THE AUDIO
PROGRAMMING BOOK
EDITED BY

RICHARD BOULANGER AND VICTOR LAZZARINI

FOREWORD BY

MAX MATHEWS

nclude
<stdio.h> #include <stdio.h> define SAMPLING_R
#include <stdio.h> #include <stdio.h> define SAMPLING_RATE 44100 #define NUM_SECONDS 3 #define NUM_SAMPLES

NUM_SECONDS * SAMPLING_RATE)

e <stdio.h>
#include <stdio.h>
SECONDS * SAMPLING_RATE)

define SAMPLING_RATE 44100

#define NUM

The Audio Programming Book

The Audio Programming Book

edited by Richard Boulanger and Victor Lazzarini

foreword by Max V. Mathews

The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

( 2011 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or mechanical
means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without permission in
writing from the publisher.
For information about quantity discounts, email specialsales@mitpress.mit.edu.
Set in Stone Serif and Stone Sans on 3B2 by Asco Typesetters, Hong Kong. Printed and bound in the
United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The audio programming book / edited by Richard Boulanger and Victor Lazzarini; foreword by Max
Mathews.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-262-01446-5 (hardcover : alk. paper) 1. Computer sound processing. 2. Signal processing—
Digital techniques. 3. Music—Computer programs. I. Boulanger, Richard Charles, 1956–. II. Lazzarini,
Victor, 1969–.
ML74.3.A93 2011
006.5—dc22
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

2010001731

This book is humbly dedicated to our teachers, mentors, and friends Max V. Mathews,
F. Richard Moore, and Barry Vercoe. They paved the way and they showed the way. They
were great explorers who freely and passionately shared their discoveries, their treasures—
their source code. Moreover, they invited every one of us to join them on the journey, to follow their example, and to ﬁnd ways to become a part of their great adventure and to build
upon the solid foundation that they laid down for us. All the contributors to this book stand
on the shoulders of these three giants of computer music. It is our hope that the book will
help the next generation to fully appreciate the great gifts of Mathews (MUSIC V), Moore
(cmusic), and Vercoe (Csound), and that it will help them ﬁnd their own unique and inspiring way to take the world one step further on this extraordinary audio adventure.

Contents

Foreword by Max V. Mathews
Preface xiii
Acknowledgments xv
Introduction xxi

xi

C Programming Basics
0 An Overview of the C Language with Some Elements of CBB
Victor Lazzarini and Richard Boulanger
1 Programming in C
Richard Dobson

55

Audio Programming Basics
2 Audio Programming in C
Richard Dobson

185

3 Working with Audio Streams
Gabriel Maldonado

329

4 Introduction to Program Design
John fﬁtch

383

Audio Programming Essentials
5 Introduction to Digital Audio Signals
Victor Lazzarini
6 Time-Domain Audio Programming
Victor Lazzarini

431
463

3

viii

Contents

Spectral Audio Programming
7 Spectral Audio Programming Basics: The DFT, the FFT, and Convolution
Victor Lazzarini
8 The STFT and Spectral Processing
Victor Lazzarini

539

9 Programming the Phase Vocoder
Victor Lazzarini

557

Programming Csound Opcodes
10 Understanding an Opcode in Csound
John fﬁtch
11 Spectral Opcodes
Victor Lazzarini

581

617

Algorithmic Synthesis and Music Programming
12 A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program
Eric Lyon
13 Using C to Generate Scores
John fﬁtch

629

655

14 Modeling Orchestral Composition
Steven Yi

677

Appendixes
A Command-Line Tools Reference
Jonathan Bailey

697

B Debugging Software with the GNU Debugger
Jonathan Bailey
C Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle
Victor Lazzarini

719
739

D An Introduction to Real-Time Audio IO with PortAudio
Victor Lazzarini
E MIDI Programming with PortMIDI
Victor Lazzarini

783

771

521

ix

Contents

F Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages
John fﬁtch

797

G Glossary 823
John fﬁtch with Richard Dobson, Victor Lazzarini, and Richard Boulanger
H An Audio Programmer’s Guide to Mathematical Expressions
John fﬁtch
Contents of the DVD
References 873
About the Authors
Index 881

869

879

855

Foreword

This is not just a book; it is an encyclopedia of mathematical and programming techniques
for audio signal processing. It is an encyclopedia focused on the future, but built upon the
massive foundations of past mathematical, signal processing, and programming sciences.
It is clearly written and easy to understand, by both human readers and computers. It
gives complete information, from the basic mathematics to the detailed programs needed
to make sound. It is the essential library, not only for computer musicians, but also for all
computer scientists, including those who work in the ﬁelds of communication and artiﬁcial
intelligence.
Today the dominant language in which to write programs is C (including Cþþ). A halfcentury ago, sound synthesis programs for music were written in assembly language. The
resulting music had few voices and uninteresting timbres. Programs were tedious to write.
Block diagram compilers, including MUSIC V, cmusic, and Csound, greatly expanded the
musical possibilities by giving composers and sound designers tools with which to create
their own timbres from blocks of code—oscillators, envelopes, ﬁlters, mixers, etc. These
blocks performed tasks that electronic musicians were familiar with and that they could
understand. Block diagram compilers were a great step forward, but they imposed limits on
what the computer was allowed to do, in many ways because of their limited library of audio
modules or opcodes.
These limits have now been swept away. This book makes it practical to write a new C program for each new piece of music. The composition is the C program. This is the great step
forward.
A half-century ago, computer sound processing was limited by the speed and expense of
existing hardware. Today those limits are gone. Affordable laptop computers are from
10,000 to 100,000 times as powerful as the roomful of equipment in a typical 1960s computer center. And this book sweeps away the programming limits and makes practical musical use of the great power of laptops.
Early computers could not be used to perform a piece of music in real time—they took
many seconds to compute a single second of sound. But today real-time performance is possible, and practical real-time programming is a big part of this book. Thus, laptops can join

xii

Foreword

with chamber groups and orchestras and thereby add rich new timbres to the already beautiful timbres of acoustic instruments.
What now is the musical challenge of the future? I believe it is our understanding of the
power and limitations of the human brain, and speciﬁcally discovering which sound waves,
sound patterns, timbres, and sequences humans recognize as beautiful and meaningful
music—and why. This book holds the key to copiously producing the software, sounds, and
music we need to truly and deeply explore these many and hidden dimensions of our
musical minds.
Max V. Mathews

Preface

‘‘But how does an oscillator really work?’’ My 40-year journey to The Audio Programming Book
began with that question. Some of the answers came from Tom Piggott (my ﬁrst electronic
music teacher, and the one who got me started with analog synthesizers—an EML200 and
an Arp2600).
More answers came from Alan R. Pearlman, founder and president of the ARP Synthesizer
Company, the man who commissioned my ﬁrst symphony, Three Soundscapes for Synthesizers
and Orchestra.
Still more answers came from Dexter Morrill, who offered me a Visiting Composer’s Residency at Colgate University, where I made my ﬁrst computer music. It took days back then,
but I rendered ‘‘Happy Birthday’’ in MUSIC 10 and played the rendered soundﬁle for my dad
over the phone on his birthday.
And more answers came from Bruce Pennycook, who was also in residence at Colgate. (We
would work through the night and end our sessions with breakfast at a local diner; I picked
his brain every spare minute; he taught me how to do stereo panning and gave me his subbass oscillator instrument, LOW.)
I started to really answer the question in Barry Vercoe’s summer workshop at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in which I learned music11. (I will never forget Barry ﬁlling
whiteboard after whiteboard, and revealing, one morning, that an oscillator consisted of a
phasor and a table.)
I made my way from MIT to the Center for Music Experiment at the University of California at San Diego, where I learned about cmusic from Dick Moore, Gareth Loy, and Mark
Dolson. My ﬁrst cmusic composition, Two Movements in C, featured a new trick that they
taught me to do with two oscillators: FM synthesis.
Life brought me back to Boston, and Barry invited me to continue my work at MIT’s new
Media Lab, where I got to explore and beta-test his new language, Csound. By his side, I was
able to further my understanding and to share some of the answers I had found along the
way through The Csound Book.
Overlapping with my time at the Computer Audio Research Lab in San Diego and the MIT
Media Lab, I got to know and work with Max V. Mathews. He invited me to work in his

xiv

Preface

studio at Bell Labs. (He would sleep in the recording booth there so that I could compose and
program.) We have worked together for more than 25 years now, touring, performing, lecturing, and sometimes sailing. It was from him that I learned the programming language C. We
would spend days and days going over every single line of his Conductor and Improv programs, his Scanned Synthesis program, his PhaserFilters program, and his MUSIC V program.
(Imagine my surprise upon discovering that an oscillator is also an envelope generator, and
then the mind-bending fact that if you ‘‘scan’’ a ‘‘mechanically modeled’’ wavetable, an
oscillator can ‘‘be’’ a ﬁlter.)
But still, it took John fﬁtch, Richard Dobson, Gabriel Maldonado, and Victor Lazzarini to
teach me to actually ‘‘program’’ an oscillator—right here in The Audio Programming Book.
Yes, for me The Audio Programming Book answers my ﬁrst question and many others. I
think you will agree that fﬁtch, Dobson, Maldonado, and Lazzarini are wonderful teachers,
and that the other contributors are their ‘‘young apprentices.’’ I hope the book will answer
all your questions and will raise new ones too.
Richard Boulanger

Acknowledgments

This book has had a long period of gestation, and while we have been at it the world has
changed; some things have disappeared, and some new things have been invented. But the
basic elements of what we wanted to teach are still as relevant today as they were when we
started. Along the way, we have also been helped and supported by many others, and
we would like to give our thanks to them here.
from Victor Lazzarini
I would like to acknowledge the support of my parents. Their support throughout my education years and beyond, both affective and ﬁnancial, was essential to my developing career
and life. Even though they might at some point have doubted the wisdom of embarking on
a music degree instead of medical school, they have never been anything but supportive.
I would also like to give thanks to the An Foras Feasa research institute in Ireland, which
provided the funds for my sabbatical at a time when I was heavily involved in ﬁnishing this
book. In particular, I would like to say thanks to its director, Margaret Kelleher, and to John
Keating, whose ofﬁce I was able to use in that period. At the NUI Maynooth Music Department, I would like to thank all my colleagues for their friendship and support, Fiona Palmer
for allowing my research leave at a busy time for the department, and Barra Boydell for his
advice, guidance, and example in all things academic. I would also want to acknowledge the
help and support of my research colleagues Joe Timoney and Tom Lysaght, with whom I
have worked for many years and who taught me a lot about signal processing.
My involvement in this book would not have happened had I not made a decision one
morning in 2005 to join the Csound users’ discussion list. A Csounder since 1993 and an
audio developer since 1996, I had always been a retiring sort of person who was not involved
‘‘in the community’’ (although I had contributed to Csound privately by sending things to
John fﬁtch). But that morning, for some reason, I decided to join the list. and this whole new
world suddenly appeared, almost by extension. So I would like to extend my gratitude to
fellow Csounders for the years of interesting conversation and bug reports. Of these new
friends, I would in particular like to acknowledge my new friends Steven Yi and Oeyvind

xvi

Acknowledgments

Brandtsegg. I would also want to thank John fﬁtch and Richard Dobson, who have been
great mentors to me on the art of programming and making noise with it. Last, but not least,
I need to thank my colleague and co-editor ‘‘Dr. B.’’ for providing the opportunity ﬁrst to
contribute to this book and then to co-edit it. His support and guidance have contributed
substantially to my development as a researcher and a composer.
Another group of people I would like to acknowledge and thank is the Linux Audio Developers ‘‘family,’’ like-minded individuals who are in the business of teaching, learning, and
sharing computer music code as members of the great brotherhood of free and open-source
software. We would not be where we are now in our ﬁeld without the efforts of countless
people contributing to FOSS projects, in many guises—a practice that dates back to the
beginnings of computer music.
Finally, I have to thank my three kids, Danny, Ellie, and Chris, for their love and for keeping me on ﬁrm ground at times when my mind was about to take off. Another special dedication goes to my wife Alice, who has put up with my work-related bad moods and my
computer-bound ‘‘disappearances.’’ Her love and support have helped me through a lot of
bad weather, for which I am very grateful.
from Richard Boulanger
Over the years, there have been many brilliant and dedicated students who have helped me
work on, work out, and work through the chapters, the code, and the ideas of the contributing authors. Not only have they worked on this project with me, but they have also been
a huge part of my compositions, my concerts, my lectures, and my research. Their spirit is
in the pages of this book and is channeled through all of my creative work. To date, the
gifted and dedicated students who have served as my musical assistants and collaborators
have included Paris Smaragdis, Eric Singer, Jacob Joaquin, Young Choi, Luigi Castelli, Greg
Thompson, and Kathryn Bigbee. I am eternally grateful to them.
A number of my students wrote chapters for this book. I want to recognize and thank
them for their contributions to my classes and my teaching. When you read and study their
contributions here, I am sure that you too will recognize the dedication, commitment, and
brilliance of Joo Won Park, Barry Threw, Tae Min Cho, Andrew Beck, Federico Saldarini, and
Johannes Bochmann, and you will know how lucky I have been to work with them.
A number of undergraduate and graduate students read speciﬁc chapters and offered feedback that helped to focus the authors and signiﬁcantly improve the ﬁnal content of this
book and the associated DVD. The student reviewers from the Berklee College of Music
were Bobby Pietrusko, David Buchs, Jason McClinsey, Victor Magro, Matthew Thies,
Gautam, Paul Marinaro, Danny Patterson, Brian Baughn, Nicolas Villa, Tom Owen, and
Sean Meagher, those from New York University were Won Lee and Nicholas Barba, the
reviewer from McGill University was Huey How, and the reviewers from the MIT Media Lab

xvii

Acknowledgments

were Noah Vawter, Victor Adan, and Adam Boulanger. Thanks to all of you for making the
time and making a difference.
From the very beginning, I had one student who not only worked through all the chapters
but also found the time to put his talent for graphic design to work; he contributed most
of the ﬁgures that appear in this book. His name is Robert Gerard Pietrusko. This talented
musician, engineer, programmer, and designer was able to translate some murky code and
concepts into transcendent and illuminating illustrations.
As the manuscript approached the ﬁnish line, two students offered to help me: Jonathan
Bailey and Tim Lukens. The three of us put together a solid Audio Programming class at
Berklee, and they helped me to write strong tutorial chapters to support that class. In addition to making the time to write some very musical code, both of these guys found the time
to write signiﬁcant and important chapters of their own for the book—Jonathan, in fact,
wrote two. There is no possible way that I can thank Jonathan Bailey and Tim Lukens
enough for all the work that they did to make this book happen, and to make our chapters
what they are. Their ‘‘musical’’ code is at the very core of my writing and my teaching, and
for that I am most grateful to them both.
Clearly, my students have been a profound and deep source of inspiration to me, but at
Berklee the real support for my research and my development has come from my department chairmen, David Mash and Kurt Biederwolf, and from my deans, Don Puluse and
Stephen Croes. For more than 22 years they have supported my travel, my studies, my
courses, and my compositions; moreover, they have brought my collaborators to the college
to work with my students and to work with me. They continue to support my growth and
development, and I will be forever grateful to them for this wonderful gift.
A number of colleagues read and reviewed the preliminary chapters and code for this book.
Their insights helped to focus this book on the target audience. I would like to thank Javier
A. Garavaglia, Michael Rhoades, Luis Jure, Sal G. Soﬁa, Josep M. Comajuncosas, Mark Ballora,
David L. Phillips, and Steven Yi.
Of all the comments and the constructive criticism that I received over the years, perhaps
the most important ‘‘wake-up call’’ came from my closest colleague, collaborator, and friend,
Lee Ray. About two years ago, I asked Lee to ‘‘check out’’ the ‘‘ﬁnal’’ draft. He read every
page—at the time, all 3,000. And after two months, Lee probably made one of the most difﬁcult phone calls of his life. He let me know ‘‘everything’’ that was broken, missing, dull,
out of place, out of date, redundant, inferior, and in some cases inappropriate. Time had
clouded my judgment and my ability to see what was there and, more important, what I
was missing. Lee’s insights opened my eyes again and helped to get me back on the right
track.
In the beginning, the number of contributing authors was slightly larger than the ﬁnal
group. They began this journey with me, but for one reason or another some contributions
do not appear in the book. Still, I want to thank the contributors for helping to move the

xviii

Acknowledgments

project forward and for reading, reviewing, suggesting, and inspiring. On behalf of all the
contributing authors I would like to thank Michael Gogins, Javier Garavaglia, Micha Thies,
IOhannes m zmoelnig, Craig Stuart Sapp, Nick Didkovsky, and Matt Ingalls. These are the
most productive, proliﬁc, and inspiring developers on the computer music scene today, and
I am grateful for their help.
Clearly, I am grateful to all my contributing authors for their brilliant contributions, but
there are four contributing authors who have been working with me on this project from
the very beginning, almost 10 years ago. Over this period, computer technologies, compilers,
processors, and platforms changed dramatically, and most times the ‘‘amazing technological breakthroughs’’ broke everything that we had built (and trashed everything I had tested
and edited). There were so many times that we had to set out in an entirely new direction
that any ‘‘normal’’ programmer or professor would have just given up. Still, when everything
was broken, these four were determined enough and committed enough to pick up the
pieces, rewrite their code, and start all over. Time and time again, they forged ahead. I
learned a great deal from each of them, and I stand in awe of all the creative possibilities
they have manifest through the software that they have written. A small glimpse of that
dynasty is now a part of this book. Richard Dobson, Gabriel Maldonado, John fﬁtch, and Eric
Lyon: on behalf of all of your future and current students (and I consider myself to be one
among them), I thank you all for everything you have taught me over these past 10 years.
One other contributor deserves special mention: Victor Lazzarini. Victor came along when
we were well into the project, and yet, with his code and his words, he raised the book up to
a new level of relevance and excellence. Where there was a hole, he would ﬁll it. Where there
was a missing piece, he would ﬁnd it (in his brilliant mind) and then write it up (and code it
up) in what seemed like no time at all. And when all his chapters were written, and all his
code was fully tested and running on all platforms, he offered to help edit and test the
mountain of words and code. Before I knew it, I had a brilliant, passionate, and dedicated
‘‘partner’’ on this project. Together we would ‘‘tag team’’ around the world and around the
clock, and we managed to get two years’ work done in a matter of months.
I asked Doug Sery at the MIT Press if I could ofﬁcially offer Victor the title of co-editor. (He
was already doing the job.) I was prepared to argue that he had become indispensable, that
he had spent six months making one signiﬁcant contribution after another, and that he
brought an essential and substantive level of expertise to the project (as was evident from
the content of his chapters and his code). But I didn’t need to present my case at all. Doug
had noticed the difference in the quality and content of the product. He had noticed the
accelerated rate of production too. In fact, in less than a minute, Doug gave me the thumbs
up. Because of Victor’s expert editorial contributions, this book is now in your hands. I am
honored and proud to have him as a major contributing author and as my co-editor.
I can’t end these acknowledgments without thanking my parents, Dick and Claire
Boulanger. It’s sad because I work hard to impress them, but when they look at any single
page of this book they both shriek with horror and wish I would just ‘‘slow down’’ and

xix

Acknowledgments

‘‘smell the roses’’ and spend some time enjoying life with them by the pool. Oh well. Even if
there isn’t a single page in here that makes one bit of sense to you, know that it’s all for you
and because of you, mom and dad—with respect, gratitude, and love. And now that it’s
done, there might be a bit more pool time.
And I can’t end these acknowledgements without apologizing to my three wonderful sons,
Adam, Philip, and Adrien. I hope you can forgive me for my absence over the past 10 years,
and for the all-too-frequent ‘‘short-fuse verbal explosions’’ when I was struggling at the computer to ﬁnd a word and you would have liked me to listen, for a minute or two, to some of
your words.
When I started this book, Adam was graduating from high school; now he is married and
graduating from MIT with a Ph.D. Where did that time go? Philip is playing classical cello
professionally in Chicago and pursuing his second master’s degree. When I started this project, he was practicing to get a decent chair in the Massachusetts Southeast District Orchestra.
Adrien was in elementary school (second grade, I think), and we were both obsessed with
Poke´mon. As the text was delivered to the MIT Press, Adrien was starting college.
I hope Adrien will use this book in one of his CS classes someday. I hope Adam (Dr. B. v2.0)
will teach one of his classes from this book someday, or his daughter Anaı¨s. And I hope Philip and I can get back to performing and touring and making new music together—working
on our Book of Dreams.
This book is about making ‘‘new’’ music by discovering new ways of transforming and
transﬁguring sounds. I hope it will open a door to tomorrow’s concert hall and online classroom for my sons and for you, your students, and your children.
Finally, I offer my deepest and most heartfelt thanks to my wife Colette. This beautiful,
caring, and loving cardiac-rehab nurse put all the pieces of this quite literally broken and
broken-hearted man back together. I had a heart attack along the way, and Colette brought
me back to life and back to this project. Without her love, her understanding, and her sacriﬁce, neither the book nor I would have seen the light of this day.
But in the end, it was the faith, support, and encouragement of Doug Sery that kept this
project alive, in me and at the MIT Press. Everyone interested in audio programming truly
has him to thank for this fantastic book—and we sincerely do thank you, Doug.

Introduction

In chapter 0, we provide a complete overview of the C language and some essential elements
of Cþþ. Using examples written from a musician’s perspective, we guide the reader through
the elements of these two languages that will be used in the audio programming chapters of
this book.
In chapter 1, Richard Dobson introduces readers with no prior experience to the basics of
C programming. All the examples employ a music-oriented focus, from MIDI-frequency calculations to the textual breakpoint ﬁle and a tuning-fork emulation including the creation of
raw binary soundﬁles. It also introduces primary tools such as Audacity and Gnuplot.
In chapter 2, Richard Dobson introduces the specially written PortSF soundﬁle library. This
is used to develop a number of useful programs designed to demonstrate the generation and
processing of basic envelopes and waveforms (including examples of additive synthesis). In
the course of introducing further important C language elements, it explores the development of the table-lookup oscillator and other basic tools.
In chapter 3, Gabriel Maldonado shows us how to send audio data to the operating system’s standard output, to a raw binary ﬁle, to a RIFF-Wave ﬁle, and directly to the audio interface in real time by using different libraries: the Tiny Audio Library, PortSF, and PortAudio.
In chapter 4, John fﬁtch introduces important software engineering principles such as
object-oriented design. These are articulated through the construction of a simple wave-table
playback program. The description includes debugging the resulting program and some additional notes on the thought processes of program construction.
In chapter 5, Victor Lazzarini introduces more formal aspects of digital signal processing
theory, including some basic mathematical concepts. Programming examples demonstrate
some essential operations on audio signals. The chapter concludes with a look into the
implementation of FM synthesis.
In chapter 6, Lazzarini explores several basic elements of waveform processing, including
synthesis and the transformation of audio signals. These processes are presented as components implemented as Cþþ functions, exposing the details of their operation. The chapter
concludes with an introduction to plug-in development, with the VST architecture used as
an example.

xxii

Introduction

In chapter 7, Lazzarini introduces the theory and implementation of basic operations
in the spectral domain. The chapter takes an intuitive approach, but it still covers the very
important mathematical descriptions of each operation. It concludes with a discussion of a
fully functional convolution program.
In chapter 8, Lazzarini goes a step beyond chapter 7 by looking into time-varying spectral
analysis and resynthesis. Here he discusses the implementation of a basic Short-Time Fourier
Transform operation and a few examples of basic manipulation in the frequency domain.
Chapter 9, also by Lazzarini, complements the study of spectral processing (featured in
chapters 7 and 8) by introducing a basic tool for the job: the phase vocoder. It also demonstrates how the phase vocoder can be used in time stretching, ﬁltering, and pitch scaling. It
concludes by looking at an alternative method of frequency estimation and its use in additive synthesis.
In chapter 10, fﬁtch studies and analyzes a number of simple Csound opcodes to reveal the
mechanisms by which they are integrated into the overall system. This leads to some practical advice concerning the creation of opcodes.
Chapter 11, by Lazzarini, complements the extensive exploration of time-domain Csound
opcodes in chapter 10 with a short look at the processing of spectral audio. Two examples are
provided, showing the separate manipulation of amplitude and frequency aspects of input
signals.
In chapter 12, Eric Lyon develops a speciﬁcation language based on the model of patchable analog synthesizers. Patch descriptions written in this language are transformed into
working Csound code.
In chapter 13, fﬁtch presents a case study of an algorithmic composition (actually an algorithmic remixer) to show how C can be used to generate Csound scores and to perform
simple analytic calculations. He demonstrates that small programs are not difﬁcult to write,
and that, despite all the teaching of advanced software engineering, there are times when a
‘‘little’’ program can prove very powerful, musical, and beautiful.
In chapter 14, Steven Yi offers observations about the orchestra as a performance ensemble
and surveys some of the techniques composers have used in writing for it. Yi derives a model
for music making from these observations, and he presents a Cþþ class library implementing this model, and a program demonstrating how the library can be used.
Appendix A—written for those new to UNIX-compatible environments—covers basic
techniques for navigating a Bash command shell, for building code using the GNU compilation tools gcc and make, and for editing ﬁles with the emacs text editor.
Appendix B is a debugging tutorial for beginning developers. It covers the basics of using
gdb to debug audio programs. Techniques for preparing your programs for debugging, for
slowing down and stepping through code line by line, and for viewing application state
and memory are reviewed.
Appendix C, an overview of soundﬁle formats from the raw to the self-describing, focuses
on the use of libsndﬁle.

xxiii

Introduction

Appendix D covers the basics of real-time audio programming using the PortAudio library.
It demonstrates the two modes of operation supported by the library, blocking and asynchronous, with comparative programming examples.
Appendix E introduces MIDI programming using the PortMIDI library. It features three
examples covering output, input, and the combination of these two.
Appendix F is a short introduction to how computers work and to the functioning of their
main components. Further, this appendix shows how computer languages are compiled into
a form that can be executed.
Appendix G is a glossary that provides support for the entire book. It includes entries that
range from simple deﬁnitions, to more extended ones, with some tutorial elements. This
appendix offers a concise introduction to a range of words and topics that readers may
encounter in this book or in other resources. The readers are presumed to have music as their
primary ﬁeld of knowledge; accordingly, the glossary concentrates on subjects relating to
programming, audio engineering, and computer architectures. Computing has created a
very large body of jargon words. This appendix explains those you are most likely to meet
as a computer musician.
Appendix H presents and explains the most important mathematical concepts for the
audio programmer and computer musician, and other mathematical concepts that audio
programmers and computer musicians might encounter.

The Audio Programming Book

C Programming Basics

0

An Overview of the C Language with Some Elements of CBB

Victor Lazzarini and Richard Boulanger

The programming languages C and Cþþ are used throughout this book, and yet the details
of the languages are often secondary to the more important issues of audio programming.
After all, this is The Audio Programming Book, and programming audio is the main goal. However, it is appropriate to reserve a little space here at the beginning for a general discussion of
the languages themselves. C is often described as a small language, and therefore we believe
it possible to present, discuss, and review the whole of it in a very compact way.
0.1

C and CBB
Most people get somewhat confused when learning about the programming languages C and
Cþþ. Sometimes the two are confused into one; sometimes C is taken to be Cþþ and vice
versa. They are, effectively, two separate and different languages, so they should not be confused. In practice, they are very similar and share many elements, but we should be careful
not to mistake one for the other. As a rule of thumb, just think of Cþþ as a C with extra
elements. While not the complete picture, this is often all you need to know.
Sometimes C is taught with some elements of Cþþ that simplify the coding. While this
might be reasonable for someone who knows what is C and what is Cþþ in the code, for
beginners this is very confusing. A secondary issue here is that Cþþ allows a more sophisticated programming approach, known as object-oriented programming, which is complex to
tackle for the novice. In this chapter, we will only deal with C at ﬁrst; at the end, we will introduce some features of Cþþ.

0.2

Building C Programs
0.2.1

Compiled and Interpreted Languages

C is what we call a compiled language. This is because programs, written with C code in a text
ﬁle, are generated by a package of programs called the compiler. These programs transform

4

Chapter 0

the text code into binary codes that are understood by the machine and the operating system. The process of compilation/program building is discussed below.
Interpreted languages, such as Python, are generally higher-level languages that are dependent on an interpreter program, which translates the text code into machine actions directly.
Their advantage is that the result of the programming can be seen immediately. On the
other hand, generally speaking, the overhead of interpreting the code can make these
languages very inefﬁcient for intensive tasks (such as calculating the output of a synthesis
routine, in the case of a music system).
0.2.2

Compiling

After opening your console/terminal window, you can invoke the compiler program can be
called by the simple command
cc mysource.c
where cc is the C compiler and mysource.c is the name of your source ﬁle. (gcc is a very
widespread compiler, if you are using it, just change the command for gcc.) The output of
this command will be a binary executable ﬁle called a.out, which you can rename (using mv)
if you want. This ﬁle will sit in the directory you are working on.
For more practical uses, you can output the binary executable to a different ﬁle, using
‘-o . . .’ (just as in Csound ‘-o’ means ‘‘output to’’):
cc -o myprogr mysource.c
On Windows machines your program ﬁlename will have the extension .exe. On other
systems no extensions are used.
0.2.3

Source Files

Source ﬁles are text (ASCII) ﬁles containing the source code written in C, which will be used
to build the program. There can be just one or many of these needed to build a program.
0.2.4

Header Files

Header ﬁles (usually with extension .h) are ﬁles with deﬁnitions and parts of code which are
included in (i.e. they will be copied to) the source ﬁles. The compiling process will use the
code in these header ﬁles in the compilation process.
0.2.5

Libraries

C is a very lean language. It has a number of built-in deﬁnitions, rules, etc.; the rest is done
by elements (functions, data deﬁnitions, etc.) existing in libraries. These are pre-compiled

5

An Overview of the C Language

(i.e. they are already in binary) and are added to the executable at the last phase of the build
of the program. In this phase, called linking, references to libraries are linked to the actual
binary code.
There are libraries for virtually anything you want to do in C: math, sorting, comparing
things, controlling processes, playing audio and MIDI, etc. When using different libraries,
you will have to inform the compiler which one(s) you are using. This can be done with
the relevant command-line options. (For more details, see appendix A.)
0.2.6

The Build Process

The ‘‘program build’’ has three main phases:
1. Pre-processing. This expands all include header ﬁles (by copying them into the source
code) and other preprocessor statements (which usually start with the character #) found in
the source ﬁle(s).
2. Compiling. This reads the source code and transforms it into binary code for the machine
you are targeting (i.e. the machine for which you’re building the program).
3. Linking. This links all references to binary code that is not in the source code (i.e. in libraries), as well as putting together all source binaries (if there are multiple source ﬁles).
These three stages can be done in one go, or if you like, separately. Usually, when building
large pieces of software it is common to do steps one and two at one time and then leave
the linkage process for later. The source ﬁles are compiled into binary ﬁles called object ﬁles
(extension .o), which can later be combined (linked) to make the program. This is usually
the case when there are many source ﬁles in the project. This procedure enables the programmer to compile the different source ﬁles only when they have been modiﬁed, saving
time and resources. Utilities such as make or scons can be used to maintain a build project
and will automatically call the compiler and the linker to build from sources that have been
updated.
0.3

The Structure of C Programs
0.3.1

Program Format and Layout

A C executable program requires that at least one function be present in it. This is what we
call the entry point of the program: where it starts executing and also providing the exit point,
i.e. when the function ends, the program also ﬁnishes. By default this function is called
main(), but this can be changed by a compiler ﬂag (although we will not normally do it).
This function can take two forms:
int main( );
and

6

Chapter 0

int main(int argc, char* argv);
The ﬁrst form does not take any arguments and, being the simplest, is the one we will use
ﬁrst. Both forms are supposed to return (i.e. ‘‘answer with’’) an integer number, which is
passed as a code to the operating system (generally 0 means OK). The second form will be
discussed later in section 0.15. In addition to main(), the program can also have other functions, although they are not absolutely required.
0.3.2

Character Set and Reserved Symbols

The C Programming Language uses the following characters:
A-Z
{}

a-z
0-9
[]
()
<

.
>

,
|

:
+

;
-

'
/

$
*

"
=

#
%
&
tab space

!

_

There are only 32 keywords (which are reserved symbols) in the C language. They are combined with the formal syntax to form the language proper. These symbols cannot be used for
any other purpose:
auto
double
int
struct
break
else
long
switch
case
enum
register
typedef
char
extern
return
union
const
float
short
unsigned
continue
for
signed
void
default
goto
sizeof
volatile
do
if
static
while
0.4

An Example Program
Our ﬁrst example is the one traditionally given in C courses:
#include <stdio.h> /* header file for IO */
int main()
/* main function */
{
printf("Hello World\n"); /* print message */
return 0; /* function returns 0 (0K) */
}
Here we have all the typical components of a program:
n
n
n
n
n
n

A main function matching one of the forms given above.
A header ﬁle, in this case for the standard input/output library.
An executable statement, to do something (print to the screen).
Since the function is said to return an ‘int’, a return statement.
Statements are always terminated with a semicolon.
Comments, between /* */, which will not be seen by the compiler.

If you build this program with the commands shown above and then run it, you will get
Hello World printed to the terminal.

7

0.5

An Overview of the C Language

Data Types
The ﬁrst element of C programming is based on the concept of a variable. Basically, variables
are memory slots that are reserved for you to stored numeric values or characters in. In C, we
need to declare these at the start of a function before we can use them, by stating the variable type and its name. The basic data types for variables are the following:
int—an integer (a whole number)
float—a ﬂoating-point value (with a decimal part)
double—a double-precision ﬂoating-point value
char—a single character.
In addition, we will also see the type void, which is used to indicate ‘‘no type’’ or ‘‘any type,’’
depending on its use. As for names, all variables must begin with a letter or an underscore.
0.5.1

Integer Data Types

An int variable, in most systems, can store a value in the 32-bit range from 2,147,483,648
to 2,147,483,647, but this is system dependent. For example,
int a;
creates a memory slot for an int and calls it a. Other types of integers also exist: a short
integer or short is stored as a 16-bit number (two bytes), and its range is from 32768 to
32767. Integers can be signed (the default) or unsigned. The latter are positive only and
have twice the positive range of a signed integer (from 0 to 4,294,967,295). The type long
can be used to mean 32-bit integers.
unsigned int ua; /* an unsigned integer */
unsigned long ulb; /* an unsigned long integer */
short sample; /* a 16-bit integer */
0.5.2

Floating-Point Data Types

Floating-point data types are so named because they store a decimal-point number in two
parts: an exponent (which tracks the point position) and a mantissa (which holds the actual
numbers over which the point ‘‘ﬂoats’’).
float: A ﬂoating-point number has about seven digits of precision and a range of about
1.E36 to 1.Eþ36. A float takes four bytes to store. Example: float result;
double: A double precision number has about 13 digits of precision and a range of about
1.E303 to 1.Eþ303. A double takes eight bytes to store. Example: double value;

8

Chapter 0

0.5.3

Characters

The type char holds a single character, stored in one byte. Example:
char c;
This type is most often used to store ASCII characters (which are themselves seven-bit codes),
but in fact can be used for any single-byte numerical use.
0.5.4

Assignment and Arithmetic Operations

You can store a value in a variable using
name = value;
For instance,
a = 10;
stores the value 10 in the int variable a. Note that ‘=’ is the assignment operator and does
not mean equality (which is ‘==’, as we will see later). The arithmetic operators are the
following:
addition: a+b
subtraction: a-b
multiplication: a*b
division: a/b
Care must be taken with situations like a = 10.0/3. If ‘a’ is an integral type (int, char,
etc.), the result will be truncated to 3. If it is a ﬂoating-point number, it will be expanded up
to the type precision (single or double), e.g., 3.3333333. This means (1) that integer division
truncates the result and (2) that if a float is involved in the calculation, integers will be
converted into float.
0.5.5

Casting

Data types can be converted one into another by using a cast:
int a;
float b;
. . .
a = (int) b;
b = (float) a;
Conversions between integral and ﬂoating-point types will cause truncation, as was discussed above. It is also important, when converting types, that the recipient have enough
range to hold the data; if it doesn’t, overﬂow may occur.

9

An Overview of the C Language

Table 0.1
Order of operations in C and Cþþ.
Operator

Associativity

( ) [ ] -> . expr++ expr++

Left to right

! ~ ++expr --expr (type) * & sizeof

Right to left

* / %

Left to right

+ << >>

Left to right
Left to right

<

<=

> >=

Left to right

== !=

Left to right

&

Left to right

^

Left to right

|

Left to right

&&

Left to right

||
?:

Left to right
Right to left

= += -= *= /= >>= <<= &= ^= |=

Right to left

,

Left to right

0.5.6

Arithmetic Ordering

Expressions are calculated using a certain precedence order, shown in table 0.1. If in doubt of
the precedence of operations, use parentheses to group them.
0.5.7

Variable Declaration and Initialization

A variable has to be declared before it is used, so that the compiler can create the memory
slot for it. You can also assign an initial value to a variable when you declare it. For example,
int a, i=1;
declares two variables (separated by commas) and initializes the second to 1.
0.5.8

Variable Scope

Variables declared within a program block are valid, and ‘‘in existence,’’ only inside that
block (and enclosed blocks). A program block is delimited by braces, so a function is a program block. These variables are called local to separate them from variables declared outside
any block, which are global and are seen by all functions within the source-code ﬁle. It is best
to avoid global variables.

10

Chapter 0

0.5.9

Constants

Constants are numeric values that cannot be changed throughout a program. Integer constants are normally written in base-10 format (decimal system): 1, 2. For long integer
constants an L is added: 2L, 10L. Floating-point constants will have two forms: with an f
at the end, for ﬂoats and just with a decimal point somewhere for doubles (2.f is a float;
2.0 is a double).
Integer constants can also be written as either hexadecimals (base 16) or octals (base 8). An
octal constant is preceded by ‘0’ and a hexadecimal by ‘0x’.
The decimal 31 (0001 1111 in binary) can be written as an octal (037) or as a hexadecimal: 0x1F.
Octal units will range from 0 to 7. Hexadecimal ones will range from 0 to F, with A–F representing the decimals 10–15. For instance, F in hexadecimals represent (1-valued) set bits,
so a 16-bit bitmask 0xFFFF is a series of 16 set bits (1111 1111 1111 1111).
Macros can be used to give constant names. The pre-processor statement #define will do
this for you, and so
#define END 10000
will substitute 10000 for any instances of the word END, so you can use END as a constant in
your code. The preprocessor takes care of this for you.
0.6

Standard Input and Output
In order for a program to communicate with the outside world, we need some sort of data
input and output. The simplest type of IO is provided by the standard C library console IO
functions. Since all IO is handled by libraries, more sophisticated ways of doing this are
implemented by different systems, but the standard IO is the one that is present everywhere,
so it is very useful in many situations.
0.6.1

printf and Format Speciﬁers

The printf function is usually of the form
printf(format-string,...)
where ‘...’ means a variable number of arguments (which can be zero). The format string
determines how many parameters it will have. If it contains format speciﬁers in the form of
‘%’ characters, it will call for one or more extra arguments. In the case of
printf("Hello World");

11

An Overview of the C Language

Table 0.2
The ANSI C format speciﬁers.
Speciﬁer

Type

Print

%c

char

Single character

%d (%i)

int

Signed integer

%e (%E)

float or double

Exponential format

%f
%g (%G)

float or double
float or double

Signed decimal
Use %f or %e as required

%o

int

Unsigned octal value

%s

string (char array)

Sequence of characters

%u

int

Unsigned decimal

%x (%X)

int

Unsigned hex value

we only have a format string and, as this contains no % characters it results in Hello World
being printed without anything extra. As an example of a format speciﬁer, %d means print a
value as a signed decimal integer, so
printf("Total = %d", total);
will print Total = and then the value of the variable total.
Here are some important notes on format speciﬁers:
1. The speciﬁer following % indicates the type of variable to be displayed as well as the
format in which that the value should be displayed.
2. If you use a speciﬁer with the wrong type of variable, you will see some strange things on
the screen, and the error often propagates to other items in the printf list.
3. You can also add ‘l’ in front of a speciﬁer to mean a long form of the variable type, and ‘h’
to indicate a short form. Short integers are 16-bit (two bytes) whereas long ones are 32-bit
(four bytes). For example, %ld means a long integer variable (usually four bytes), and %hd
means a short int. Notice that there is no distinction between a four-byte ﬂoat and an
eight-byte double. The reason is that a ﬂoat is automatically converted to a double precision
value when passed to printf, so the two can be treated in the same way.
0.6.2

More on Format Speciﬁers

The % speciﬁers that you can use in ANSI C are given in table 0.2. A modiﬁer that will determine how the value will be printed can precede each speciﬁer. The most general modiﬁer is
of the form
flag width.precision

12

Chapter 0

Table 0.3
The ANSI C format modiﬁers.
Flag

Use

-

Left justify.

+

Always display sign.

space

Display space if there is no sign.

0
#

Pad with leading zeroes.
Use alternate form of speciﬁer.

Table 0.4
Examples using the # modiﬁer.
Speciﬁer

Display

%#o

Adds leading 0 to octal value

%#x

Adds leading 0x to hex value

%#f or %#e

Ensures decimal point is printed

%#g

Displays trailing zeros

where width speciﬁes the number of characters used in total to display the value and
precision indicates the number of characters used after the decimal point. The format
modiﬁers are shown in table 0.3.
For example, %10.3f will display a ﬂoat using ten characters with three digits after the
decimal point. (The ‘‘ten characters’’ would consist of the decimal point and a minus sign,
if there were one.) The speciﬁer %-1Od will display an int left justiﬁed in a ten-character
space. The speciﬁer %+5d will display an int using the next ﬁve character locations and
will add a plus sign or a minus sign to the value. The # modiﬁer can be used as shown in
table 0.4.
Finally, ASCII control codes can be used in a string as shown in table 0.5. These escape
sequences are used to display non-printing or special characters. They essentially control
how the text is positioned on the screen.
0.6.3

scanf

The scanf function works in much the same way as the printf, as it has the general form
scanf(controlstring,...)
In this case the control string speciﬁes how strings of characters, usually typed on the keyboard, should be converted into values and stored in the listed variables. To store values,
the scanf function has to have the addresses of the variables rather than just their values.

13

An Overview of the C Language

Table 0.5
Escape sequences and their results.
Escape sequence

Special character or behavior

\b

Backspace

\f

Formfeed

\n

Newline

\r
\t

Carriage return
Horizontal tab

\v

Vertical tab

\'

Single quote

\"

Double quote

\0

Null character

\a

Alert (beep)

So we will pass the address of the variable (&variable) instead of just the variable. In general, all of the relevant format speciﬁers listed in connection with printf can be used with
scanf. The scanf function processes the control string from left to right, and each time it
reaches a speciﬁer it tries to interpret what has been typed as a value. If you input multiple
values, then these are assumed to be separated by white space (i.e. blanks, newline, or tabs).
For example,
scanf("%d %d",&i,&j);
will read in two integer values into i and j. The integer values can be typed on the same line
or on different lines as long as there is at least one white space between them. Note, however, that in the case of the %c speciﬁer scanf does not skip white space and it will read
the next character typed, regardless of what it is.
The width modiﬁer can be used in scanf to limit the number of characters accepted to
width. For example,
scanf("%lOd",&i)
would use, at most, the ﬁrst ten digits typed as the new value for i.
0.6.4

A Simple Example

Here is a simple addition program to demonstrate the use of IO and arithmetic in C:
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
int a,b,c;

14

Chapter 0

printf("\n Please enter a number: ");
scanf("%d",&a);
printf(" Please enter a second number: ");
scanf("%d",&b);
c=a+b;
printf("%d + %d = %d \n",a,b,c);
return 0;
}
This program will prompt the user for two numbers, using printf(), take them in with
scanf(), then print out the resulting sum. Notice that each line is executed in sequence
and that scanf() blocks waiting for input. Also notice that we could have saved using a
third variable (‘c’) by performing the sum as one of the arguments to the last printf(), as in
printf("%d + %d = %d \n",a,b,a+b);
0.7

Control of Flow
C provides a number of ways of controlling the ﬂow of execution of a program, so that it
does not always have to proceed statement by statement as in the previous example. Before
we examine the different forms of controlling the ﬂow, we have to introduce ways of checking the truth of conditions and statements: logical expressions.
0.7.1

Logical Expressions

A logical expression is an expression used to test a certain condition in a ﬂow control statement. For example, a > 0 is true if a contains a value greater than zero, and b < 0 is true if b
contains a value less than zero. The concept of truth in C is very simple: 0 if not true and
non-0 if true. So a logical expression generally evaluates to 0 or non-0 (say, 1). The following
relational operators are used in logical expressions:
>

<

>

=

<=

==

!=

Note that the equality operator is == and not simply =. The last operator means ‘‘NOT equal
to.’’ Because truth conditions are zero or non-zero, a zero-valued variable can also be used to
indicate falsehood, and a non-zero variable to indicate truth.
0.7.2

Conditional Execution

One of the programming devices use to control the ﬂow of a program is called conditional
execution. This is performed by an ‘if’ statement:
if (a > 0) printf("%d is positive", a);

15

An Overview of the C Language

If the condition is false, the program continues with the next instruction. In general, the if
statement is of the form
if (condition) statement;
The ‘‘statement’’ above can be a single statement or a program block. In addition, it is also
possible to select between two statements, one to be obeyed when the condition is true and
one to be obeyed when the condition is false. You can do this using
if (condition) statement1;
else statement2;
This is a variation of the if statement. In this case statement1 is carried out if the condition is true and statement2 if the condition is false. Notice that both parts of the if-else
statement can be blocks or single statements terminated by a semicolon:
if (f2 ==0) printf("division by zero !!!\n");
else printf("%f/%f = %f\n",f1, f2, f1/f2);
A third form of ‘if’ can be used for selecting several options:
if (condition) statement1;
else if(condition2) statement2;
. . .
else if(conditionN) statementN;
else else-statement;
This can be used if several conditions need to be checked, and the last else is used to catch
the case where none of the above are true.
0.7.3

Conditional Operator

A condensed form of if-else can be found within the construction
a = b > c ? b : c;
which means the following: if b is bigger than c, then a = b; else a = c. The general form is
condition ? true-expression : false-expression;
The result of the expression is the true-expression if the condition is true; otherwise the result
is the false-expression.
0.7.4

Switch

An alternative to select from several options is the switch statement, a multiple selection
statement. A variable is successively tested against a list of integral constants. When a match

16

Chapter 0

is found, the program executes from the matched label onwards. The general form of the
switch statement is
switch(expression)
{
case constant1: statement sequence; break;
case constant2: statement sequence; break;
. . .
case constantN: statement sequence; break;
default: statement sequence; break;
}
Each case is labeled by one or more integer-valued constants. The default label is reached
if no matches are found. The default is optional. If all matches fail and default is absent,
no action takes place. When a match is found, the program switches execution to the statement sequence associated with that case. The use of ‘break’ is important, because the execution will continue forward within that program block, possibly executing more than one of
the ‘cases’. Using ‘break’ ensures that the program block is exited after the relevant statements have been executed. For example:
switch (i)
{
case 1:
printf("one");
break;
case 2:
printf("two");
break;
case 3:
printf("three");
break;
case 4:
printf("four");
break;
default:
printf("out of range");
}
This program fragment recognizes the numbers 1–4 and prints the value of a variable in
English. The switch statement differs from if in that switch can only test for equality,
whereas the if conditional expression can be of any type. Also, switch will work with
only int and char types.

17

An Overview of the C Language

0.7.5

A Music Theory Example

Here we demonstrate the three forms of conditional execution introduced above. This is a
little music theory program that calculates the interval between two notes and prints its
semitone length and name. We ask the user to input two notes, which we take in as characters and then translate into numerical pitch classes (0–11). The reason for the dummy variable is that the user is expected to separate the two note names by a ‘‘carriage return’’ (or
‘‘enter’’) character, or even a blank space. As we are scanning characters, these have to be
accounted for, so the dummy variable is used as a placeholder. (Though we could have used
‘note2’, for the sake of clarity we have not.)
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
char note1,note2, dummy; /* note names, dummy char */
int pc1, pc2, interval; /* pitch classes, interval */
printf("Please enter two natural notes.\nfirst note: ");
scanf("%c%c",&note1, &dummy);
printf("second note: ");
scanf("%c",&note2);
switch(note1){ /* translating from note name to pitch class */
case 'C': case 'c':
pc1 = 0;
break;
case 'D': case 'd':
pc1 = 2;
break;
case 'E': case 'e':
pc1 = 4;
break;
case 'F': case 'f':
pc1 = 5;
break;
case 'G': case 'g':
pc1 = 7;
break;
case 'A': case 'a':
pc1 = 9;
break;
case 'B': case 'b':
pc1 = 11;
break;

18

Chapter 0

default:
printf("error: %c is not a natural note\n",note1);return 1;
}
switch(note2){
case 'C': case 'c':
pc2 = 0;
break;
case 'D': case 'd':
pc2 = 2;
break;
case 'E': case 'e':
pc2 = 4;
break;
case 'F': case 'f':
pc2 = 5;
break;
case 'G': case 'g':
pc2 = 7;
break;
case 'A': case 'a':
pc2 = 9;
break;
case 'B': case 'b':
pc2 = 11;
break;
default:
printf("error: %c is not a natural note\n",note2);return 1;
}
/* calculate the interval and keep it modulo 12 */
interval = pc2 - pc1;
if(interval < 0) interval += 12;
else if(interval > 11) interval -= 12;
/* print the number of semitones. The special case of
unison (0) has to be handled correctly, so we use the
conditional operator for this */
printf("%d semitones up or %d semitones down\n", interval,
interval ? 12-interval : 0 );
/* now we print out the interval name */
switch(interval){
case 1:
printf("minor 2nd up or major 7th down\n");
break;
case 2:

19

An Overview of the C Language

printf("major 2nd up or minor 7th
break;
case 3:
printf("minor 3rd up or major 6th
break;
case 4:
printf("major 3rd up or minor 6th
break;
case 5:
printf("perfect 4th up or perfect
break;
case 6:
printf("augmented 4th \n");
break;
case 7:
printf("perfect 5th up or perfect
break;
case 8:
printf("minor 6th up or major 3rd
break;
case 9:
printf("major 6th up or minor 3rd
break;
case 10:
printf("minor 7th up or major 2nd
break;
case 11:
printf("major 7th up or minor 2nd
break;
default:
printf("unison \n");

down\n");

down\n");

down\n");

5th down\n");

4th down\n");

down\n");

down\n");

down\n");

down\n");

}
return 0;
}
As we will see later, this program is longer than it has to be if we use all the tools that the
C language offers. However, it demonstrates what is possible with the elements introduced
so far.
0.8

Loops
Until now we have been using programs that have a certain number of instructions that are
read and executed, line after line depending on control ﬂow statements (if, else, or

20

Chapter 0

switch). If we want some parts of the program to be repeated, we will have to use a neat
programming device: the loop.
0.8.1

The while and do while Loops

You can repeat any statement using either the while loop:
while(condition) { . . . }
or the do while loop:
do { . . . }while(condition);
The condition is just a test to control how long you want the program block to carry on
repeating. In the case of the while loop, before the code block is carried out the condition
is checked, and if it is true the block is executed one more time. If the condition turns out to
be false, the loop is exited. In the case of the do while loop, it will always execute the code
within the loop at least once, since the condition controlling the loop is tested at the bottom
of the loop.
One of the typical ways of controlling a loop is to employ a counting variable, which will
be incrementing every time the loop repeats:
a = 0;
While( a < 10){
. . .
a=a+1;
}
The increment is such a common operation that we have a special operator for it:
++a; or a++;
In this case, ++a increments a before using its value, whereas a++ means ‘‘use the value in a,
then increment the value stored in a.’’ Decrement operators (--) also work in the same way.
In addition, += and -= are used to increment or decrement by more than 1.
Other ways of stopping a loop include querying the user with scanf() and examining the
value of an arithmetic expression.
0.8.2

The for loop

The loop controlled by a counting variable is so common that a special form is designed to
provide a compact way of doing it. This is implemented by the for loop
for (counter=start; counter < end; counter++) statement;
which is equivalent to

21

An Overview of the C Language

counter=start;
while (counter < end)
{
statement;
counter++;
}
Here is an example creating the classic Fahrenheit-to-Celsius conversion table:
for (fahr = 0 ; fahr <= 300 ; fahr = fahr + 20)
printf("%4d %6.1f\n", fahr, (5.0/9.0)*(fahr-32));
0.8.3

Another Music Theory Example

Here we show the use of a loop to implement a repetitive task. In this program, we want to
print the notes of a major scale in ascending steps. This involves adding two semitones to a
starting note at every repetition, except after the third note, when we have just one semitone. In order to print the note names, we translate the pitch class numbers by bringing
them to the range 0–11 (modulo 12, we can use the % operator since all notes are now
non-negative).
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
int note, i;
printf("Please enter the key (in pitch-class number, 0-11): ");
scanf("%d",&note);
/* make sure start note is not negative */
while (note < 0) note += 12;
/* build the scale */
for (i=0; i < 7; i++){
/* translate pitch-class to note name */
if(note%12==0) printf("C ");
else if(note%12 == 1) printf("Db ");
else if(note%12 == 2) printf("D ");
else if(note%12 == 3) printf("Eb ");
else if(note%12 == 4) printf("E ");
else if(note%12 == 5) printf("F ");
else if(note%12 == 6) printf("Gb ");
else if(note%12 == 7) printf("G ");
else if(note%12 == 8) printf("Ab ");
else if(note%12 == 9) printf("A ");
else if(note%12 == 10) printf("Bb ");

22

Chapter 0

else printf("B ");
/* find the next pitch class, jump
a semitone only after 3rd step */
if(i != 2) note += 2;
else note++;
}
printf("\n");
return 0;
}
0.8.4

Break and Continue

The break statement allows you to exit a program block from anywhere within it (we saw
how it can be used in a switch block). So it can be used to exit a loop from inside it, without
using the loop conditional test. The continue statement is used to jump directly to the test
from anywhere in the loop, skipping any remaining statements.
0.9

Bitwise Operations
C permits a set of low-level operations, known as bitwise, that add some useful functionality
to the language. These operators, as the name implies, are deﬁned to work at the bit level,
on the individual zeroes and ones that make up the binary information. They are deﬁned
for integer use.
0.9.1

Bitwise Logic

A number of operators are deﬁned for bitwise operations; they compare each bit of one
operand with the corresponding bit of the other operand:
&
|
^
~

bitwise AND
bitwise inclusive OR
bitwise exclusive OR
ones complement (unary operator).

Bitwise AND (&) returns a set bit (1) only when both sides of the operation have that bit set.
It is often use with bitmasks to ﬁlter bytes off an integer:
short mask = 0xFF00, value, masked;
value = 0x0111;
masked = mask & value;
In the example above, the mask will only let the higher byte pass, ﬁltering off the lower
one. Thus the value of masked will be 0  0100:

23

An Overview of the C Language

0000 0001 0001 0001
&
1111 1111 0000 0000
----------------------------0000 0001 0000 0000
The bitwise OR (|) returns a set bit when either operands have a set bit. It is used to turn
bits on (and to combine bytes).
masked = mask | value;
will turn the higher-order byte to 0  FF, resulting in 0  FF11:
0000 0001 0001 0001
1111 1111 0000 0000
----------------------------1111 1111 0001 0001
The bitwise exclusive-OR returns a set bit when only one operand has a set bit, otherwise it
will return a zero. The unary ones complement operator (~) converts each set bit into a zero
and vice versa.
The bitwise logic operators can be combined in short-hand expressions with the assignment operator, for the updating of variables. For example:
value &= mask; // same as value = value & mask;
0.9.2

Bitshift Operators

Two operators can be used to shift bits in an integer:
<< left shift
>> right shift
They shift bits by a number of positions speciﬁed by the right-hand operand: x << 1 shifts all
bits by one position to the left, and x >> 2 shifts all bits by two positions to the right.
Left-shifts ﬁll the vacated bits with 0-bits. Right-shifts will depend on the type of the
operand: for unsigned types, bits will be ﬁlled with zeroes; for signed types, the sign bit is
preserved and the shifted bits will be ﬁlled with sign bits (the ﬁrst bit). This is platform
dependent, but in the major systems we use this is the norm. They employ a representation
for signed integers called ‘‘twos complement.’’ In it, the ﬁrst bit (sign) is 1 for negative
numbers and 0 for positive numbers.
Left shifts are equivalent to multiplication (a fast way of doing it):
x << n

multiplication by 2 n .

Right shifts are equivalent to division (with rounding):
x >> n

multiplication by 2 n .

24

Chapter 0

Thus, a fast way of multiplying or dividing by 2 is to left or right shift a number by one
position. The division will be rounded down to an integer.
0.10

Functions
In C, functions are also known as subroutines or procedures. A function is simply a block of
code grouped together and given a name. This block of code can then be invoked just by
using its name in a statement. For instance a function can be declared to print a message
and exit:
void message()
{
printf("This is my message\n");
}
Now that it is deﬁned, you can use it:
int main()
{
message();
return 0;
}
As the function does not return anything, it is deﬁned with the return type void, meaning
‘‘nothing.’’ It also does not take any arguments, so there is nothing inside the parentheses.
Note that any variables declared inside a function (a code block) are only valid and seen
inside that block. These variables are local and they will disappear when function exits. In
order to pass in values to local variables and to get the answers out of functions, we will use
arguments (parameters) and return values.
0.10.1

Arguments and Return Types

Passing values to a function is done via its arguments. These are deﬁned within the parentheses, each one with its type and separated by commas. Arguments declared like this also
behave as local variables for the function. In order to pass the answer (if any) that the function provides, we use the keyword return:
int sum(int a, int b)
{
int result;
result=a + b;
return result;
}

25

An Overview of the C Language

This deﬁnes a function (called sum) with two parameters, a and b, both integers, returning
an integer, and can be used as
a = sum(2,2);
This is a call to the sum function with a set to 2 and b set to 2, and so result is set to 4.
You can also initialize parameters to the results of expressions such as
a = sum(x+y,z*w);
This will set a to the result of x+y and b to z*w. The values of the arguments are copied into
them as the function is called. C passes copies of variables as arguments, not the variables
themselves. In summary, a function has the general form
type FunctionName(arguments)
{
statements
}
Notice that the function will always exit when it reaches a return statement. The rest of the
code beyond it will be skipped. The return statement can return a value or (in the case of
void return types) nothing at all.
0.10.2

Prototypes

Before a function is used, the compiler must be given the return type and any arguments
for it. Thus, in order to use it, we will ﬁrst have to declare it. We need not completely deﬁne
(implement) it before it is used; we need only declare it. In that case, we can provide the
function prototype: its type, name, and arguments. For instance,
int sum(int, int);
is the prototype for the sum function deﬁned above. The function deﬁnition can then go
elsewhere in the source code—after main(), or even in a different source ﬁle. By default, if a
function is not declared before use, it is assumed to be an int function—which is not always
correct.
0.10.3

A More Compact Version of the Interval Program

Now we can use functions to implement tasks that might be repeated with different inputs,
so we can have a more compact program. Here we put the translation code of our ﬁrst music
theory example program into a function, then call it when we need pitch classes for the
interval calculation:

26

Chapter 0

#include <stdio.h>
/* this function implements translation */
int nameToPc(char name){
switch(name){
case 'C': case 'c':
return 0;
case 'D': case 'd':
return 2;
case 'E': case 'e':
return 4;
case 'F': case 'f':
return 5;
case 'G': case 'g':
return 7;
case 'A': case 'a':
return 9;
case 'B': case 'b':
return 11;
default: /* error code */
return 100;
}
}
int main()
{
char note1,note2, dummy;
int interval;
printf("Please enter two natural notes.\nfirst note: ");
scanf("%c%c",&note1, &dummy);
printf("second note: ");
scanf("%c",&note2);
/* to calculate the interval, we call nameToPc() to translate */
interval = nameToPc(note2) - nameToPc(note1);
if(interval > 20 || interval < -11) {
printf("either %c or %c are invalid notes\n", note1, note2);
return 1;
}
if(interval < 0) interval += 12;
else if(interval > 11) interval -= 12;
printf("%d semitones up or %d semitones down\n", interval,
interval ? 12-interval : 0 );
return 0;
}

27

An Overview of the C Language

0.10.4

The Standard Library

The Standard C Library provides a great number of functions that perform very useful tasks,
including input and output, math, string and character manipulation, and memory allocation. The advantage of using this library is that it has more or less the same behavior across
platforms and is generally guaranteed to work everywhere. Table 0.6 shows some of the functions in the Standard C Library.
0.11

Arrays
So far we have been able to create memory slots only for single variable types, but in many
applications we will require whole blocks of memory for storing values contiguously. This
can be done using arrays. For example,
int a[5];
declares an array called a with ﬁve elements. The ﬁrst element is a[0] and the last a[4], so
all the arrays are zero-based. In general you have
type array[size]
which declares an array of the speciﬁed type and with size elements. The ﬁrst array element is array[0] and the last is array[size-1]. Arrays can be initialized as follows:
int a[5] = {1,2,3,4,5};
The for loop and arrays go together very well. The for loop can be used to generate a
sequence of values to pick out and process each element in an array in turn—for instance,
for (i=0; i<5; i++) a[i] = i+1;
to ﬁll the array with 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
0.11.1

Two-Dimensional Arrays

In C it is possible to create arrays of two dimensions, sometimes also called two-dimensional
matrices. Such an array’s numbers of rows and columns deﬁne a two-dimensional matrix.
Thus, a 2-D array can be declared as follows:
a[rows][columns]
int a[10][10]; /* a 10x10 matrix */
A two-dimensional array is actually an array of arrays; it can be initialized, just as any other
array, by placing the columns in row order:
int a[3][2] = { {0, 1},
{2, 3},
{4, 5} };

28

Chapter 0

Table 0.6
Some of the more popular functions from the standard C library.
stdio.h

I/O functions

getchar()

Returns next character typed on keyboard

putchar()

Outputs a single character to screen

printf()

Outputs to stdout

scanf()

Reads data from stdin

string.h

String functions

strcat()
strcmp()

Concatenates a copy of str2 to str1
Compares two strings

strcpy()

Copies contents of str2 to str1

ctype.h

Character functions

isdigit()

Returns non-0 if arg is digit from 0 to 9

isalpha()

Returns non-0 if arg is a letter of alphabet

isalnum()

Returns non-0 if arg is a letter or digit

islower()

Returns non-0 if arg is a lowercase letter

isupper()

Returns non-0 if arg is an uppercase letter

math.h

Mathematics functions

acos()

Returns arc cosine of arg

asin()
atan()

Returns arc sine of arg
Returns arc tangent of arg

cos()

Returns cosine of arg

sin()

Returns sine of arg

exp()

Returns natural logarithm e

fabs()

Returns absolute value of num

sqrt()

Returns square root of num

time.h

Time and date functions

time()

Returns current calendar time of system

difftime()
clock()

Returns difference in secs between two times
Returns number of system clock cycles since program execution

stdlib.h

Miscellaneous functions

malloc()

Provides dynamic memory allocation

rand()

Returns a pseudo-random number

srand()

Used to set starting point for rand()

29

An Overview of the C Language

0.11.2

Strings: Arrays of Characters

Strings are arrays of characters, and the C programming language uses the convention that
the end of a string of characters is marked by a null character (ASCII code 0). To store the
null character in a character variable, you can use the notation \0. However the compiler
will automatically add a null character and store each character in a separate element
when you use a string constant. A string constant is indicated by double quotation marks, a
character constant by single quotation marks): "A" is a string constant and 'A' is a character
constant. It is important to realize and remember that strings are always arrays and so cannot
be assigned directly, as in
char string[40];
string="name"
However, you can print strings using printf and read them into character arrays using
scanf. You can also initialize a string with a string constant:
char name[40] = "hello";
But to manipulate strings we will need functions that deal with the fact that they are arrays
(and that they are terminated with a null character). Standard library string functions, such
as strcmp() and strcat(), are designed to operate on such arrays of characters.
0.11.3

A More Elegant Version of the Scale Program

We can now make our scale program more elegant by using an array of strings as a translation table. First, we get the key as a string, use a loop to look it up on the table, and obtain
the index to it, which is our pitch class (from 0 to 11). Then we can use the table again to
print out the note name. We use the strcmp() library function to match the strings. It
returns 0 if the strings are the same.
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
int main()
{
int note, i;
char key[3];
char* scale[12]={"C","Db","D","Eb",
"E","F","Gb","G",
"Ab","A","Bb","B"};
printf("Please enter the key(capitals only, "
"use b for flats,
eg. Eb):");
scanf("%s",key);
/* use table to translate note name to pitch class */

30

Chapter 0

for(i=0; i < 12; i++)
if(strcmp(scale[i],key)==0){/* found the note */
note = i; /* pitch-class is array index */
printf("== %s major scale ==\n", key);
break;
}
else note = -1; /* note not found */
if(note >= 0){
for (i=0; i < 7; i++){
/* use table to translate pitch-class to note name */
printf("%s ", scale[note%12]);
if(i != 2) note += 2;
else note++;
}
printf("\n");
return 0;
}
else{
printf("%s: invalid key\n", key);
return 1;
}
}
0.12

Pointers
As we mentioned earlier, a variable is a memory slot that has been given a name. For example, int x; is an area of memory that has been given the name x, and x=10; stores the data
constant 10 in memory slot x. The computer accesses its own memory by using a memory
map with each location of memory uniquely deﬁned by a number called an address. A pointer
is a variable that holds this location of memory, the address of a variable. We declare it just
like any other variable, but we use an asterisk to mark it. For example,
int *pa;
is a pointer to an integer. To use a pointer, we will employ two special operators: & and *. We
have already seen that the & operator returns the address of a variable. For example,
int *pa, a;
declares pa, a pointer to int, and an int, and the instruction
pa=&a;
stores the address of a in pa. We say that pa is pointing at a.

31

An Overview of the C Language

The operator ‘*’ is the indirection operator. A ‘*’ in front of a pointer variable gives the
value stored in the variable pointed at. That is, pa stores the address of a variable, and *pa
is the value stored in that variable.
a = 10;
b = *pa; /* b is now also 10 */
*pa = 12; /* a is now 12 */
In summary:
n
n
n

A pointer is declared by a ‘*’ in front of its name.
The address of a variable is given by a ‘&’ in front of its name.
To obtain or store the value of a variable (pointed at), use ‘*’ in front of a pointer.

0.12.1

Pointers and Arrays

Pointers and arrays are closely connected. If you declare an array as
int a[10];
you are also declaring a pointer a to the ﬁrst element in the array. Here, a is equivalent to
&a[0]. The only difference between a and a pointer variable is that the array name is a constant pointer and cannot be used as a variable. In this sense, a[i] and *(a+i) are equivalent, which makes possible what is called pointer arithmetic, adding integers to pointers to
step through a memory block. The compiler will know how many bytes to move forward
when you add a certain number of memory slots to it. If it is an int, it will jump four bytes
(system-dependent of course) each step, if it is a double, then it will jump eight bytes. This
is one of the reasons why the compiler needs to know the type of a variable when you
declare it.
Finally, when you pass an entire array to a function then by default a pointer is passed.
This allows you to write functions that process entire arrays without having to pass every
single value stored in the array, just a pointer to the ﬁrst element:
int randarray(int *pa, int n)
{
int i;
for (i=0; i < n; i++)
{
*pa = rand()%n + 1;
pa++;
}
}
The loop can in fact be reduced to
for(i=0; i<n; i++) *(pa+i)=rand()%n+1;

32

Chapter 0

or
for(i=0; i<n; i++) pa[i]=rand()%n+1;
If you deﬁne pa as a pointer, you can use array indexing notation with it as well as pointer
arithmetic.
0.12.2

Strings, Arrays, and Pointers

We now see that a string is just a character array with the end of the valid data marked by
an ASCII null character ‘\0’. Manipulation of strings is based on pointers and special string
functions. For example, the strlen(str) function returns the number of characters in the
string str. It counts the number of characters up to the ﬁrst null in the character array, so
it is important to use a null-terminated string.
We need a function to copy strings, because simple assignment between string variables
does not work. For example,
char a[l0],b[10];
b = a;
does not copy characters. It just makes pointer b set point to the same set of characters that a
points to, but a second copy of the string is not created (in fact, this code will not even compile). What we need is strcopy(a,b), which copies every character in a into the array b up
to the ﬁrst null character. Similarly, strcat(a,b) adds the characters in b to the end of
the string stored in a, and strcmp(a,b) compares the two strings, character by character,
and returns 0 if the results are equal.
Notice that, to assign a character array to a string, you cannot use
a = "hello";
because a is a pointer and "hello" is a string constant. However, you can use
strcopy(a,"hello");
because a string constant is passed in exactly the same way as a string variable, i.e. as a
pointer. And remember, a string can always be initialized. For example:
char a[6]="hello";
0.12.3

A Transposition Program Using Pointer Arithmetic

As an example of the use of pointer arithmetic (i.e. incrementing and decrementing memory
addresses), we present a program that calculates the result of transposing a note by any number of semitones (positive or negative). This program uses an array that is a table of note
names. We set a pointer to the start address of that array and then increment it until we
ﬁnd the base note. We then add to this pointer the interval in semitones (after bringing

33

An Overview of the C Language

this to the range 0–11), then make sure the address is in the correct range (otherwise we
wrap it around). This will result in the pointer being set to the address in the table where
the correct note name is:
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
int mod12(int note){
while(note < 0) note += 12;
while(note >= 12) note -=12;
return note;
}
int main() {
char note[3], **p1, **p2,
*table[12] = {"C","C#","D","D#",
"E","F","F#","G",
"G#","A","A#","B"};
int interval;
printf("Enter base note (capitals, use # for sharps, eg. A#): ");
scanf("%s", note);
printf("Enter interval in semitones: ");
scanf("%d", &interval);
/* point p1 to the beginning of the array and p2 to its end */
p1 = table;
p2 = table+11;
/* now find the base note position,
incrementing the pointer until we find it */
while(strcmp(*p1,note)){
p1++;
if(p1 > p2) { /* if we're past the end */
printf("could not find %s\n", note);
return 1;
}
}
/* add the interval to the address of the base note */
p1 += mod12(interval);
/* if beyond the end of the table, wrap it around */
if(p1 > p2) p1 -= 12;
/* print result */
printf("%s transposed by %d semitones is %s\n",
note, interval, *p1);
return 0;
}

34

Chapter 0

0.12.4

Pointers to Functions

In C it is possible not only to have pointers to built-in data types, but also to have pointers to
functions. With this facility, we will be able to manipulate functions as pointers, pass them
to other functions, put them in arrays, and so on. It is quite an advanced principle, but very
useful. For instance,
void (*pf)();
is a pointer to a function that takes no parameters and does not return anything. In that
case, we can assign
void message(){ printf("my message\n"); }
pf = message;
and call the function using a pointer:
(*pf)(); /* will call message() */
or, even simpler,
pf();
This is because (*pf)() and pf() are equivalent, both being the function that is pointed at.
In general, we have this form for function pointer declarations:
return-type (*pointer-name) (arguments);[
Why do we need something like this? Well, function pointers are useful for callbacks, i.e.
functions not invoked directly by you but by existing code. For instance, suppose we have
the function
void message_printer(int times, void (*callback)(char *msg),
char *user_mess){
int i;
for(i=0; i < times; i++) callback(user_mess);
}
This invokes a user-deﬁned function to print out a user-supplied message, a callback. The
user would then supply a callback for message-printer() to call it, as in the following
example:
void my_important_message(char *mess){
printf("VERY IMPORTANT: %s \n," mess);
}
void my_warning_message(char* mess) {
printf("WARNING: %s\n," mess);
}

35

An Overview of the C Language

int main() {
message-printer(10, my_important_message, "functions can be pointers");
message-printer(1, my_warning_message, "but be careful");
return 0;
}
This advanced concept can be much more useful than the trivial example above, but this
gives you an idea of what a callback is. These types of programming constructs are often
seen in audio systems, where the programmer supplies a callback that will be used by the
system to perform a particular task (such as sending audio samples to the soundcard).
0.13

Structures
The array is an example of a data structure made up of a single data type. If you need something that holds a variety of types together in a single block, you will need a single data structure using a single name, provided in the C language by struct.
0.13.1

User-Deﬁned Data Types

With C structures we have a new, user-deﬁned, data type. To use them, ﬁrst we need to
deﬁne what the new type looks like, using struct:
struct note
{
char name[3];
int duration;
char intensity[5];
};
Then we can declare a variable of that type, to be used in the program:
struct note first;
Notice that the new variable is called first and is of the type note. This can be considered
as valid a data type as any of the built-in types, such as float or int. In general, you can
deﬁne a structure using
struct name
{
list of member variables
};
and you can have as many member variables as you need. Once deﬁned you can declare as
many examples of the new type as you like, using
struct name list of variables;

36

Chapter 0

For example,
struct note first, second, third;
and so on. If you want to avoid using struct for variable declaration, you can use typedef.
For instance,
typedef struct _note
{
char name[3];
int duration;
char intensity[5];
} note;
note first;
deﬁnes the structure, and a new type based on it called note, then uses the newly created
data type directly. To use the data type, you can access each member by name, using a period
to link the variable name and the requested structure member:
first.name
first.duration
Once you have used a qualiﬁed name to get down to the level of a member variable, it
behaves like a normal variable of the type deﬁned in the structure. For example,
first.duration = 120;
is a valid assignment to an int, and
strcpy(note.name, "C");
is a valid statement. Notice that to access the member we use the structure variable name
and not the structure type name. You can also deﬁne a structure that includes another structure as a component and of course that structure can contain another structure and so on.
Structures can be initialized using syntax that is similar to array initialization:
note first = { "Ab", 80, "mf" };
As another example of the use of structures, we would like to deﬁne a type to hold complex numbers. A complex number is composed of two parts—a real part and an imaginary
part—that can be implemented as single or double precision values. This suggests deﬁning
a new struct type:
typedef struct comp
{
float real;
float imag;
} complex;

37

An Overview of the C Language

After this, you can declare new complex variables using
complex a,b;
The new complex variables cannot be used as if they were simple variables. C does allow
you to assign structures as in
a = b;
Being able to assign structures and operate on them is even more useful when they are
bigger. What we can do is to deﬁne a function to operate on a structure. You can pass entire
structures as parameters and return entire structures. As with all C parameters, structures are
passed by value; thus, if you want to allow a function to alter a parameter you have to
remember to pass a pointer to a struct. For instance, multiplication of complex numbers
can be deﬁned as follows:
complex mult(complex a, complex b)
{
complex c;
c.real=a.real*b.real-a.imag*b.imag;
c.imag=a.real*b.imag + a.imag*b.real;
return c;
}
You can then write a complex multiplication as
x=mult(y,z)
The following program example demonstrates the use of structures and how to operate on
them:
#include <stdio.h>
typedef struct comp
{
float real;
float imag;
} complex;
complex mult(complex a,complex b)
{
complex c;
c.real=a.real*b.real - a.imag*b.imag;
c.imag=a.real*b.imag + a.imag*b.real;
return c;
}
int main()

38

Chapter 0

{
float re,im;
complex a,b;
get two complex numbers as inputs */
printf("Please enter the first complex number (re, im): ");
scanf("%f%f", &re, &im);
a.real = re; a.imag = im;
printf("Please enter the second complex number (re, im): ");
scanf("%f%f", &re, &im);
b.real = re; b.imag = im;
/* multiply them */
a = mult(a,b);
printf("Their product is %f + %fi \n", a.real, a.imag);
return 0;
}
Finally, notice that passing a struct by value (to a function) can use up a lot of memory
in the case of large data structures (which is not the case in the example above). This is
because a copy of the structure is made for the function argument. To avoid this, you can
use pointers to structures.
0.13.2

Pointers to Structures

You can declare a pointer to a structure in the same way as any pointer. For example,
person *ptr
deﬁnes a pointer to a person. You can use a pointer to a struct in the same way as any
pointer, but the typical means of structure access makes it look rather awkward. For example,
(*ptr).age
is the age component of the person structure that ptr points at—i.e. an int. You need the
brackets because a period has a higher priority than an asterisk. The use of a pointer to a
struct is so common that you can use
prt->age
to mean the same thing as (*ptr).age. The notation gives a better idea of what is happening: prt points (->) to the structure and age selects which component of the structure we
want.
0.13.3

Structures and Functions

Structures can only contain built-in data types, so a function cannot be directly deﬁned
inside a structure. However, as we can declare pointers to functions, we could use them to

39

An Overview of the C Language

hold functions, which in some cases might be useful. For instance, it would be nice to be
able to have an increment function for the complex data type. First, we could declare a structure containing a function pointer
typedef struct comp {
double real, imag;
void (*incr)(struct comp *p);
} complex;
Then we could deﬁne a function to operate on the data (we’ll use a pointer, as it is more
efﬁcient):
void incr1(complex *p){ p->real++; p->imag++; }
To use this structure and its associated function, we can write the following code:
complex a = { 0, 0, incr1 };
a.incr(&a);
0.13.4

Structures and CBB

Deﬁning functions to work on data structures is very useful. In Cþþ, there will be an easier
way to do it. Structures with functions associated with them are in fact a point of connection
between C and Cþþ, as they become classes in Cþþ. In simple terms, a Cþþ class is a structure in which you can deﬁne members that are functions (not only function pointers). You
will also be able to control access to the data members of a class. Moreover, the same ‘.’
access system applies to the class and the use of pointers and the ‘->’ operator. These elements will be further discussed in later sections of this chapter.
0.14

Dynamic Memory Allocation
So far we have not bothered with how memory is set aside for data you use in a program. In
the usual variable declaration, the compiler works out how to allocate storage. For example,
when you declare
int a;
the compiler sorts out how to allocate memory to store the integer, and with int a[256] ;
it allocates space for 256 ints and sets the name a to point to the ﬁrst element. This is static,
automatic storage—storage that is allocated at ‘‘compile time.’’ But another way to do this is
to use dynamic allocation, with the malloc function:
pa = malloc(size);
Here malloc allocates a certain number of bytes (size) and returns the address of that location. Since we can retrieve the size of any data type with the sizeof(...) function, we can
allocate storage using

40

Chapter 0

pa = malloc(sizeof(int)*N);
where N is the number of ints you want to create. But because malloc is used to allocate an
arbitrary memory block, it returns a void pointer, which must then be cast to the right type:
pa = (int *) malloc(sizeof(int)*N);
This makes the value returned by malloc a pointer to int. After this deﬁnition, you can use
ptr as normal. For example,
pa[n]
is the nth element of the array. When you are ﬁnished with the memory, you’ll have to use
free(pa); to free it.
0.15

Command-Line Arguments
Now let us look at how to get arguments off a command line. This uses the second form of
main() shown at the beginning of the chapter. Command-line arguments are passed to a
program through two arguments to the main() function. The parameters, are called argc
and argv, are seen in the following main prototype:
int main(int argc, char **argv)
The argc parameter holds the number of arguments on the command-line and is an integer. It will always be at least one because the name of the program is the ﬁrst argument. The
argv parameter is an array of string pointers. All command-line arguments are passed to
main() as strings. For example:
#include <stdio.h>
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
int i;
for (i=1; i<argc; i++) printf("%s", argv[i]);
return 0;
}
This program will print out all of its arguments, starting with the program name.
0.15.1

A Program for Analyzing Serial Music

We will now use many of the C language tools learned in this chapter to create a fully functional program for analyzing serial music. Suppose we want to apply the rules of twelve-tone
music to create a matrix with all the serial forms that derive from a single tone row. The ﬁrst
row of the matrix will receive the original twelve notes, from left to right. The inversion of

41

An Overview of the C Language

the series will ﬁll the ﬁrst column of the matrix, from top to bottom. To complete the matrix,
the other rows will receive transposed versions of the original series, each one starting with
the note in the ﬁrst column. When the matrix is complete, we will be able to read all the
transposition forms of the original series in the rows from left to right, the retrograde forms
in the same rows from right to left, the inversions in the columns from top to bottom, and
the retrograde of inversion forms in the opposite sense. Here are the steps that we will have
to take to achieve this:
1. As in previous examples, we will take pitch classes from 0 to 11, which form the original
series, from the command-line arguments, and place this series in the ﬁrst row of the matrix.
2. We will use two arithmetic formulae for the inversion and transposition of the original
series. The inverse form, appearing in the ﬁrst column, is given by
Pm,1 ¼ [(Pm1,1 þ (P1,m1  P1,m )] mod12

(1)

and, the subsequent transpositions are given by
Pm,n ¼ [(P1,n þ (Pm,1  P1,1 )] mod12.

(2)

3. We will then use a translation table to print the serial matrix.
Using many of the principles introduced earlier in the chapter, we can create a very compact
program. Note that we will not check for correct inputs (in the range of 0–11, but we will
apply mod12 to all input pitch classes) or repetition of notes (required by certain types of
serial music). Here is the program:
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
int mod12(int note) {
while(note >= 12) note -= 12;
while(note < 0) note += 12;
return note;
}
int
main(int argc, char** argv)
{
int series[12][12], offset;
int n, m, i;
char* table[12]={"C","Db","D","Eb",
"E","F","Gb","G",
"Ab","A","Bb","B"};
if(argc != 13) {
printf("usage: %s note1 note2 ... note12\n", argv[0]);
return -1;

42

Chapter 0

}
/* loop until all available notes are entered*/
for(n = 0; n < 12; n++)
series[0][n] = mod12(atoi(argv[n+1]));
/* create inversion in column 1 */
for(m = 1; m < 12; m++)
series[m][0] = mod12(series[m-1][0] + series[0][m-1]
- series[0][m]) ;
/* create all transpositions */
for(m = 1; m < 12; m++)
for(n = 1; n < 12; n++)
series[m][n] = mod12(series[0][n] + series[m][0]
- series[0][0]);
for(m = 0; m < 12; m++){
/* print the pitch classes, row by row, using the
translation table */
for(n = 0; n < 12; n++) printf(" %s ", table[series[m][n]]);
printf("\n");
}
return 0;
}
This concludes our tour of C, which demonstrates how compact yet expressive and efﬁcient it can be. As a complement, let us look brieﬂy at some elements of Cþþ.
0.16

Moving to CBB
The Cþþ programming language is a super-set of C. As such, it supports and allows all the C
coding we have done so far, but it introduces new elements and additional resources, which
hopefully make life easier for the programmer. There are many new features in Cþþ (in fact,
Cþþ is anything but a small language), only a few of which we will introduce here. We must
remember that if strict C is required, then we cannot use any Cþþ features in a program.
When writing pure C code, we should use the ﬁle extension .c; when writing Cþþ code,
we should use .cpp. This will avoid confusion and make sure that the building tools call
the right compiler (for C or for Cþþ).
0.16.1

Variable Declaration Anywhere in the Code

The C programming language allows variables to be declared only at the start of a code block
({ }), whereas Cþþ allows variables to be declared anywhere. For instance:

43

An Overview of the C Language

/* C example */
void func(){
int a,b,c;
a = g();
b = f();
c = a+b;
}
// C++ example
void func(){
int a;
a = g();
int b;
b = f();
int c = a + b;
}
0.16.2

Default Value for Arguments in Functions

In Cþþ it is possible to declare functions with default arguments:
float func(int a=0, int b=1, float f=0.5f);
float func(int a, int b, float f){
return a+b*f;
}
When called as in
a = func();
this function will return 0.5.
In order to use this facility, in the declaration, we deﬁne which arguments are to have
default values by initializing them. In the function deﬁnition, we just implement the code
as before.
0.16.3

Memory Management: new and delete

Cþþ provides a simpler mechanism for memory allocation, which is perhaps less awkward
than malloc() and friends. This mechanism is implemented with two Cþþ operators: new
and delete.
The former is used to allocate memory for any built-in or user-deﬁned variable type, as in
// memory allocation for float pointer variable a

44

Chapter 0

float *a
// ditto
int *b =
// ditto
MyStruct

= new float;
for int pointer variable b
new int;
for struct Mystruct pointer variable s
*s = new MyStruct;

Memory can be allocated for arrays, as in
int size = 512;
float *array = new float[size]; // 512 floats.
As this is a dynamic memory allocation, a variable can be used to determine how much
memory will be allocated. Only one dimension of a multi-dimensional array can be allocated
at a time. To free the memory, we use delete:
delete a;
For arrays, we use a slightly different form:
delete[] array;
0.16.4

Structures and Data Types

In Cþþ, when deﬁning a structure, we are also creating a new data type, so we do not need
the typedef keyword to deﬁne it. In fact, a struct is a special case of a programming structure called a class, which can also contain constructors and methods (functions that are members of a class). For the moment, it is sufﬁcient to know that we can write
struct MyStruct {
int a, b;
float f;
};
// no need for typedef...
MyStruct obj;
obj.a = 1; // etc...
0.16.5

Line Comments

Cþþ also supports a single-line comment, using ‘//’ as the ﬁrst characters in a line of code.
We have been using this type of comments in the examples above. This turns all the text on
the rest of the line into a comment (until a new line character is seen).
0.17

Data Abstraction
Data abstraction is another important element of programming that is enabled in a more
consistent way by Cþþ than by C. It consists of deﬁning new data types that would model

45

An Overview of the C Language

something—perhaps signal-processing components or unit generators. We will deﬁne a data
type by deciding what it is made of (its member variables) and what it can do (its operations).
Cþþ structures provide good support for this type of programming. For example, we can
deﬁne a structure to hold an oscillator’s data (the dataspace) and functions or methods (the
methodspace) as follows:
struct Osc {
// dataspace
float *table; // ftable
float phase; // phase offset
float ndx; // ndx
int length; // ftable length
int vecsize; // vector size
float rate; // sampling rate
float *output; // output audio block
// methodspace
Osc(float *tab, float ph=0.f, int len=def_len,
int vsize=def_vsize, int sr=def_sr);
~Osc() { delete[] output; }
float *Proc(float amp, float freq);
};
The structure holds all the data members that make up the oscillator, the data that needs to
be persistent (i.e. present in memory) between invocations of the process function. The
methodspace is made up of the bare minimum necessary: an initializing function (the constructor), the deallocating function (the destructor), and the oscillator function proper. The
constructor will always have the same name as the structure, and the destructor will have a
‘~’ before the structure name. This is called automatically when the instance of the structure
is deallocated. In order to use this data type, all we need do is create one (using all the default
parameters):
Osc bing(table);
and the process function will generate audio, as in
output(fp_out, bing.Proc(0.5f, 440.f));
Since Proc() is a member of osc, it is accessed means of a ‘.’. Notice that in the present
design the function returns the audio block, which has been allocated inside the data type
by the constructor. Member functions such as those declared above can be deﬁned inside
the struct deﬁnition (as in ~osc()) or externally. The syntax for the latter is

46

Chapter 0

struct_name::member_func()
For example, the constructor will be deﬁned as
Osc::Osc(float *tab, float ph, int len, int vsize, int sr){
table = tab;
phase = ph;
length = len;
vecsize = vsize;
ndx = 0.f;
rate = sr;
output = new float[vecsize];
}
and the processing function will be
float *Osc::Proc(float amp, float freq) {
float incr = freq*length/rate;
for(int i=0; i < vecsize; i++){
output[i] = amp*table[(int)ndx];
ndx += incr;
while(ndx >= length) ndx -= length;
while(ndx < 0) ndx += length;
}
return output;
}
The above code demonstrates that functions belonging to a struct have access to their
local variables and to the member variables of the structure they belong to. This is very useful because table indexes and wave tables can be kept outside the function and separate from
the rest of the program. In addition, each instance of the Osc data type will have its own
individual member variables, and the user need not supply them to the processing function.
0.17.1

Function Overloading

Function overloading is another feature of Cþþ. It is possible to have functions with same
name in a class, as long as their arguments differ in type or in number. Function selection,
then, depends on argument types at the function call. It is possible to supply more than
one processing method to the structure, say to take in audio vectors for the amplitude and/
or frequency arguments (for audio rate modulation of these parameters). Because of overloading, it is possible to use the same name (Proc()) for these functions:

47

An Overview of the C Language

struct Osc {
// dataspace
float amp; // amplitude
float freq; // frequency
float *table; // ftable
float phase; // phase offset
float ndx; // ndx
int length; // ftable length
int vecsize; // vector size
float rate; // sampling rate
float *output; // output audio block
// methodspace
Osc(float amp, float freq, float *tab, float ph=0.f,
int len=def_len,int vsize=def_vsize, int sr=def_sr);
~Osc() { delete[] output; }
// fixed amp & freq
float *Proc();
// variable control-rate amp & freq
float *Proc(float amp,float freq);
// audio-rate amp
float *Proc(float *amp,float freq);
// audio-rate freq
float *Proc(float amp,float *freq);
// audio-rate amp & freq
float *Proc(float *amp,float *freq);
};
0.17.2

Usage Examples

ﬁxed parameters
Osc zing(0.5f,440.f,wtable);
for(...) {
sig = zing.Osc(); // 440 Hz –6dB sound
}
FM synthesis
Osc mod(ind*fm, fm, sintab);
Osc car(amp, fc, sintab);

48

0.18

Chapter 0

Data Hiding and Encapsulation
Another feature of Cþþ that can be useful for systems design is the support for data hiding
and encapsulation. This allows us to make certain bits of the data structure available only for
member functions, and not for functions that are external to the data structure. One reason
this might be useful is that we can keep things in a structure completely separate from the
rest of the program. We can then provide an interface for accessing only certain elements of
our data types, the ones we want to grant access to. This will provide a more robust data
type, which will be able to behave only in ways deﬁned by us.
In a structure, all members are accessible from the outside: they are public by default. If we
use the keyword ‘private’, we can keep them from being accessed by external code:
struct Osc {
// dataspace is now private
private:
float *table; // ftable
float phase; // phase offset
float ndx; // ndx
int length; // ftable length
int vecsize; // vector size
float rate; // sampling rate
float *output; // output audio block
// methodspace needs to be accessible
public:
Osc(float *tab, float ph=0.f, int len=def_len,
int vsize=def_vsize, int sr=def_sr);
~Osc() { delete[] output; }
float *Proc(float amp,float freq);
};
We can still create an instance of our data type, because the constructor is public:
Osc ping(table);
But we cannot read or write to the member variables:
ping.ndx = 1; // not allowed, ndx is private
0.18.1

Classes

In Cþþ, a version of struct exists in which all members are private by default. It is called a
class:

49

An Overview of the C Language

class Osc {
// dataspace is private by default
float *table; // ftable
(...)
// methodspace needs to be accessible
public:
Osc(float *tab, float ph=0.f, int len=def_len,
int vsize=def_vsize, int sr=def_sr);
(...)
};
Classes and structures are basically the same thing, although the former is more commonly
used. They provide the support for a programming style called object-oriented programming
(OOP), in which the ideas discussed above in relation to data abstraction and data hiding
play an important part. In OOP parlance, we call the instances of a data type objects.
0.18.2

A CBB Program for Analyzing Serial Music

In this subsection, we will present a version of our serial analysis program using the concept
of data hiding and encapsulation. We will start by modeling the concept of a twelve-tone
series and the basic operations that we can apply to it:
class Dodecaphonic {
protected:
int series[12]; /* the tone row, hidden from outside */
int mod12(int note) { /* the modulus as an internal method */
while(note >= 12) note -= 12;
while(note < 0) note += 12;
return note;
}
public:
Dodecaphonic() { /* default constructor */
for(int i=0; i < 12; i++) series[i] = 0;
}
Dodecaphonic(int *notes) { /* constructor from an array */
for(int i=0; i < 12; i++) series[i] = mod12(notes[i]);
}
int get(int index){ return series[mod12(index)]; /* get & set
notes */
void set(int note, int index) {
series[mod12(index)] = mod12(note); }

50

Chapter 0

Dodecaphonic transpose(int interval); /* the three basic
operations */
Dodecaphonic invert();
Dodecaphonic retrograde();
};
/* defining the operations. All of them return a Dodecaphonic object */
Dodecaphonic Dodecaphonic::transpose(int interval){
Dodecaphonic transp;
for(int i=0; i < 12; i++)
transp.set(mod12(series[i]+interval), i);
return transp;
}
Dodecaphonic Dodecaphonic::invert(){
Dodecaphonic inv;
inv.set(series[0],0);
for(int i=1; i < 12; i++)
inv.set(mod12(inv.get(i-1) + series[i-1] - series[i]), i);
return inv;
}
Dodecaphonic Dodecaphonic::retrograde(){
Dodecaphonic retr;
for(int i=0; i < 12; i++) retr.set(series[i], 11-i);
return retr;
}
Notice that in this simple class we did not have to allocate new memory or do any extensive
initialization. Because of that, we do not have to deﬁne a destructor (the compiler will provide a default one), and assignment (=) will work by default. In more complicated cases, a
‘‘copy constructor’’ and an ‘‘assignment operator’’ would have to be deﬁned for this to work
correctly. These issues, however, are beyond the scope of this chapter. Also, transpose()
and other manipulation methods do not modify the state of the object, but return a new
object with the desired state (this is a design decision; state-modifying methods could also
have been implemented).
With this class in hand, it is very simple to create a little program that will give us one of
the four versions of an original series (transposed, inverted, retrograde, inverted retrograde).
Because each operation returns a dodecaphonic object, we can operate directly on the
returned value, without the need to use a variable to hold it. For example,
b = a.invert(1); c = b.transpose();
can be written as

51

An Overview of the C Language

b = a.invert().transpose(1);
Here is a program that uses this class (the ellipsis is a placeholder for the class code deﬁned
above):
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
. . .
int main(int argc, char** argv)
{
Dodecaphonic row, res;
int interval, n;
if(argc != 14 || argv[1][0] != '-'){
printf("usage: %s [-oN | -rN | -iN | -irN] "
"note1 note2 ... note12\n",
argv[0]);
return -1;
}
for(n = 0; n < 12; n++) /* initialize the row object */
row.set(atoi(argv[n+2]), n);
switch(argv[1][1]){
case 'o': /* original transposed */
interval = atoi(argv[1]+2);
res = row.transpose(interval);
break;
case 'r': /* retrograde */
interval = atoi(argv[1]+2);
res = row.retrograde().transpose(interval);
break;
case 'i': /* inverted */
if(argv[1][3] != 'r'){
interval = atoi(argv[1]+2);
res = row.invert().transpose(interval);
}
else { /* inverted retrograde */
interval = atoi(argv[1]+3);
res = row.invert().retrograde().transpose(interval);
}
break;
default:
printf("unrecognized option \n");
return -1;
}

52

Chapter 0

for(n = 0; n < 12; n++)
printf("%d ", res.get(n));
printf("\n");
return 0;
}
0.18.3

Inheritance

Classes (and structures) can also be created from other classes by inheritance. This allows the
re-use of code ( rather than rewriting it) and the deﬁnition of a common interface for various
interrelated objects (all derived classes will share some code, especially functions). The syntax for deriving a class from an existing one looks like this:
class Osci : public Osc {
(...)
};
This makes Osci a derived class from Osc. All public members in Osc are also made public
in Osci. Thus Osci can access all the public members in Osc, but not the private ones. In
order to make private members accessible to derived classes, we must use the keyword
protected, which means private to the class and all its subclasses.
0.18.4

Virtual Functions

Cþþ has also a mechanism that allows functions to be specialized in subclasses. These are
called virtual functions. By using the keyword virtual for a function on the superclass, we can
make these functions overridable; that is, we can supply new code for their implementation:
class Osc {
(...)
virtual float *Proc(float amp,float freq);
};
The Proc() function can be then re-declared and re-implemented in a derived class (Osci,
say) to implement an interpolated lookup (instead of truncation):
class Osci : public Osc {
(...)
virtual float *Proc(float amp,float freq);
};
This allows a system to provide an interface for processing functions, which can be implemented by derived classes. The OOP term for this is polymorphism. An example of the use of

53

An Overview of the C Language

such a mechanism is found in the application programming interface for VST plug-ins,
which is written in Cþþ and is based on the derivation of classes from a base class.
0.18.5

Overloaded Operators

Similarly to overloaded functions, it is possible to deﬁne overloaded forms of speciﬁc operators for a certain class deﬁnition. The operators =, +, -, *, /, <<, and >> can be overloaded.
For instance, we could set up the overloading of operator + for our Osc class as follows:
class Osc {
(...)
float *operator+(float val) {
// adds val to every sample in the output block
for(int i=0; i < vecsize; i++) output[i] += val;
// returns the audio block
return output;
}
};
Now using ‘+’ with an Osc object and a float has a deﬁnite meaning: add that number to
every sample in the output audio block of the Osc object (and return a block of samples).
Here is an example of how it can be used:
Osc oscil(...);
float a = 1000.f;
float *buffer;
(...)
for(...) {
(...)
buffer = oscil + a;
(...)
}
0.19

Final Words
In this chapter we have focused on the aspects of Cþþ that should be useful for audio programming, and on almost the whole of the C language. We hope the chapter has served as a
quick refresher course if you are an experienced programmer and as an inspiring appetizer if
you are a beginner.
Clearly, Cþþ is much more extensive than C. Cþþ has its own powerful and robust standard library, the Cþþ Standard Template Library, which is beyond the scope of this chapter
but is well worth exploring.

54

Chapter 0

In the chapters that follow, you will ﬁnd both ‘‘slow-cooked’’ and ‘‘fast-food’’ audio
recipes in C and Cþþ that will sustain, nourish, and inspire the development of your own
unique audio and musical applications regardless of your level of expertise. Along the way,
you will learn to program in both C and Cþþ; at the same time, you will learn the fundamentals and secrets of digital signal processing, software synthesis, computer music, algorithmic composition, and digital audio.

1

Programming in C

Richard Dobson

1.1

Why C?
This section concentrates, as any ﬁrst section on programming must, on the essential features of the language used. However, unlike general books on programming, this book has a
speciﬁc focus, from the outset, on music and audio applications. A useful advantage of this is
that it gives an opportunity to address in very practical ways the question of why you need
to know this, or do that. We have all seen instruction manuals with statements such as ‘‘to
decouple the bifurcated sprocket ﬂange, use the long-handled dingbat’’—without explaining
why, and in what circumstances, you would want or need to do it.
In each of the examples of C code that follow, some audio or music aspect is incorporated
or developed. This gives a clear focus, and I hope it will give at least partial answers to the
‘‘why’’ question, but a ‘‘pure’’ presentation of the language runs the risk of concealing issues
that a more thorough theoretical approach might consider important. So the approach here
is based on the desire to get results, rather than on a foundation of theory; theoretical principles will arise rather as an emergent feature, on which a stronger emphasis is placed in later
sections. Nevertheless, the question ‘‘Why C?’’ is worth addressing at the outset.
The most obvious problem we face in programming audio processes is speed of computation. Many techniques, such as spectral transformation, have been known about for decades,
but only with computer processing speeds at the level they have reached in the last few years
has it been possible to use them in real time. Even now, ensuring that the code is as efﬁcient
as possible is still of great importance, especially for real-time performance. It translates into
more of everything (more oscillators, more ﬁlters, more channels) and higher quality (better
ﬁlters, better reverbs, and so on). Fortunately for the purposes of this book, computers are
fast enough now that we can in many cases afford the luxury of code that is arguably inefﬁcient to a degree, but demonstrates a process clearly. Nevertheless, throughout the book,
hints and tips on ‘‘optimizing’’ working code for maximum performance will be given; and
as your understanding develops, these techniques will gradually become part of your stock in
trade. They are typically based on knowledge of how compilers work, or how computers
work (e.g. how data is moved around in memory), or both. C programming does tend to
demand that, sooner or later, this knowledge will be essential.

56

Chapter 1

The C language has often been described as ‘‘close to the hardware.’’ Expressions in the
language can be compiled to very efﬁcient machine code, exploiting the facilities of each
processor. Some idioms in C, such as the auto-increment and decrement operators and the
address-of and pointer operators, match machine-level instructions exactly. As a result, C
programs may run as fast as programs written in low-level assembler code. The complexity
of modern processors, coupled with a powerful code optimizer (an essential component of
any C compiler), can even mean that a compiled C program may be more efﬁcient than a
skilled programmer can achieve working in assembler. However, these idioms presuppose
an understanding of how the processor handles instructions and data, and even of exactly
how that data is stored in memory. C does little to hide such things from the programmer,
and does even less to prevent you from writing code that can crash the program (and maybe
even the computer). Thus, C is a ‘‘permissive’’ language—it allows you to do things that it
would be a very good idea not to do.
One aspect of C that facilitates closeness to the hardware is, curiously enough, the complete absence, within the language itself, of anything to do with input and output. Text
input from a keyboard and output to a screen or printer depend on hardware, and usually
on the facilities of a supporting operating system. However, an embedded processor may
have neither—perhaps it is connected to transducers and a set of LEDs. All such facilities
are external to the language and have to be supplied by libraries, which now are highly
standardized and which a complete compiler package will always include.
This closeness to the hardware also has made the C language pre-eminent for the writing
of operating systems. C is associated primarily with UNIX and its variants. Many people
today maintain that the ideal platform for the development of audio applications is one or
other ﬂavors of UNIX ( including Linux and now Macintosh OS X) and its native C compiler.
That compiler will include a set of libraries supporting all aspects of the operating system,
including support for input and output devices of all kinds.
In view of the importance of speed for audio programming (and the need to be able to talk
directly to hardware such as A to D and D to A converters, MIDI ports, and so on), it is easy
to understand why C has become popular. As a result of its widespread use, a lot of expertise
and a lot of help are available, and there is a great mass of published source code (covering
the range from simple tools to advanced large-scale applications) to draw upon.
Despite being close to the hardware, C also has the characteristics of a ‘‘high-level language.’’ (‘‘High-level’’ means close to the user; ‘‘low-level’’ means close to the hardware.) It
provides a variety of powerful and ﬂexible facilities for creating and managing large applications, while making it easy to write simple yet useful tools. Much that is very useful can be
done without the need for ‘‘advanced’’ programming skills. This power comes only partly
from the language itself, which supports a ‘‘building-block’’ approach to programming. The
rest comes from the development environment supporting the compiler itself—copious messages from the compiler to help track down errors, and a powerful text pre-processor that,
though in principle external to the language, is in practice inseparable from it.

57

Programming in C

The popularity of C has stimulated the development of very sophisticated development
environments supporting many ‘‘visual’’ tools. Perhaps the most important tool is the
‘‘source-level debugger,’’ which makes it possible to run a program a line at a time, watching
how the data changes. The debugger will run a program for you, and if the program crashes
it will automatically show you the line of code that triggered the crash, and give some indication of what the cause is (such as reading from non-existent memory). It is also possible to
make a program stop at a particular place in the code (‘‘setting a breakpoint’’), where again
you can inspect the state of all relevant data, and even change it before resuming execution.
But the compiler cannot tell you what to do to ﬁx a bug. Thus, knowing how to ﬁx problems (‘‘debugging’’) and, better, knowing how to avoid them in the ﬁrst place (‘‘defensive
programming’’) soon become central skills for the programmer to master. Audio programs
that depend on running at full speed for correct operation (e.g. because a process has to
respond to signals from the hardware) offer special challenges in this respect.
Other ‘‘why’’ questions arise from speciﬁc aspects of the language, or from the chosen
application domains of music and audio. These will be addressed within the context of each
topic or each code example. The reasons for coding one way rather than another may arise
not only from the requirement for speed, but also from the desire for audio quality, or simply
from the need for clarity of design, so that the code can be read six months later and still be
understood. Programmers rarely like to ‘‘reinvent the wheel,’’ so whenever they come up
with some code that might be of general use they may put a bit of extra work into it to
make it as reusable as possible. At other times, code is written a particular way to facilitate
testing and debugging. One may also encounter discussions about ‘‘ugly code’’ and ‘‘beautiful code’’—there is a strong aesthetic element to programming, as is true of most technical
disciplines.
In short, we want to write code that works well, that makes sense when we read it, that is
easy to modify and extend, and that we may be able to use again in other projects. You will
ﬁnd that documenting your code becomes at least as important as writing it. Even excellent
code is of little use if you don’t know how to use it.
The main point to carry with you as you read this chapter concerns the use of libraries. For
writing audio applications, we cannot avoid the use of libraries; indeed, we will be very grateful for their existence, as they remove from us a great deal of hard work, and make possible
what would otherwise be impossible. This will become very much clearer as you work
through the chapters in this book. The question ‘‘What is a library, exactly?’’ has not been
answered yet, but it will be answered soon. Indeed, you will ﬁnd, almost by accident, that
as you work through the book you are in a real sense creating your own library; and all it
takes to complete that process is use of the standard ‘‘library-maker’’ tool (not a technical
term) that is part of the compiler. All you need know at this stage is that a library stores sections of code (those building blocks mentioned above) that you expect not to change and
you expect to use frequently. As you will soon discover, a modern C compiler includes a
large number of standard libraries, and in order to use them to the full you will have to be
able to read and understand the documentation.

58

Chapter 1

1.1.1

Your First C Program

Before proceeding, it is worth looking at appendix A (which deals with the compiler and
command-line tools) so that you have an idea of the programming environment we will be
using. These early examples assume a traditional command-line environment. While all the
example programs presented here are available on the DVD as complete projects, it is preferable that you practice typing in the code by hand, especially if you are unpracticed at typing.
The text editor, used to write and edit programs, is of supreme importance, so the sooner you
get familiar with it the better.
Listing 1.1 is a faintly musical version of the classic ‘‘Hello World’’ program that everyone
traditionally writes ﬁrst when learning a new language. Although it is extremely short, it
illustrates many of the fundamental aspects of C described above. Listing 1.1 includes line
numbers (starting from 1) in the left margin for convenience. These are not actually part of
the program code—all text editors used for writing programs will display, somewhere on the
screen, the line containing the typing cursor.
Listing 1.1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

/* wonder.c:displays "What a Wonderful World!" in the terminal */
#include <stdio.h>

int main()
{
printf("What a Wonderful World!\n");
return 0;
}

The ﬁrst thing to notice about this example is that there is a lot of what is called ‘‘white
space’’: there are empty lines, and some lines are indented. As far as a C program is concerned, all this white space is almost always unimportant. There are situations where the
presence or absence of white space is meaningful (‘‘syntactically signiﬁcant’’), but a lot of
the time we can use it freely, to lay out the code as we wish.
Line 1 comprises a text comment. You could delete this whole line and the program would
still compile. Comments are ignored by the compiler; they are there purely for the beneﬁt of
the human reader. This comment simply identiﬁes the name of the ﬁle and its purpose. A
comment in C is anything placed between the /* and */ character pairs (there must be no
space between the * and the /). These are characters that cannot legally occur together as C
code. There is no requirement for the comment to ﬁt on a single line. The lines below
equally form a legal comment:

59

Programming in C

/* This is a comment,
running over
several lines.
*/
Apart from their primary use to add annotations to source code, comments are often used
to prevent lines of code from being compiled, without having to delete them. There are
other, arguably better ways of doing this, but the practice is widespread. Depending on
your text editor, text inside a comment may be drawn in a special color, to make it easy to
see where the comment starts and ends. If this is the case, try deleting the closing */ and see
what happens.
Some programmers like to write elaborate titles and descriptions at the head of a source
ﬁle, as in the following example:
/********************* WONDER.C
/*
*
* Version 1.0 RWD 10/1/2002.

***************/

********* DESCRIPTION *********
*
*This program writes a friendly and affirmative message to the user.
* TODO: Add more lines from the song.
*/
/**** BUGS AND LIMITATIONS *****
* No bugs found.
* It would be good to have the computer sing the text.
*
*/
There is no need to type this in (hardly necessary for a program as simple as this); but make
sure you can see how many separate comments there are, by looking for the matching /* */
pairs. Note that you are not allowed to nest comments (putting one /* */ pair inside another
one). Such descriptive blocks are often used to carry copyright or licensing information. The
rest of the text comprises C code to be compiled—this is where we have to get everything
right.
Skipping line 2 for a moment, we see a block of code extending from line 5 to line 9. This
block deﬁnes a function. The function is the primary building block used in computer programs. Here we have just one function, called main. This is the one function a C program
must contain in order to be compiled as an executable program. You are not allowed to
have duplicate functions (i.e. with the same name) in C. The term ‘function’ comes from
mathematics and is used to describe some procedure that takes an input (consisting of one
or more numbers) and produces an output (also consisting of one or more numbers). The

60

Chapter 1

deﬁnition of a function must allow for the possibility of either or both input and output. In
this case, the main function outputs a single integer number, indicated by the type speciﬁer
word int in line 5.
In the code, int is an example of a C keyword, a word that belongs to the language, and is
therefore reserved (you can’t use it as the name for anything else). It is one of a collection of
keywords that deﬁne basic numeric types (see section 1.2). Another keyword in this program
is return, used in line 8.
After the function name main there is a pair of parentheses. These provide a space for any
input data. In this case there is no input, so we can just write the parentheses by themselves.
Later, we will see alternative ways of deﬁning the main function to enable it to receive input
from the user.
So far, the main function looks as follows:
int main()
But this is incomplete—it does not deﬁne what the function does. This is the job of the
function’s body. The body of a function is deﬁned by code placed between braces, as in this
example:
{
return 0;
}
Now the complete structure of the main function looks as follows:
int main()
{
return 0;
}
You can, in fact, replace all of lines 5–9 with the above, and the program will compile. It just
won’t appear to do anything. However, it is actually performing one task. The main function
is deﬁned as producing an integer result; and the one line of code shown above does this: it
causes main to output the value 0. To do this we are using the C keyword return, followed
by the required value. In the jargon of C programming, the return value of main() is 0.
Overall, this line of code forms a C ‘‘statement.’’ As was shown above, a C statement is terminated by a semicolon. Where to put a semicolon is one of the aspects that most often confuse beginning C programmers. As you study the code examples in this book, take careful
note of where a semicolon is required and where it is not. You will see that the code inside
the main function comprises one or more statements, each ending in a semicolon (look back
at listing 1.1), but the function body (deﬁned by braces) is not followed by a semicolon.
What happens to the value returned by main()? In the majority of cases it is just ignored;
however, where programs are run remotely, from a UNIX shell script or from a DOS batch
ﬁle, it is possible to read the return value, and to take action accordingly. Typically, a return

61

Programming in C

value of 0 means that ‘‘the program terminated without errors,’’ and anything else means
that some error occurred. For example, if a program requires a ﬁle to be opened, but the
name given is incorrect (e.g. the ﬁle doesn’t exist), you can trap this in the program and
have main() return some other value, such as 1. You will see as you work through later sections of this chapter that this principle is entirely general—the return value from a function
may be something you use elsewhere, or it may be an indication of success or failure.
The substance of listing 1.1 is found in line 7:
printf("What a Wonderful World!\n");
This is the line of code (a single C statement, ending in a semicolon) that does something
useful: it writes a message to the console. The presence of a matching pair of parentheses
looks very like the format of the main() function just described—and indeed this statement
does contain a function, whose name is printf, which is shorthand for ‘‘print with formatting.’’ Inside the parentheses is the text to be displayed (referred to by programmers as a
string, or sometimes a character string), within double quotation marks. In the jargon of programming, this string is the argument to the function printf, and overall the statement constitutes a function call.
The ﬁnal two characters in the message string may be unfamiliar. They relate to the ‘‘formatting’’ aspect of the printf function. The ﬁrst of the two characters is a backslash. In the
context of a character string, this is called the escape character. It signiﬁes that the following
character is not to be written literally to the console, but is instead a control instruction to
arrange the text in a particular way. In this case the control character is n, which signiﬁes
‘‘new line’’ (sometimes also called ‘‘carriage return and line feed’’). To see how this works,
you can delete these two characters, re-compile and run the program, and see what happens.
In line 7, the control characters are at the end of the line. However, they could be placed
anywhere in the string. You can even write a string that contains only the control characters,
and you can write them as many times as you like. For example:
printf("\nThe Hills are alive,\nWith the Sound of Music!");
printf("\n");
We will see in later sections that printf is even more versatile than this. It can print numbers too, and control characters are available to organize numbers with respect to spacing,
number of digits, and even to write them in technical formats such as hexadecimal.
1.1.2

Library Functions and the #include Directive

Two questions remain unanswered. Previously, it was stated that the C language does not
contain a ‘‘print’’ command, yet here we are using one, called printf. Where does it come
from? And what is the meaning of line 2, which we so casually skipped over earlier?
The printf function is an important example of a C library function, in this case supporting text output to the console. Most important, it is a ‘‘standard library’’ function that you

62

Chapter 1

can expect any C compiler to include. But as it is not part of the C language itself. The compiler has to be given information about it—its name, its inputs, and its outputs. This information takes the form of a ‘‘declaration.’’ We will discover how a declaration is written in a
later section. The important thing to grasp at this stage is that the declaration of printf is
contained in a text ﬁle called stdio.h (the ﬁle extension .h is used by convention to show
that the ﬁle is a C ‘‘header ﬁle’’), and is incorporated into your program by a preprocessor
command (‘‘directive’’). This is the purpose of line 2 in listing 1.1. Your code ﬁle is passed
to this preprocessor before being passed to the compiler itself. The preprocessor strips out
all the comments, and can also be asked to perform text substitutions, or to add text from
another ﬁle, using the preprocessor directive include. All preprocessor directives are indicated by the initial #, followed by the name of the command—e.g. #include. The whole
directive is then followed by the name of the required ﬁle, enclosed in angle brackets:
#include <stdio.h>
Although by convention the command immediately follows the character # without an
intervening space, this is not mandatory. The spacing
# include <stdio.h>
is legal.
When the compiler is installed on your system, a large number of header ﬁles are stored in
a special ‘‘include’’ directory. The compiler thus ‘‘knows about’’ this directory, and will automatically search it to ﬁnd the requested ﬁle. The use of the angle brackets, as shown above,
ensures that this directory is searched ﬁrst for ﬁles. An alternative notation using double quotation marks asks the preprocessor to search the directory containing the current ﬁle, before
searching further:
#include "myfuncs.h"
This would be used typically for ‘‘local’’ include ﬁles that are speciﬁc, and usually private, to
a project. You will see plenty of examples of this in later sections, especially in projects
involving multiple source ﬁles.
When your program is compiled, the compiler also looks for the code for printf in a
library ﬁle in a lib directory, and links that code with yours to create the ﬁnal executable. In
subsequent sections, you will be introduced to many more ‘‘standard’’ C functions that are
required to be supported by all C compilers.
1.1.3

Exercises

Exercise 1.1.1
Create a new program, perhaps called music.c (if you are using an IDE, you will also have
to create a project for it called music), and write a new message of your choice. Add some
informative text inside a comment block at the top of the ﬁle.

63

Programming in C

Exercise 1.1.2
Find out what happens (i.e. what messages the compiler reports) if you
(a) leave out #include <stdio.h> (you can do this without deleting text, by commenting
out the line using /* and */)
(b) leave out the angle brackets
(c) swap the braces and the parentheses
(d) leave out one or both of the semicolons
(e) replace the ﬁrst semicolon with a comma
(f) leave out the return statement
(g) leave out the ﬁnal brace.
1.2

Adding Something of Your Own—An Introduction to Variables and Types
1.2.1

Basic Arithmetic in C

In this section we will see how to perform basic arithmetical calculations in C. To do this, we
need a means of representing numerical values, an idea of how the computer stores them,
and a means of performing arithmetical operations on them. This may already sound complicated, but fortunately the way arithmetical expressions are written in C is very similar to
how they might be written down on paper. Whether using paper and pencil or writing a
computer program, in order to work anything out we need to be able to represent numbers
by name. For example, you probably will recognize this simple calculation for ﬁnding the
area of a rectangle:
area = width * height
By convention, an asterisk is used to signify ‘‘multiplied by’’ or ‘‘times.’’ We replace width
and height with numbers and perform the calculation, the result of which is area. The line
above is a simple arithmetical statement. To make it a complete C statement, we must add a
semicolon:
area = width * height;
Note the use of appropriate words, rather than arbitrary letters or symbols. The names make
it completely clear what the task is, and thus the code is ‘‘self-documenting.’’
1.2.2

Expressions and Statements

It is very important to understand the difference between expressions and statements. An
expression in C is anything that can be ‘‘evaluated’’ (i.e. that has a numerical result)—for

64

Chapter 1

Table 1.1
Binary operators.
Operator

Example

Description
Assign the value of b to c.

Assignment

=

c = b

Addition

+

c = b + a

Add a to b and assign this value to c.

Subtraction

-

c = b - a

Subtract a from b and assign this value to c.

Multiplication *
Division
/

c = b * a
c = b / a

Multiply a and b and assign this value to c.
Divide b by a and assign this value to c.

Modulo

c = 12%11

Result after integral division. The value of c is 1.

%

example, the right-hand side of the calculation above, here enclosed in parentheses to make
the point clearer:
(width * height)
Expressions can contain expressions, for example
(100 + (width * height))
Ultimately, even a single number is an expression, evaluating to itself. A statement is any
legal expression, or combination of expressions, possibly combined with one or more C keywords, and terminated by a semicolon. Indeed, the semicolon by itself is a legal C statement,
and this fact commonly gives rise to errors when a semicolon is used by mistake. Normally, a
statement changes something; typically, a variable acquires a new value, or the ﬂow of control through the program is changed.
An expression can also be a statement—for example,
width * height;
This is, however, useless, as the value of the expression is ignored.
1.2.3

Operators

As was noted above, an asterisk is used to indicate multiplication. In C terminology, it is an
operator. More speciﬁcally, it is a binary operator, as it operates on two numbers (or expressions). C possesses a large number of operators, including ones for the basic arithmetic operations, identical to the usual algebraic symbols (see table 1.1).
Both + and - can also be use as ‘‘unary’’ operators, though in practice only - has to be
used explicitly:
val = -64; /* unary negation */
Subsection 1.2.9 describes the way C decides in what order these operations are carried out
when an expression incorporates several of them.

65

Programming in C

1.2.4

Numeric Types

We are already remarkably close to performing a calculation in C, but some information the
compiler needs is missing. It needs to know what sorts of numbers we are using so it can
store them correctly and so it can perform the correct kind of processing on them. The two
most important classes of numbers are integers (1, 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .) and ﬂoating-point numbers
(e.g., 3.14159, 0.707, 1.414).
C includes a wide range of integer types (described in subsection 1.2.5), but the most frequently used has the keyword int. There are two ﬂoating-point types: a float occupies four
bytes and is described as a single-precision number, and a double usually occupies eight bytes
and, as its name suggests, is a double-precision number.
To complete the statement above in C code, we must deﬁne each of our variables in terms
of a numeric type:
double area;
double width;
double height;
These declarations tell the compiler to set aside some memory to hold each variable, and
deﬁne what type each one is. In the next line, we put some numbers into the variables:
width = 10.0;
height = 21.5;
The semicolon is ubiquitous: a variable declaration is a statement, as is an ‘‘assignment’’—
a statement using the operator =, properly called the assignment operator. In programming
jargon, we would say that the value 10.0 is assigned to the variable width. It is also common
to refer to the ‘‘right-hand side’’ of an assignment statement (the right-hand side has to be
an expression, therefore) signifying a possibly elaborate calculation that produces a result
that can be stored on the left-hand side.
Why call area, width, height, and so on ‘‘variables’’? We can assign a value as often as
we like to a variable, like so:
width = 10.0;
width = 0.0;
width = 1000.3;
However, all that is remembered is the last assignment. So literally, the contents of the variable width can vary over time. We can also assign the value of one variable to another:
height = 21.5;
width = height;

/* a square! */

Most important, we can perform the full calculation, which is where we started1:
area = width * height;

66

Chapter 1

1.2.5

Integers—A Special Case

The examples above used ‘‘double’’ variables, which ensure a precise result for our calculation. It would also be possible to deﬁne all three variables above as integers instead, by using
the type keyword int:
int area;
int width;
int height;
However, we cannot store fractional (ﬂoating-point) numbers in such variables, only whole
numbers:
width = 20;
height = 7;
area = 21.5;

/* compiler will issue a warning here! */

The particular quality of integer calculations emerges when we try to perform division:
area = 26;
height = 10;
width = area / height;
Here width receives the value 2, whereas the use of ﬂoating-point variables would result in a
more accurate fractional value of 2.6.
Historically, the integer is the oldest computer data type, and ﬂoating-point calculations
had to be performed by means of much arcane code and were therefore extremely slow.
Even today, many digital signal processors used for audio use integer calculations, which
can be performed very rapidly and which offer the highest precision for a given storage size.
1.2.6

Sizes of C Numeric Types

One other important aspect of integers that the programmer has to consider is that there is a
limit to the size of the number that can be represented, depending on the number of bits
used. A 16-bit integer can store numbers from 0 to 65,535 (65,536 numbers in all). Therefore,
no negative numbers can be represented at all. However, a long-established system called
‘‘twos complement’’ enables ‘‘signed’’ numbers to be stored by treating the most signiﬁcant
(leftmost) bit as a ‘‘sign’’ bit. In the case of a 16-bit integer, the ‘‘signed’’ range is from
32,768 to þ32,767; this is how 16-bit audio samples are stored.
A 32-bit integer can similarly be ‘‘signed’’ or ‘‘unsigned.’’ The numbers are, of course,
much larger: the signed 32-bit range is from 2,147,483,648 to þ2,147,483,647.
So important are integers that a C compiler supports several type (shown in table 1.2,
which assumes a typical 32-bit platform). Note that both ‘‘signed’’ and ‘‘unsigned’’ forms

67

Programming in C

Table 1.2
Integer types in C. *The int type is dependent on the CPU integer size.
Integer

Number

type

Size

of values

char

1 byte

28

Minimum
Signed
Unsigned

short

2 bytes

2

16

long

4 bytes

2 32

int

*

*

Maximum
128

127

0

256

32,768

32,767

Unsigned

0

65,536

Signed
Unsigned

2,147,483,648
0

2,147,483,647
4,294,967,265

Signed

*

Signed

Unsigned

*
0

*

are explicitly supported. ‘‘Signed’’ is the default for all numeric types, so it is only necessary
to use the ‘‘unsigned’’ qualiﬁer when such a form is required. For 16-bit DOS and Windows
(8086 CPU family), an int is 2 bytes (equivalent to short), whereas on 32-bit architecture
(MC68000, PPC, Pentium) an int is 4 bytes (equivalent to long). Thus, using the int type
is unsafe if a speciﬁc numeric range is required. In this case long or short should be used.
On 64-bit platforms, int will similarly be 64 bits, and the same caveat applies. Use of the
name long long is already widely established to indicate a 64-bit integer type, though not
yet standard. Strictly speaking, the C standard allows considerable latitude in deﬁning the
sizes of numeric types (as they will have to reﬂect the nature of the hardware). For example,
C only mandates that a short will not be larger than an int and that a long will not be
smaller than an int. Thus, it is theoretically possible (though very unlikely these days) for a
short, an int, and a long all to be the same size.
1.2.7

The sizeof() Operator

Sometimes it is important to be able to ﬁnd the size of a type, such as a numeric type, programmatically. This is especially important where code is intended to run on multiple platforms. C provides the sizeof() operator for this purpose. It has the appearance of a
function call (where the name of the type is the argument), but in fact it is a C keyword. It
returns the size of the type in bytes:
int intsize = sizeof(int);
/* may return 2 or 4, depending on the machine */
We will introduce an important use of the sizeof() operator in section 1.5, in connection
to user-deﬁned data types.2

68

Chapter 1

1.2.8

A Musical Computation

The task here is fairly simple but useful, and just complicated enough to justify a computer
program: to convert a MIDI Note number to the equal-tempered frequency in hertz. We will
develop the task on paper ﬁrst, so to speak, and then see how it would appear as a C program.
First we need some background information. MIDI Note data values use an unsigned
seven-bit integer range, i.e. from 0 to 127 inclusive. These numbers have to embrace key
numbers, various controllers (including Pitchbend and Modulation), Key Velocity and Pressure, and so on. So converting MIDI values into other things is going to be a very common
operation.
Middle C on the piano keyboard is deﬁned to be MIDI Note 60. Given the international
tuning standard, in which Concert A ¼ 440, and assuming equal temperament (E.T.), middle
C has a frequency of approximately 262.626 Hz. An octave contains 12 semitones, so that C
an octave below middle C would correspond to MIDI Note 48. The full theoretical MIDI
range 0–127 (not known to be covered by any keyboard yet made) extends ﬁve octaves
below middle C (to MIDI Note 0) and almost six octaves above it.
An octave jump corresponds to a frequency change by a factor (or ratio) of 2: doubled for
an octave rise, and halved for an octave fall. So an octave below Concert A would have the
frequency 220 Hz. A further octave fall halves the frequency again, to 110 Hz. A single semitone rise corresponds to the (approximate) value 1.0594631, which is (approximately) the
twelfth root of 2 (a semi-tone ‘‘only’’ in E.T. 12 tuning). That is to say, multiply 1.0594631
by itself twelve times and you should get the value 2.0. This operation, known as raising to a
power, is notated mathematically as 1.059463112 .
To ensure the best possibly accuracy, we can use the computer to calculate the semitone
ratio itself. Recall the rules of indices, according to which a power of 1/2 corresponds to the
square root and a power of 1/12 corresponds to the twelfth root. So we might notate this as
pﬃﬃﬃ
(1)
semitone_ratio ¼ 12 2.
The two numbers 2.0 and 1.0594631 (or better, its computed value semitone_ratio) are
all we really need to calculate any equal-tempered 12-tone interval, given a starting base
frequency3.
For example, calculate the frequency of the C sharp above Concert A in Equal Temperament. Concert A is 440, and by deﬁnition C sharp is four semitones above A (major third),
so the calculation is simply
Csharp ¼ 440  (1.05946314 ) Q 554.365.
The one other piece of numerical information we need is the frequency of the lowest note,
MIDI Note 0. This is ﬁve octaves below middle C—well below the audible range. An octave
drop is a factor of 0.5, so a ﬁve-octave drop requires the value 0.5 to be multiplied by itself
ﬁve times: 0.55 . This gives 0.03125. Multiply this by the frequency of middle C and we get
the frequency of the MIDI Note 0, or C0. As shown above, each rise of a semitone involves a

69

Programming in C

multiplication by 1.0594631. So to ﬁnd the interval between MIDI Note 0 and MIDI note 73
(which happens to be the Csharp calculated above), we ﬁrst multiply 1.0594631 by itself
73 times: 1.059463273 . We then have to multiply the base frequency C0 by the result of
this calculation to obtain the required result. It is now time to look at listing 1.2, where the
full computation is performed, and the result printed to the console. If you type this in and
compile it, you could call it ‘‘midi2freq.c,’’ and the program itself as ‘midi2freq’.
Listing 1.2
Calculate the frequency of a MIDI note:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

/* listing 1.2. Calculate frequency of a MIDI Note number */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
int main()
{
double
double
double
double
int

semitone_ratio;
c0; /* for frequency of MIDI Note 0 */
c5; /* for frequency of Middle C */
frequency; /* . . . which we want to find, */
midinote;
/* . . . given this note.
*/

/* calculate required numbers */
semitone_ratio = pow(2, 1/12.0); /* approx. 1.0594631 */
/* find Middle C, three semitones above low A = 220 */
c5 = 220.0 * pow(semitone_ratio, 3);
/* MIDI Note 0 is C, 5 octaves below Middle C */
c0 = c5 * pow(0.5, 5);
/* calculate a frequency for a given MIDI Note Number */
midinote = 73;
/* C# above A = 440 */
frequency = c0 * pow(semitone_ratio, midinote);
printf("MIDI Note %d has frequency %f\n,"midinote,frequency);
return 0;
}

You can test this program by changing the number assigned to ‘‘midinote,’’ re-compiling,
and running it. (Sections 1.3 and 1.4 explain how to avoid this tiresome process.)
As expected, there is more code here than in listing 1.1. Nevertheless, the layout of the
program follows the same structure. First, in line 3, a new header ﬁle, <math.h>, is included.
This is required to supply the deﬁnition of the C library function pow() that is used in the

70

Chapter 1

program. This is the function that raises a number to a power. While you study the details of
the code, notice the comments (inside the /* */ pairs), which describe both the purpose of
the program and what the various lines of code do.
Lines 7–11 contain declarations of variables, using names that help describe what the code
is doing. Two numeric types are used: the double and the int. These declarations must
appear before any other lines of C code appear.4 The compiler reads the code from the top
down, and needs to know about all these variables, and set aside storage for them, before it
can process code that uses them. You will ﬁnd that C++ is more ﬂexible, and that it allows
you to declare a variable anywhere, but in C they must all be declared ﬁrst, as here.5 Notice
that each declaration is terminated, as usual, with a semicolon.
Because the variables are declared inside the main() function, they are described as ‘‘local’’
to that function, or simply as ‘‘local variables.’’ The alternative is to declare variables outside
main(), after the preprocessor #include statements. Such variables are then ‘‘global’’—
accessible anywhere in a program. This is generally regarded as a bad idea, as it can be very
difﬁcult to control how they are modiﬁed. (For more on this, see section 1.3.)
Each variable is identiﬁed by a unique name. There is a lot of ﬂexibility allowed in creating
names. Essentially any printable character can be used, as long as it is not otherwise used by
C. This excludes characters such as *, /, -, %, &, and ? (in fact most of the pictorial characters), but it does include the underscore, which is very useful for creating multi-word names,
given that a name cannot incorporate any white space. Also, numeric characters are allowed,
but not as the ﬁrst character of a name. So the name 5c would be illegal. It is also illegal to
use a C keyword as a variable name:
int return; /* illegal name! */
You might experiment by deliberately writing illegal names and re-compiling to see what
error messages the compiler gives you. Sometimes error messages are a bit obscure, and it is
very useful to know what they most likely refer to.
Some programmers like to create extremely long names more akin to descriptive comments—for example,
int an_extremely_long_variable_name_representing_a_MIDI_note;
This can get out of hand very quickly, however, and a good rule of thumb is to try to avoid
names longer than 32 characters or so. It should still be practicable to use a range of expressive names.
Lines 15–19 perform the essential intermediate calculation steps described above. They
demonstrate three slightly different ways of using (‘‘calling’’) the pow() function, and in so
doing they reveal a lot about how expressions are handled in C. Inside the parentheses, this
function requires two ﬂoating-point numbers: the ‘‘base’’ number and the number to which
it is to be raised. In the header ﬁle <math.h> this function would be declared as follows:
double pow(double base, double power);

71

Programming in C

This shows that the function takes two arguments (deﬁned inside the parentheses, and separated by commas) of type double, and returns a value also of type double. The names
shown above (‘‘base’’ and ‘‘power’’) are optional (and ignored by the compiler), but are
clearly useful for documenting what the function does. The minimum version of this declaration would therefore be
double pow(double, double);
You can add this line to the list of variable declarations (say into line 11), and then remove
line 3, where <math.h> is included, and the program will compile as before. It is worth looking at the use of this function in listing 1.2 in more detail. Line 15 calls the pow() function
in almost the simplest way possible:
semitone_ratio = pow(2, 1/12.0);
The result or output from the function is assigned to the variable semitone_ratio using
the assignment operator. As we know, everything on the right-hand side of the ‘‘equals’’
sign must be an expression that evaluates to a value. That value must be in the form of one
of the legal C types (here, a double). It follows that the type on the left-hand side of the
‘‘equals’’ sign must be the same, as it is here. Thus the statement
semitone_ratio = "twelve";
would be illegal, because it tries to make a double equal to a character string, which is obviously impossible. It would be ﬂagged as an error by the compiler, probably using the term
‘‘type mismatch.’’
Inside the function call, the ﬁrst argument is a simple number, 2. To C this is actually an
integer (int type), but as the required argument is a double, which is another number type,
C is happy to make a conversion automatically. (For more about converting numeric types,
see subsection 1.2.10.) This conversion does take a little time to do, and to eliminate that
you could add a decimal point and a zero to 2:
semitone_ratio = pow(2.0, 1.0/12.0);
C will recognize ‘‘2.0’’ as a ﬂoating-point number, and will automatically treat it as a double.
The second argument in this call to pow() is not a simple number but a simple arithmetic
expression, 1/12.0. Because no variables are used, only explicit numbers, the compiler will
usually make this calculation itself, rather than creating code for it. The use of at least one
decimal point ensures that the calculation is performed in ﬂoating-point fashion. Writing
‘‘1.0/12’’ would be just as good. However, if you had typed the line as
semitone_ratio = pow(2.0, 1/12);
the numbers 1 and 12 would be treated as integers, and the expression 1/12 would evaluate
to 0 (the result of integer division of 1 by 12), which is clearly not going to work as intended.
However, it is legal code, and the compiler probably will not warn you about it. All the

72

Chapter 1

compiler can assume is that that is what you meant in the ﬁrst place. You will not be aware
that something is wrong until you run the program.
In line 17 the ﬁrst argument is not an explicit number, but a variable to which we have
previously assigned a value:
c5 = 220.0 * pow(semitone_ratio, 3);
In this case, the call to pow() is itself part of a more lengthy expression, the value of which is
assigned to the variable c5. Line 19 shows pow() called with two numeric arguments (the
second integer again converted by C into a double), and line 23 shows it called with two
variables.
Line 25 is the same printf function introduced in listing 1.1, but here demonstrating one
of its primary uses: to write ‘‘formatted’’ numeric data to the console. ‘‘Formatting’’ means
many things; in this context it simply means embedding numbers of various types inside a
text string, the numbers being obtained from variables within the program.
In addition to the message string, two further arguments are given: midinote and frequency. Inside the message string, you will see two occurrences of %. This has the special
meaning for printf of signifying the start of a ‘‘formatted conversion.’’ For each argument
following the message string, we insert % into the message at the required position, followed
in each case by a letter indicating the type of the argument. A d or an i indicates an integer
(d stands for ‘decimal’ or ‘denary’), and an f indicates a ﬂoating-point number. There are
many other possibilities. The ﬁrst % conversion uses the ﬁrst argument (following the initial
message string), the second conversion uses the second argument, and so on:
printf("%d o'clock %d o'clock %d o'clock rock,\n," 1, 2, 3);
1.2.9

Initializing Variables and Reducing the Line Count

In listing 1.2 each variable is declared on a separate line. For just four variables this does not
really matter, but a larger program may involve dozens or even hundreds of variables, making
the code very long. C allows variables of the same type to be listed together, separated by
commas:
double semitone_ratio,c0,c5,frequency;
You lose the scope for adding comments about each variable doing this; the use of expressive
names can compensate to some extent, but most programmers tend to mix multiple declaration lines like the above with individual lines where comments are needed.
It is also possible to give a variable an initial value when it is declared:
int midinote = 73;
Not surprisingly, this is called initialization. It can be applied to some or all variables in a
multiple declaration statement:

73

Programming in C

double semitone_ratio = 1.0594631, c0 ,c5, frequency = 440.0;
Moreover, in an initialization, the right-hand side can even be an expression:
double semitone_ratio = pow(2, 1/12.0);
Note that this requires that the pow() function has already been declared, as it would be if
the library header ﬁle math.h is #included, as shown in line 3. Try rewriting listing 1.2 to
make these changes.
A numeric expression can be used anywhere a simple number can be used. This means,
taken to the extreme, that the whole calculation of listing 1.2 can be compressed into a
single expression, eliminating at a stroke three variables:
frequency = (220.0*pow(pow(2,1.0/12),3)*pow(0.5,5))
*pow(pow(2,1.0/12), midinote);
This has reduced the code to almost the theoretical minimum, but at high cost—it is far
less understandable much more difﬁcult to modify, it is more likely to lead to errors, and it
is less efﬁcient—the expression pow(2, 1/12.0) is calculated twice. There is no virtue in
trying to make the code as compact as possible if it merely increases the chances of making
mistakes, or if it makes the code harder to understand. The goals of writing code are not
only to be correct and to be efﬁcient, but also to be clear—you need the code to be as selfexplanatory as possible. You may understand it now, having just written it, but not when
you go back to it six months later.
1.2.10

Operator Precedence in Numeric Expressions

As a C expression can combine several calculation steps, C deﬁnes strict rules for deciding
in what order to carry them out. These rules are based on the principle of operator precedence. Operations with high precedence are performed before operations with lower precedence. Multiplication and division have higher precedence than addition and subtraction
and thus will be performed before addition and subtraction. The statement
float val = 15 + 440 * 2.5;
will evaluate to 1115.0, as if the expression on the right-hand side were written as
float val = 15 + (440 * 2.5);
Where two operations have equal precedence level, C has to have a rule to decide which to
perform ﬁrst. This rule is that operations are performed from left to right. In programming
terminology, the operation ‘‘associates left to right.’’ In the statement
frequency = 210.0 / 3 * 4.0;
the result will be 280, not 17.5, as the division is performed ﬁrst.

74

Chapter 1

In the case of addition, the order of evaluation will not matter: 200 + (10 + 20) is the
same as (200 + 10) + 20. But this is not the case for subtraction:
midinote = 200 - 10 - 20;
Depending on which subtraction is performed ﬁrst, midinote will equal 170 or 210.
Again, the operations are performed in order from left to right. The statement above will
accordingly evaluate to 170, as if written as
midinote = (200 - 10) - 20;
If in doubt, use parentheses to make it clear in what order you want the operations carried
out. Parentheses effectively have the highest precedence of all. Many expert programmers
routinely write complex expressions of this kind, without parentheses, as they know what
the evaluation order will be. On the one hand this is entirely reasonable, especially for simple expressions, but on the other hand adding parentheses even where technically they are
not necessary can help to document the code (e.g. to indicate that certain groups of numbers
or expressions relate to each other) and to prevent mistakes.
While all the arithmetic operators associate left to right, the ‘‘equals’’ (‘‘assignment’’) operator associates right to left. This makes it possible to write statements such as
int
a =
b =
c =
a =

a,b,c;
0;
1;
10;
b = c;

The statement a = b = c; is equivalent to the following two lines:
b = c; /* b now has the value 10 */
a = b; /* a now has the value 10 */
1.2.11

More on Type Conversion—the Cast Operator

In listing 1.2 and in the description that followed it, we have seen two examples in which a
number of one type (e.g. an int) was automatically converted to another (e.g. to a double).
The most explicit example occurs in line 23:
frequency = c0 * pow(semitone_ratio, midinote);
How do we know a type conversion is happening here? First, the function pow() is deﬁned
as having two arguments of type double. However, in the function call above, the second
parameter is in fact midinote, declared as an int. In this case the compiler is automatically
inserting a conversion process known as a cast. It is also possible to specify the cast explicitly
in the code:

75

Programming in C

frequency = c0 * pow(semitone_ratio, (double) midinote);
Thus the cast operator consists of a type speciﬁer enclosed in parentheses, placed directly in
front of the number or expression to be converted. It has a higher precedence than the operators *, /, and %. Note that the cast embodies a hidden copy; the type of the object being
cast does not change.
Casting an int to a double is a no-loss change, as this data type can hold much larger
numbers than any of the standard C integer types. This process is often described as ‘‘promoting’’ the number. Casting a double to an int is a far more drastic change:
int ival;
double dval = 21.5;
ival = (int) dval;
The cast to an int has the effect of removing the fractional part of the double, so that ival
receives the int value 21 in the above example. Also, the 64-bit double can represent numbers outside the range of a 32-bit int. As a result, any conversion from a ﬂoating-point value
to an integer, if performed without an explicit cast (and, more generally, any conversion
from any numeric type to a smaller one—a ‘‘demotion’’), will trigger a warning message
from most compilers. In the context of audio programming, the most common use of the
cast is in converting ﬂoating-point samples into integer ones, not least the ubiquitous 16-bit
sample:
double fracsamp;
short samp;
fracsamp = 0.5;
samp = (short) (fracsamp * 32767);
As a revision exercise, you might like to make sure you understand why the following version of the line above will not produce the intended result:
samp = (short) fracsamp * 32767;
1.2.12

Going the Other Way: Converting a Frequency to the Nearest MIDI Note

The code fragment below illustrates the use of the cast operator to obtain a required integer
result; it also introduces another important function from the standard C math library. The
fragment can directly replace lines 21–25 of listing 1.2. You also need to add a new variable
fracmidi of type double to the variable list. If you do this, you may want to change to program name, for example to freq2midi. This example uses the C math library function
double log(double arg);
which ﬁnds the natural logarithm (to base e) of the argument:

76

Chapter 1

/* find nearest MIDI note to a given frequency in Hz */
/* uses the log rule:
log_a(N) = log_b(N) / log_b(a)
to find the log of a value to base 'semitone_ratio'.
*/
frequency = 400.0;
fracmidi = log(frequency / c0) / log(semitone_ratio);
/* round fracmidi to the nearest whole number */
midinote = (int) (fracmidi + 0.5);
printf("The nearest MIDI note to the frequency %f is %d\n,"
frequency,
midinote);
You may be wondering why midinote is declared as an int rather than a char. In terms
of the calculation, it could be, so you could make the change and the program would run as
expected. However, in doing this you would be relying on the internal ‘‘promotion’’ of the
char to an int, in the call to printf(), where the format speciﬁer %d is used. There is a format speciﬁer for chars: %c. But that assumes, reasonably, that the char is an ASCII character
and the value 69, for example, would be written as ‘‘E.’’ Needless to say, to a musician that
would be doubly confusing.
Note the use in the example above of a simple method for rounding numbers: adding 0.5
to the ﬂoating-point value before applying the cast. For audio purposes we often require
more sophisticated rounding methods, so that negative and positive values are rounded symmetrically, but this simple method works very well for simple rounding of positive numbers.
Use of the int type also facilitates the detection of errors caused by a user supplying a
number outside the allowed range. The detection and handling of errors (whether your own
or the user’s) is an essential aspect of programming, as will be seen in the next section.
1.2.13

Exercises

Exercise 1.2.1
Using the sizeof() operator and printf statements, write a small program to report the
size in bytes of each of the following:
int

char

short

long

float

double

This will be of particular interest and importance if you happen to be using a 64-bit machine.
Exercise 1.2.2
The statement
samp = (short) fracsamp * 32767;

77

Programming in C

is intended to convert a ﬂoating-point sample (e1.0) to the 16-bit integer range:
samp = (short) fracsamp * 32767;
However the output is not as expected. Why?
Exercise 1.2.3
Replace the calls to pow() with literal values, in order to simplify the all-in-one statement
shown in subsection 1.2.9. Make sure the computed result is correct. What might you lose
as a programmer by making such a change?
Exercise 1.2.4
As was suggested in the text, modify listing 1.2 to avoid reliance on the compiler’s automatic
type promotion from int to double. Use a cast where appropriate. For example, change
1/12.0 to 1.0/12.0.
Exercise 1.2.5
(a) The sounding length of a string sounding C4 (‘‘middle C’’) is given as 660 cm. Modify
listing 1.2 to print out the lengths of string required for each semitone up to the next octave
(C5, 330 cm).
(b) What further language facilities would make this task easier?
Exercise 1.2.6
(a) Implement the program freq2midi as suggested in subsection 1.2.12.
(b) We deﬁne pitchbend as a percentage deviation half a semitone above or below a MIDI
note. Maximum deviation is therefore e50 percent. For example, given a frequency of
430 Hz, the nearest notes are 69 (f ¼ 440) and 68 (f ¼ 415.3). The deviation is therefore
10/24.7 ¼ 0.398 ¼ 40 percent (approximately). Extend freq2midi to report the frequency
deviation above or below the calculated MIDI note, as a percentage. (Hint: To print a percentage symbol using printf, precede it with the same symbol.)
int bend = 45;
printf("pitchbend = %d%%\n",bend);
(There is an important follow-up to this exercise in the next section.)
1.3

Introduction to Pointers, Arrays, and the Problem of User Input
It will probably not have escaped your notice, if you have run the programs presented in
the previous sections, that having to re-compile every time you change the number for
midinote or frequency is very tiresome. This section introduces changes to listing 1.1 to
make it function interactively—it asks the user for some data, which is then processed.

78

Chapter 1

What is involved in receiving input from the user? In the context of a command-line program, the user will be typing something at the keyboard, which the program reads and presumably processes in some way. The challenge here is a basic one—we don’t know in
advance, and we have fairly limited means for controlling just what, or how much, the user
is going to type. The user may not even type anything at all. Therefore, some of the code we
write deals not with the core task, but with handling user input—making sure we read all of
it, and checking for the unexpected.
Thus an interactive program has to do two things: provide some space (memory), which
we hope is sufﬁcient for anything the user will likely type, and test that data to make sure it
is what we need.
1.3.1

Strings and the C Pointer Type

In the previous programs, we relied on the printf() function to print variables to the console. We now have the opposite task—the user will (we trust) type numbers as a string of
numeric characters, and the program will have to convert that into a C variable. It is time
to understand a little more about exactly how a string is represented in the computer. Consider the string
"one two three four"
This string is stored in memory one character at a time in successive ascending memory
locations. It is the task of the compiler to decide exactly where it is stored. The above string
will occupy eighteen successive bytes of memory (remember, the space is also a character),
starting at some location N determined by the compiler.
However, an additional ‘‘null’’ byte (the character \0) is added at the end, so the string
occupies nineteen bytes. Thus, any function that is required to access the string need only
know where the ﬁrst character is, and it can completely trust that all following bytes also
belong to this string, as far as that ﬁnal null byte. The location in memory of this ﬁrst byte
is its ‘‘address,’’ and that address is accordingly the address of the whole string. The full technical term for this is a null-terminated string; this is the way all strings are implemented in C.6
Thus, in the statement
printf("one two three four");
the printf() function is given the address of the start of the string.
So the address is itself an object, a variable that can be passed around. As it is a variable, it
has to have a type—in this case, it is a pointer type, because it ‘‘points to’’ a location in memory. As it points to a row of characters (which may of course be just one character long), its
full type deﬁnition is ‘pointer to char’. It declared as
char* message;
which could also incorporate an initialization to a string:

79

Programming in C

char* message = "one two three four";
Here the asterisk is not a multiplier; it is the indicator of a ‘‘pointer’’ type. In this statement,
‘message’ is assigned the address of the start of the given string, in effect the memory location of the ﬁrst character. It is now possible to replace the printf() statement above with
printf(message);
The list of format speciﬁers for printf() includes one for strings: %s. This leads to yet
another way of creating messages for printf():
char* two = "two";
char* four = "four";
char* six = "six";
printf("%s %s %s eight," two, four, six);
or even7
char* message = "%s %s %s eight";
printf(message, two, four, six);
1.3.2

The Array

To receive text input from the user, we have to set aside some memory to hold the text. This
requires a character ‘‘array.’’ An array is simply a row of objects of a single type. This requires
a different notation, one that incorporates information on how much space we want:
char message[256];

/* array of 256 chars */

The brackets (‘‘subscript notation’’) indicate the deﬁnition of an array, and the number
inside the brackets indicates how many items of the stated type to provide space for. The
result of the statement above is that a ﬁxed block of 256 bytes of memory is set aside (since
a char is one byte in size), and the address of the start of it is stored in the variable ‘message’.
The forms
char message[]; /* unspecified size */
and
char message[0];
are illegal. Either of them will trigger an error message from the compiler. Needless to say,
negative sizes will also be rejected. Subscript notation is also used to read and write individual elements of an array:
char Beatle[5] = "John";
char letter;
letter = Beatle[0]; /*
Beatle[2] = 'a';

letter = 'J' */
/* Beatle now = "Joan" */

80

Chapter 1

Here the number in brackets is termed the array ‘index’ or ‘subscript’ and, as can be seen,
counts from 0, not (as one might intuitively expect) from 1. In binary arithmetic, a single
bit holds two values, 0 and 1, and so can be used to count two items. 0 therefore has to signify the ﬁrst item, and 1 the second.
The power of the subscript notation becomes more apparent when we realize that an integer variable (of any integral type) can be used for the index:
int position;
position = 3;
Beatle[position] = 'l';
position = 0;
Beatle[position] = 'P';
position = 2;
Beatle[position] = 'u';
position = 1;
Beatle[position] = 'a';
/* Beatle now contains "Paul" */
As well as enabling programmatic changing of the index value, this also supports selfdocumenting code, as the index name can become descriptive.
Arrays can be formed using any type. Of course, the string initialization system can be applied only to arrays of char. In declaring the size of an array to contain a string, it is essential
to count the terminating null byte as part of the string. C provides a generic notation using
braces (note the ﬁnal semicolon here), which enables arrays of any type to be initialized in a
single statement:
int FullChord[4] = {60,64,67,72};
/* MIDI notes for C Major */
int root = 0, third = 1, rootnote;
FullChord[third] = 63;
/* change chord to C minor */
rootnote = FullChord[root];
/* Middle C */
Figure 1.1 shows the construction of a string array element by element using this notation,
including the all-important terminating null character.

Figure 1.1
A string as a null-terminated array of characters.

81

Programming in C

If there are too many elements in the initialization block, the compiler will ﬂag an error.
However, if there are too few, the remaining elements in the array will be initialized to 0:
int LargeChord[32] = {60}; /* first element = 60, all others set to
zero */
In section 1.5 we will learn how C enables the programmer to step through arrays programmatically, so that possibly very large arrays or other data structures can be initialized
and modiﬁed using a small amount of code.
1.3.3

NULL

In addition to the initializations described above, it is possible, and often a very good idea, to
initialize a pointer (of any type) to the special value NULL (deﬁned in stdlib.h). It is always
written in upper case. Exactly how this is deﬁned is discussed in a later section; sufﬁce it to
say here that it is a form of zero for pointers. Many functions that return pointers will use
NULL to indicate errors.
1.3.4

Array Index Errors

It is probable that more bugs in C programs are caused by misuse of pointers and arrays than
by any other single programming error. There are two bad things one can do with an array
index. One is the following:
double buffer[32];
buffer[-2] = 1.0594631; /* ERROR! Index below start of array */
buffer[33] = 2.0; /* ERROR! Index beyond end of array */
The problem here is that the compiler will very likely not warn you about these errors, and if
the index is in fact a variable, it will in any case have no way of knowing. C does very little
‘‘hand-holding’’ of programmers, and if you over-run the bounds of an array it will do nothing to stop you. Sometimes the program will seem to run correctly, but it may suddenly
crash on some machines and not on others, and the point of the crash may be in some seemingly unrelated part of the program.
Indexing errors of the kind discussed above are especially damaging when you are modifying data in memory, because in most compilers the memory spaces below and above an
array may belong to the system, holding information on other data used elsewhere. Maybe
you will be affecting other variables in your program, so it will appear that those variables are
causing the crash.
There are nevertheless good reasons why even an explicit negative index is not automatically treated as an error by the compiler. We will see in later sections that a pointer can
be assigned the address of any element, e.g. one in the middle of an array. In this case, a

82

Chapter 1

negative index relative to that new pointer is perfectly valid. The danger arises only if the
bounds of the overall array itself are exceeded.
A subtle problem arises using indexing on strings used to initialize pointers:
char* name = "John";
name[2] = 'a';
/* DANGER: may crash! */
This will compile, but the program may crash with an access violation, because an attempt
is being made to modify a string that is ‘‘constant’’ and which the compiler has stored in a
protected area of memory. This may be to stop programmers trying to rename Windows
‘‘Windoze,’’ which would never do. However, if you declare ‘name’ as an array, all will be
well:
char name[] = "John";
name[2] = 'a';

/* NB: sizeof(name) = 5 */
/* safe: name now = "Joan" */

This demonstrates probably the easiest way to initialize a char array—it is not necessary in
such cases to supply a size for the array inside the brackets as that is now available from the
initialization string. Usefully, with this form of initialization, the sizeof operator can also
be used to ﬁnd the size of the string programmatically.
As you work through the chapters of this book, you will discover a range of techniques
that programmers use to keep such coding errors to a minimum. Together these form a repertoire of techniques for ‘‘defensive programming.’’ We have already met some of these techniques: the use of informative variable names, explanatory comments, and the robust testing
of user input. As our programs grow in complexity, we will need to pay ever greater attention
to defensive programming. We hope we will ‘‘get it right ﬁrst time,’’ but the more our programs depend on input from outside, and the larger our programs become, the more we
must be on the lookout for code with unintended side effects.
1.3.5

Converting Number Strings to Variables: The const Keyword

We have used the printf() function to write a numeric variable to the console in text
form. In order to get a number interactively from the user, we need to be able to do the
reverse. The standard C library offers three conversion functions: atof(), atoi(), and
atol(), which convert into double, int, and long, respectively. They are declared in the
header ﬁle stdlib.h, which therefore must be #included in any source ﬁle that uses them.
They all have the same format, differing only by return type:
double atof(const char*);
int atoi(const char*);
long atol(const char*);
Their use is straightforward:

83

Programming in C

double dval;
int ival;
long lval;
dval = atof("1.0594631"); /* dval = 1.0594631 */
ival = atoi("440"); /* ival = 440 */
lval = atol("65536"); /* lval = 65536 */
The const keyword is often used in such declarations. It indicates that the supplied argument is treated as ‘‘constant’’ or ‘‘read only’’; it will not be modiﬁed. That is to say, the
pointer is a ‘‘pointer to a constant char.’’ When a plain (non-pointer) type is used as a function argument, it is copied into the function’s private memory space, so that the variable is
not modiﬁed. When the argument is a pointer, the pointer is copied, but the memory it
points to could be modiﬁed. Some functions are expressly designed to do this, and would
be declared without the const keyword. An important example is the function gets(),
which obtains text typed at the console:
char* gets( char *buffer );
Here the buffer argument receives the string from the user, and must therefore be a pointer
to a char array of adequate size, while the return value will duplicate the buffer or will be
NULL to indicate an error.
Conversely, the presence of const in a function declaration is a guarantee that the function will not modify your data. It therefore becomes another element in our repertoire of
defensive programming techniques. It is also a signal to the compiler that some sorts of optimizations can be performed.
The use of these functions is easy:
double frequency;
char* message = "1.0594631";
frequency = atof(message);
/* frequency now has the value 1.0594631 */
The only issue to remember is what happens if the message string does not in fact contain
the expected numeric characters—in this case, these functions return 0, in the appropriate
type:
message = "one thousand";
frequency = atof(message);
/* frequency now has the value 0.0 */
However, this will produce a plausible result:
message = "1000pointfive";
frequency = atof(message);

/* frequency = 1000.0 */

as atof() simply stops reading at the ﬁrst non-numeric character.

84

Chapter 1

Thus you cannot know with certainty whether the user has actually typed a 0 or whether
it has typed some other incorrect text. Of course, this is an issue only if 0 is a reasonable
number for the user to give. The standard C library offers more elaborate functions, such as
strtod(), that both trap incorrect text, and identify it for you by returning any offending
text via a pointer to a char array, that you provide.
The const keyword can be used to trap the problem mentioned at the end of the previous
section. By declaring the pointer as a pointer to const char:
const char *name = "John";
name[2] = 'a';
The second line will now trigger a warning from the compiler that an attempt is being made
to modify const or read-only memory.
1.3.6

Testing, Comparison, and Decision Making: The if Keyword

Listing 1.2 does very little that cannot be handled by a pocket calculator. In order to write a
reasonably practical interactive program, we need to be able to check user input for correctness, and be able to quit the program if input is incorrect. The ability to make simple
‘‘yes-no’’ or ‘‘true-false’’ decisions (very quickly) lies at the heart of computing. Such a decision is, of course, binary—there are only two possible answers. At the level of binary logic,
‘‘yes’’ corresponds to ‘‘true’’ and is associated with the value 1, while ‘‘no’’ equates to ‘‘false’’
and has the value 0. We will see later that literally every C expression can be evaluated in
terms of ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false.’’ At this stage, all we need is the ability to make a comparison between two expressions (e.g. two numbers) and to take alternative actions based on the result.
A frequent programming requirement is to ﬁnd out if two variables are equal. This is one
of many comparison tests for which C provides special operators. These are listed in table
1.3. As they are binary operators (like the arithmetic operators), they are placed between the
two values being compared. For example, the ‘‘equality’’ operator is used to ﬁnd if two variables are equal. The expression
Table 1.3
The C comparison operators.
Operator

Example

Description
a is equal to b

Equal to

= =

a = = b

Not equal to

!=

a ! = b

a is not equal to b

Bigger than

>

a > b

a is bigger than b

Smaller than

<

a < b

a is smaller than b

Bigger than or equal to

>=

a >= b

a is bigger than or equal to b

Smaller than or equal to <=

a <= c

a is smaller than or equal to b

85

Programming in C

(width == height)
(an example of a C ‘‘conditional expression’’ or ‘‘conditional test’’) will evaluate to 1 if the
values are identical, or to 0 otherwise.
The C language includes the keyword if, which is placed in front of the expression to be
tested:
if(width == height)
As it stands, this is incomplete—it is not yet either an expression or a statement. To form a
complete ‘‘if statement,’’ it must be immediately followed by a C statement, to be executed if
the test is successful (i.e. if the expression evaluates to ‘true’):
if(width == height)
printf("it's a square!");
By convention, the body of the statement is indented if it appears in the next line, showing
that it depends on the outcome of the preceding if expression. If you need to write more
than one statement depending on the same if expression, the statements must be enclosed
by braces, which serve to indicate a single ‘‘code block’’:
if(width==height)
{
found_square = 1;
printf("it's a square!");
}
One of the traps for the unwary with if statements is adding a ﬁnal semicolon. This can
easily occur by accident in the process of editing code, and it is often difﬁcult to spot:
if(width == height);
This is in fact legal C, because the semicolon by itself is a legal statement that does nothing
(a ‘‘null statement’’). The true meaning is clearer when we use appropriate layout:
if(width == height)
;
/* do nothing! */
C is fairly ﬂexible with respect to comparisons between different numeric types. However,
comparisons between plain variables and pointers will be ﬂagged as errors by the compiler,
as will be comparisons between pointers to different types (e.g. a float pointer with an int
pointer). The one important exception is NULL, which can be compared with any pointer
type. One of the more idiosyncratic styles I have come across is
if(a == b)
{
do_something();
}

86

Chapter 1

This works perfectly well so long as braces are always used (as is often recommended). However, in
if(a == b)
do_something();
if(c == d)
{
do_something_else();
}
the dependent statements have different degrees of indentation but are in fact at the same
‘‘level.’’
The amount of indentation also attracts different opinions. Indents of two, four, and eight
spaces are common. A subtler issue is whether to use hard spaces or a tab. (Most text editors
can be set to use a requested tab size.) So long as one approach or the other is used consistently throughout, there should be few problems with layout if the text is transferred between
platforms. If in doubt, remember that the use of hard spaces will always be portable.8
1.3.7

An Interactive Version of Listing 1.2

Each time the program is run, it asks the user to type in a MIDI Note number. If it is recognized as a reasonable number, the corresponding frequency is displayed. Otherwise, an error
message is displayed and the program ﬁnishes. You can either create a new ﬁle (or project)
for this or just edit listing 1.2, keeping the same program name. Apart from the fact that
this version is a little more useable, the latter approach reﬂects more closely how programs
are usually developed—incrementally, adding features step by step. The program uses the
function gets(), described above, to read a line of text typed by the user in response to a
prompt.
When gets() is called, it waits for user input from the console (which must include a
ﬁnal ‘return’ keypress), then places whatever was typed in the char array supplied as the
function argument. That array must be large enough to accommodate whatever we suspect
the user might try to type. The return value, also a char pointer, is simply a copy of the
input argument. The function can also signal an error in special circumstances, by returning
NULL. While those circumstances are not likely to apply here, this possibility is nevertheless
tested for in the program. Comparing pointers with NULL is a very common programming
procedure, and is very important, as trying to read from or write to memory pointed to by
NULL can be guaranteed to crash the program. To detect errors, listing 1.3 uses four if statements with three different comparison operators. In each case, the return keyword is used
to exit the program if an error is detected, with 1 as the error value.

87

Programming in C

Listing 1.3
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <math.h>
int main()
{
double c5,c0,semitone_ratio,frequency;
int midinote;
char message[256];
char* result;
semitone_ratio = pow(2, 1.0/12);
c5 = 220.0 * pow(semitone_ratio, 3);
c0 = c5 * pow(0.5, 5);
printf("Enter MIDI note (0 - 127): ");
result = gets(message);
if(result == NULL){
printf("There was an error reading the input.\n");
return 1;
}
if(message[0] == '\0') {
printf("Have a nice day!\n");
return 1;
}
midinote = atoi(message);
if(midinote < 0){
printf("Sorry - %s is a bad MIDI note number\n",message);
return 1;
}
if(midinote > 127){
printf("Sorry - %s is beyond the MIDI range!\n",message);
return 1;
}
frequency = c0 * pow(semitone_ratio, midinote);
printf("frequency of MIDI note %d = %f\n", midinote, frequency);
return 0;
}
The use of compound expressions was demonstrated in subsection 1.2.8. As any C expression can be evaluated to a value, it follows that one or both sides of a comparison operator
could also be a compound expression; for example, incorporating a function returning a

88

Chapter 1

value. In listing 1.3, the return value from gets() is tested only once, so the code could reasonably be compacted as follows, eliminating a variable:
printf("Enter MIDI note (0 - 127): ");
if(gets(message) == NULL){
printf("There was an error reading the input.\n");
return 1;
}
The compiler will make sure that the function call is executed ﬁrst (it has the highest precedence), and the result then passed to the conditional test.
1.3.8

Exercises

Exercise 1.3.1
Listing 1.3 has no comments. How ‘‘self-documenting’’ is the code? Add some comments
wherever you think they would be useful.
Exercise 1.3.2
(a) Make a new interactive version of ‘‘freq2midi’’ from the previous section.
(b) Implement rounding of the printed pitch deviation percentage value, so that positive
and negative values are symmetrically rounded. For example, 38.7 should be rounded to 38,
and 38.7 should be rounded to 39.
Exercise 1.3.3
(a) Add a further test on the number supplied from the user in listing 1.3, to detect and
reject ﬂoating-point values (since MIDI notes are integers).
(b) Try to detect whatever erroneous input the user might make, and respond with an appropriate error message.
Exercise 1.3.4
What messages does the compiler write if
(a) you omit the ﬁnal double quotation marks in a printf statement?
(b) you omit the variable name associated with a format speciﬁer in printf?
1.4

The Command Line—Getting Data from the User
1.4.1

What Is the Command Line?

As its name suggests, the command line is a means of communicating with a computer using
text commands typed from the keyboard, and using the medium of a ‘‘command shell’’ or

89

Programming in C

a ‘‘console program’’—for example, the Bash shell in UNIX, the DOS console in Windows, or
the Terminal in Macintosh OS X. While it is not the oldest way of sending commands to a
computer, it is by far the longest established, and despite the inexorable progress of WIMPbased systems (Window Icon Menu Pointer), usually referred to simply as a GUI (Graphic
User Interface), it refuses to go away. Signiﬁcantly, the Apple Macintosh, having eliminated
the command-line interface as both unnecessary and ‘‘user-unfriendly,’’ has recently reacquired it with the introduction of OS X, which is based on the UNIX-like BSD kernel.
Thus the three most widely used operating systems all now support a console-based command-line interface, which is ideal for developing and running simple programs such as
those presented in this section. Indeed, for many advanced users (and especially on Linux
and other UNIX-like platforms) it remains the ideal environment in which to work, even
on complex projects.
A typical text command consists of a program name (e.g. ‘copy’), followed by one or more
‘arguments’—words separated by spaces. Let us suppose there is a program sfmix that takes
two or more soundﬁles and adds them together (i.e. mixes them) to create a new soundﬁle.
The documentation for the program tells us that the ﬁrst argument should be the name of
the new output ﬁle, and all following arguments should be the names of input soundﬁles to
add together. The command line might look like this:
sfmix backing.wav drums.wav guitars.wav
This runs the program sfmix, creating the output ﬁle backing.wav from the input ﬁles
drums.wav and guitars.wav. This works because the operating system supports a standard
method for both running a command-line program and giving it the arguments from the
user. The operating system has no idea what these arguments mean—they are nothing
more than text strings separated by spaces. It does one very useful thing, however: it separates each string into a list, and gives that list to the program to use as it wishes. Thus, rather
than having to ask the user interactively for each ﬁlename, the program is given all the
names automatically from the command line.
The command-line environment is most strongly associated with the UNIX operating
system and its variants, including Linux and OS X. However, the principles are much the
same on Windows using the DOS console. Programs can be run just as illustrated above.
The only immediately relevant difference from a classic UNIX-style environment is that the
command to list the contents of a directory is ls on UNIX-style systems, whereas it is dir in
DOS. By using command-line arguments, a program can be designed to handle a range of
inputs from the user. The usual environment for command lines is a shell application or
terminal window such as the Windows DOS Console, Terminal in OS X, or an Xterm in
Linux. Table 1.6 shows some typical shell commands. (N.B: To run a program in the current
directory—e.g. in which the program has been built—in a UNIX-like environment (Linux,
OS X Terminal), the program name must be preﬁxed by the ‘‘current directory’’ shorthand
./ as follows:

90

Chapter 1

> ./cpsmidi 72
Other commands, such as cd to change directory, are the same.
If you have not already done so, you may want to try out some of the pre-compiled command-line programs supplied on the DVD as a way to develop ﬂuency in using such tools.
Most of them are projects from later chapters in this book. Although they involve much
more elaborate C programming than we can do at the moment, there is no reason not to
use them as prefabricated tools with which useful creative work can be done. The chances
are high that you will very soon think of some new facility that is not provided by a given
program. There can be no better incentive to develop your programming skills than the prospect of crafting exactly the tools you want for the work you want to do.
1.4.2

The Extended main() Function: Receiving Command-Line Arguments

In the programs demonstrated so far, we have used the main() function with no arguments.
There is an alternative extended form, which is required whenever we want information
from the user at the beginning of the program:
int main(int argc, char* argv[]);
The ﬁrst argument, argc, is simple enough. It is an int, and the name means ‘‘argument
count,’’ the number of space-separated strings supplied in the command line. This number
will always be at least 1, as the ﬁrst argument (counting from 0, as is always the case in C) is
the name of the program itself. The second argument is a little more complicated and needs
some detailed explanation. You have already seen declarations of pointers (such as char*
name;) and of arrays (such as char name[32];), but argv combines both the pointer and
array notations. The name argv is shorthand for ‘argument vector’, and ‘vector’ here is a
synonym for ‘array’. So we have an array argv[]of ‘pointer to char’: char*.
The key aspect to remember here is that a pointer to char can itself signify an array, in the
sense of a character string (i.e. null-terminated), which indeed is the case here. Thus, taking
the example above as our example command line, this array of strings would be laid out as
follows:
argv[0]points
argv[1]points
argv[2]points
argv[3]points

to
to
to
to

"sfmix"
"backing.wav"
"drums.wav"
"guitars.wav"

This is shown graphically in ﬁgure 1.2.
An array can also be understood as a container, so instead of ‘‘points to’’ you could say
‘‘contains.’’9 There is also a ﬁnal implicit argv[4] which contains NULL. However, this is
not counted in argc, so for this example argc would have the value 4. This ﬁnal NULL element can in principle be used in code that steps through the argv array until the NULL is

91

Programming in C

Figure 1.2
Command-line arguments as pointers to strings.

found. However, as argc is always available (and a more convenient basis for a loop), such
usage is rare. Note that the ﬁrst argument (argv[0]) contains the name of the program. This
may seem superﬂuous (after all, we have written the code, so we know what we have called
the program), but it can be surprisingly useful. If nothing else, we will not be caught out if
the user decides to rename the program.
In a program, you might use argv to print a message to the users, perhaps about some
error:
printf("Cannot find the file %s\n," argv[2]);
Since the expression argv[2] evaluates to a char*, it can be used as the associated variable
for the string format speciﬁer %s. Similarly, it can be passed as the parameter to any function
expecting a char* :
/* read number of oscillators requested */
int num_oscs = atoi(argv[3]);
if(num_oscs > 100)
printf("too many oscillators!\n");
Just as in the previous program examples, we will have to check each argument for reasonableness. The simplest and most important test, however, is the one applied to argc. We

92

Chapter 1

know how many arguments we need, and we must check for this before trying to read any of
them:
if(argc < 4){
printf("insufficient arguments.\n") ;
printf("usage: sfmix outfile infile1 \
infile2 [infile3 . . ..]\n");
return 1;
/* exit the program */
}
For command-line programs, this ‘‘usage message’’ is a very common procedure, which users
come to expect and rely on. If they type just the name of the program, they should be given
a full usage message listing the purpose of the program and the name and purpose of each
argument. You will see this incorporated in all the programs that follow.10
1.4.3

The ** Notation for argv

The main function supports an alternative deﬁnition of argv:
int main(int argc, char** argv)
where ** means that argv is a ‘‘pointer to a pointer.’’ In principle, pointer variables can
incorporate any amount of ‘‘indirection.’’ I have seen the following in programs:
char**** very_indirect_variable;
This might perhaps be a pointer to an array of string arrays, or it might not. The ** notation
is, however, very common in programs that deal with lists of strings. It is arguably less appropriate than the explicit array notation, for main()—a variable that is a ‘‘pointer to a pointer
to char’’—may, in the end, be pointing only to a single character. Opinions on this differ,
however, and you will ﬁnd many main functions deﬁned this way—perhaps merely because
it is marginally quicker to type.
Listing 1.4 shows a revision to listing 1.3 to obtain input from a command-line argument.
This is the ﬁrst program in the present chapter that can be considered ‘‘useful,’’ as the user
can run it with any MIDI note as input—one need not compile the program each time.
Exercise 1.4.1 invites you to incorporate this change into the complementary program outlined in subsection 1.2.11 (converting frequency into MIDI). Listing 1.4 could be made even
more useful by allowing the user to enter any number of MIDI notes.
Listing 1.4
/* cpsmidi.c : convert MIDI note to frequency, using command line
argument */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <math.h>

93

Programming in C

int main(int argc, char* argv[])
{
double c5,c0,semitoneratio;
double frequency;
int midinote;

/* could be a char */

semitoneratio = pow(2,1.0/12);
c5 = 220.0 * pow(semitoneratio,3);
c0 = c5 * pow(0.5,5);
/* if the program is not called cpsmidi,
either change the lines below,
or use the argv[0] system, shown commented out below */
if(argc != 2){
printf("cpsmidi : converts MIDI note to frequency.\n"
/*,argv[0]*/);
printf("usage: cpsmidi MIDInote\n" /* ,argv[0]*/);
printf(" range: 0 <= MIDInote <= 127 \n");
return 1;
}
midinote = atoi(argv[1]);
/* use argv[1] to echo a bad argument string to the user */
if(midinote < 0){
printf("Bad MIDI note value: %s\n",argv[1]);
return 1;
}
if(midinote > 127){
printf("%s is beyond the MIDI range!\n",argv[1]);
return 1;
}
frequency = c0 * pow(semitoneratio,midinote);
printf("frequency of MIDI note %d = %f\n",midinote,frequency);
return 0;
}
Finally, if you think that command-line arguments exist only for command-line programs,
think again: a Windows GUI program also reads command-line arguments, as will any UNIX
(or Linux or Apple OS X) program. In Windows, for example, it is possible to invoke the
Notepad application from the DOS console, giving it the name of a ﬁle to edit:
notepad freq2midi.c
The procedure on Apple OS X is only slightly different. To run the soundﬁle editor Audacity
from the Terminal, you can type
open -a Audacity.app myfile.aiff

94

Chapter 1

The command-line handling skills you develop here will stand you in good stead when
developing more advanced GUI applications.
1.4.4

Exercises

Exercise 1.4.1
Convert all the programs developed so far to use argc and argv. Don’t forget to incorporate
the extensions suggested in previous exercises.
Exercise 1.4.2
Add a usage message to each program.
Exercise 1.4.3 (experimental)
(a) Extend the program with a further command-line argument that deﬁnes the ‘‘root A’’
tuning. For example, ‘‘Baroque’’ pitch deﬁnes A ¼ 415 Hz. In fact, A ¼ 440 Hz is itself a relatively recent ‘‘standard’’—especially in the United States, where the pitch of A ¼ 435 Hz was
recently in widespread use.
(b) (experimental) Add a further argument that deﬁnes the division of the octave. For example, a popular alternative temperament uses a 19-note equal-temperament division. A value
of 24 would deﬁne a quarter-tone ET scale. In each case, trap inappropriate user input with
suitable error messages.
1.5

Controlling Repetition: Looping and Counting
So far, with one exception, every one of the example programs has dealt with a single piece
of data—a single MIDI note, or a single frequency value. The exception is the character
string, which takes the form of an array of single characters. It is possible to make arrays of
any type (e.g. a block of ﬂoating-point audio samples), and it becomes essential to have the
means for processing the array as a whole, while addressing individual elements within it, in
a structured and systematic manner, regardless of how large the array is. The image of a production line is a very natural one with respect to dealing with arrays. Given that they contain multiple instances of only one type of object (char, or float, for example), we can
imagine a process that more or less automatically repeats itself for each element. We would
like to be able to press a button, so to speak, to start this process, and be able to press another
button to stop it again.
As audio programmers, we will be creating and processing such arrays (and other data
structures) all the time, and the sheer number of elements is far too great for anyone to contemplate writing code that processes each one in a written list. Fortunately, the need to
address an individual element of such arrays directly is rare; most of the time we want to

95

Programming in C

apply the same process to each element just as described above—for example, to change the
amplitude of an array of audio samples. We can use the power of the C language to make
such tasks easy. With a few lines of code, we will be able to read and process every element
of an array of any size. The tools for this are two cornerstones of all programming: iteration
(counting) and looping (repeating instructions). These are especially important tasks in audio
programming, as we will be working all the time with blocks of samples, such as tables containing waveforms, memory buffers containing delay lines or audio streamed from a disk or
from a soundcard, or tables of frequencies and amplitudes for oscillators. In a typical application we have to step through the block, making a change to each sample as we go. On a
larger scale, when we need to read a soundﬁle, we usually need to read it in blocks (the whole
ﬁle may be far too large to ﬁt in memory all at once), so we have to use iteration and looping
to read each block and process it. This is, then, a process of ‘‘mass production.’’ We can use
the power of the language to repeat steps automatically, at very high speed, on blocks of data
of any size. In this section, we move from writing calculations, to writing algorithms—methods for performing a concretely deﬁned task, usually involving many repeated steps. In a
sense, this is the ﬁrst section in which we embark on true computer programming. We will
learn about how to create loops, and also more about the use of C’s auto-increment and autodecrement operators, which are designed to support the highly efﬁcient mass production we
need. Finally, we will apply all this new knowledge to build on the programs we have already
built, and to produce perhaps the ﬁrst truly useful program so far.
1.5.1

The while Loop

As its name suggests, a loop is a block of code (it need not be a single instruction) that
repeats over and over. However, a code block that simply repeated forever—an ‘‘endless
loop’’—would not be very useful. If you have used a sampler, you will be familiar with the
way a sound is looped (to maintain a sustaining sound) while a key is held down. This is a
form of endless loop—it is broken out of only when you release they key. Should it fail to do
that, you have a real problem.
So, the most important aspect of using loops is control—making sure that they stop when
we want them to. The simplest way to do this is to count the number of times the loop
repeats, and stop when a limit is reached.
The simplest loop construct in C is the while loop. Listing 1.5.1 shows an example of its
use.
Listing 1.5.1
1
2
3
4

#include <stdio.h>
int main(){
int i;

96

Chapter 1

5
6
7
8
9
10
11

i = 0;
while(i < 10) {
printf("%d ,"i);
i = i + 1;
}
return 0;
}

The output from this program is simply
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Instead of writing the printf() statement ten times, we have written it just once, and used
the while loop to generate the repeats. In this program we have decided to write ten numbers, so could in principle write each one explicitly. But suppose this was a program called
‘count’ and had a command-line argument that set the number to count to. We cannot
know in advance what this number will be, and of course it may be different each time we
run the program. We can only implement this task using a loop, where the input from the
user is used to control the loop.
The while statement is similar to the if statement in that it comprises a conditional test
(inside the parentheses, followed by a ‘‘dependent’’ statement or code block (in braces). The
main difference is that, whereas an if statement may execute the dependent code once and
move on, the while statement will repeat the dependent code forever, so long as the conditional expression is true. (See ﬁgure 1.3.)

Figure 1.3
Comparing if . . . while and do . . . while.

97

Programming in C

There are three essential elements of loop control illustrated in this example:
1. Line 6 is the conditional test, associated with the while keyword itself,: (i < 10). At the
end of each iteration, program control will automatically return to the conditional test, and
evaluate it again. So long as the expression evaluates to ‘true’, the code inside the dependent
block { }will execute repeatedly.
2. Line 8 is the update of the control expression, i = i + 1; In the control expression (i < 10),
i is a variable which is declared outside the block, and modiﬁed at each repeat (‘‘iteration’’).
The effect is simply that at each repeat i is increased by 1, as shown by the output of
printf().
3. Line 5 is the initializer statement, i = 0 ;This sets the starting value of the controlling variable. This is placed before, and outside, the while statement. In this case it is set to 0, but it
could be anything. For example, in this variation the numbers count downward from 9
to 0 11:
i = 9;
while(i >= 0){
printf("%d," i);
i = i - 1;
}
1.5.2

The ++ and -- Operators

In listing 1.5.1, the update expression increases the variable i by 1:
i = i + 1;
This algebraically impossible expression, commonplace in programming, means ‘‘let i have
the value it currently has, plus 1.’’ The process of adding 1 to something is termed an increment, and similarly, subtracting 1 is called a decrement. So common is this form of counting
that special automatic increment (++) and decrement (--) operators were added to C, reﬂecting in many cases identical machine-level instructions.
Auto-increment increases a variable by 1:
i++;

/* equivalent to i = i +1; */

Auto-decrement decreases a variable by 1:
i--;

/* equivalent to i = i - 1; */

Since this form can be used as part of a more complex expression, it enables a loop to be
expressed in a very concise form. The example below is exactly equivalent to the code in listing 1.5.1 (note that we now can omit the braces):
i = 0; /* initializer */
while(i < 10) /* conditional expression */

98

Chapter 1

printf("%d ,"i++); /* update in the dependent code */
The comments indicate the three loop elements required.
There is a subtle aspect to these increment and decrement operators. In the printf()
statement above, i is auto-incremented after its value has been used by printf()—this is
the ‘‘post-increment’’ operator. It is also possible to place the ++ characters before the variable name, forming a pre-increment operator:
printf("%d," ++i);
In this case, i is incremented ﬁrst, and the new value is passed to printf(). The result will
be that each number printed would be one larger (i.e. 1 to 10 instead of 0 to 9).
The auto-decrement operator functions in the same way:
printf("%d ",i--); /* print the i, then reduce it by one */
printf("%d ",--i); /* reduce i by one, then print the value */
These last examples illustrate the idiomatic way to use the auto-increment and decrement
operators in the context of a larger expression, and especially in the context of loops. They
can be used on their own (sometimes merely to save typing), but they were born for use as
part of larger expressions, in which they are usually the most efﬁcient method of increment.
1.5.3

General Update Operators

While the increment and decrement operators are intended for use with integer variables
(and also with pointers, as we’ll see later), they will also work with ﬂoating-point variables:
double var = 1.5;
var++; /* var now = 2.5 */
This is not idiomatic C programming, however, and it is not recommended12 —any C programmer reading the expression var++ will assume that var is an integer variable. A more
general update expression that can be used with ﬂoating-point types uses one of the arithmetic operators (+, -, *, /) together with the = sign:
float a =
a += 2.5;
a -= 0.5;
a /= 2.0;
a *= 3.0;

1.0;
/* equivalent to a = a + 2.5; a has the value 3.5 */
/* a now = 3.0 */
/* a now = 1.5 */
/* a now = 4.5 */

The % (modulus) operator can also be used in this way, but only for integral types:
int a = 10;
a %= 3;

/* a now = 1 */

99

Programming in C

Note that it is illegal to have a space between the arithmetic operator and the = sign:
a + = 5;

/* syntax error */

In the example below, update notation is used inside a loop to calculate the intervals of
the equal-tempered scale, and write them to an array. Post-increment is also used, applied
to the counter i in the array index expression:
double ratio = 1.0, semitone_ratio = pow(2,1/12.0);
double intervals[12];
int i;
i = 0;
while(i < 12){
intervals[i++] = ratio; /* uses auto-increment*/
ratio *= semitone_ratio; /* uses update operator */
}
The examples in this subsection demonstrate the use of the primary arithmetic conditional tests—for equality (=), ‘‘less than’’ (<), and ‘‘greater than’’ (>), together with their
inverses, ‘‘not equal to’’ (!=), ‘‘greater or equal’’ (>=), and ‘‘less or equal’’ (<=). As we shall
see, these already offer the programmer considerable ﬂexibility in designing conditional tests
associated with loops. C also supports a group of ‘‘logical’’ operators that make it practicable
to test multiple conditions together.
1.5.4

The for loop

As was shown above, a complete looping construct involves three control elements: an initializer statement, a conditional expression, and an update statement (e.g. a counter) that
usually updates a parameter in that expression. C offers a compact looping construct based
on the keyword for that places all three elements together; it is by far the most popular
and widely used of all the looping constructs in C. It is best demonstrated by example:
int i;
for(i = 0; i < 12; i++){
intervals[i] = ratio;
ratio *= semitoneratio;
}
This functions identically to the while example in the previous section. The for statement
has the structure
for(initializer_statement; conditional_expression; update_expression)
This must be followed, as in the case of the while construct, by either a single statement or a
block of statements enclosed by braces, as shown above. The three elements are demarcated

100

Chapter 1

Figure 1.4
The for loop.

by the two required semicolons—a semicolon should not be used to terminate the update
expression.
The for loop runs as follows (see ﬁgure 1.4), assuming that the conditional test evaluates
to true:
(1) The initializer statement is executed: i = 0;
(2) The conditional expression is evaluated: i < 12;
(3) The result is true, so . . .
(4) The dependent code inside the braces is executed.
(5) Control returns to the top, and the update expression is executed: i++
(6) The loop continues from step (2) until the condition evaluates to false.
(7) When the condition evaluates to false, control passes to the statements after the for
block.13
1.5.5

The do { } while ( ) Loop

There is an argument (among computer scientists, at least) that says that any programming
language requires only one loop construct; anything further is ‘‘syntactic sugar.’’ In that
case, C is very sweet indeed, as in addition to the while and for loops it also offers a varia-

101

Programming in C

tion on the while loop that places the dependent block at the top and the conditional test
at the bottom:
int i;
i = 0;
do {
printf("%d ,"i++);
}
while(i < 10);
Note that the while expression is terminated by a semicolon, to complete the do - while
statement. The special aspect of this form of loop is that the dependent block will always be
executed at least once, as the conditional test is placed after it. In the example above it makes
no signiﬁcant difference, but there are common situations in which this would be the most
appropriate form of loop. One typical situation is reading data from a ﬁle (a soundﬁle, for
example); in such a situation, we usually make at least one read attempt before ﬁnding out
if we have read everything, or if we have suffered an error. Real code to do this is usually
lengthy, so this example uses some ﬁctitious functions (it is sometimes called ‘‘pseudocode’’ for this reason)14:
int sampsread;
do {
sampsread = readsamps("tubularbells.wav");
if(sampsread > 0){
process_samps(sampsread);
write_samps("plasticbells.wav," sampsread);
}
}
while (sampsread > 0);
1.5.6

Breaking Out of Loops Early: The break Keyword

The do loop example above has one unsatisfying aspect: the expression
(sampsread > 0)
is used twice: inside the dependent code block (do), and in the conditional test (while). This
is generally regarded by programmers as tautologous and wasteful. We would prefer not to
have to duplicate code in this way if it can be avoided.
Consider what happens if the test inside the do block fails—if the function readsamps()
returns 0. This means that no more soundﬁle data is available (we assume we have reached
the end of the ﬁle). There is also the ever-present danger of a system error whenever disks are
accessed—a fault could arise at any time, and a robust program has to be able to handle that
situation.

102

Chapter 1

In short, we often want to be able to break out of a loop early—either when there is no
more data, or if there is a system error. Recalling the comparison with the production line;
if there is a problem, we need to be able to stop the machinery immediately. Happily, C provides the break keyword that does just that. Using break, we can rewrite that example a
little more elegantly, and at the same time more expressively:
int sampsread;
do {
sampsread = readsamps("tubularbells.wav");
if(sampsread == 0)
break; /* end of file, or error */
process_samps(sampsread);
write_samps("plasticbells.wav," sampsread);
}
while (sampsread > 0);
If the break instruction is reached, control jumps right out of the do block and past the
while expression, to whatever the next instruction is.
Given the reasonable assumption that sampsread is in fact guaranteed to become 0 eventually, even if the conditional while part of the statement is really redundant, we can rely
entirely on the sampsread test to exit the loop. This is a surprisingly frequent situation, and
you will often encounter loops constructed this way, with a dummy conditional test that
always evaluates to true, and relying on break instead. So, instead of running an explicit
count to manage the loop, we set the loop to run forever, but watch for a condition or event
that we know will occur eventually.
In the for() initialization expression, all three elements are optional, leaving just the two
semicolons:
for(;;){
sampsread = readsamps("tubularbells.wav");
if(sampsread == 0)
break;
/* end of file */
process_samps(sampsread);
write_samps("plasticbells.wav," sampsread);
}
and any non-zero integer evaluates to true:
while(1){
sampsread = readsamps("tubularbells.wav");
if(sampsread == 0)
break;
/* end of file */
process_samps(sampsread);
write_samps("plasticbells.wav," sampsread);
}

103

Programming in C

These are common constructs in real programs, but they are safe only if break can be guaranteed to be called at some point.
So where are the three elements that all loops are supposed to have? They are now
embedded in the looped code: the assignment to sampsread is both the initializer and the
update, and the conditional test is clearly the if statement.
Assuming that in a real program the function write_samps() will also return a value
(below zero) that can indicate an error, we would have to check that too:
if(write_samps("plasticbells.wav," sampsread) < 0)
break;
In this case it is purely a check for an exceptional situation—normally one hopes that a write
to a ﬁle will always succeed.
1.5.7

Writing a Program to Create Unusual Musical Scales

We have learned quite a few C programming skills already—we know how to use the
extended form of the main() function to get command-line arguments from the user, we
know how to program simple loops, using auto-increment and update operators, and
we also know something about calculating equal-tempered intervals. The program developed
in this subsection combines all these elements into a useful program that can create scales
with any number of notes to the octave (not just 12 semitones), up to some reasonable limit,
and starting at any MIDI note requested by the user. There is a great interest in the use of
such scales among composers, and one of the much-lauded virtues of experimental computer music is that one need not be limited by conventions such as the classical 12-note
chromatic scale.
Since this is arguably our ﬁrst real program, the process of designing and writing it is presented from scratch, with the full program listing presented at the end. Try to resist the
temptation just to look ahead to the listing. Instead, follow the process all the way through,
starting with a new empty project. There is not very much typing involved, and we will reuse
some code from section 1.2. You might assume that the ﬁrst thing to do is (somehow) to
start writing code. But it isn’t—the ﬁrst thing to do is to sit down and think carefully about
what the program is going to do, and in particular how the user is going to use it.
The goal of this program is to display the frequencies of equal-tempered intervals for N
notes per octave. If N is 12, we will get the notes of the standard chromatic scale. Another
popular octave division is 19 notes. If N is 24, we will get a quarter-tone scale. If we write
each frequency on a separate line, 24 lines seems a reasonable limit for this program.
We need to set a limit, because we are going to deﬁne an array to hold the interval data,
and we can only deﬁne an array with an explicit constant size. (We will see how to get
around this limitation in section 1.7.) So we need the size to be that of the largest number
N we intend to support.

104

Chapter 1

We know that one command-line argument will be N, the number of notes in the octave.
We also need a MIDI note, so that will be the second argument. Our program (which will be
called ‘‘nscale’’) will therefore have the following usage:
nscale notes midinote
where notes is the number of notes per octave and midinote is the base note on which to
build the scale. Therefore, there will be a total of three command-line arguments, including
the program’s name.
We can now create a source ﬁle (‘‘nscale.c’’) in a new project, and write a skeleton main()
function. We are printing to the console, so we will need <stdio.h>. As we are using mathematical functions such as pow(), we will also need <math.h>. We should also put in a
small comment line, to say what the program is.
Listing 1.5.2 shows the skeleton program so far. This will compile and run; if you run it
with no arguments (or indeed with anything more than two arguments), the usage message
will be written to the screen.
Listing 1.5.2
/* nscale.c. Display E.T frequencies for an N-note octave, from a
given MIDI note */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
int main(int argc, char* argv[])
{
/* declare variables here. . .*/
if(argc != 3){
printf("usage: nscale notes midinote\n");
return 1;
}
/* program code goes here */
return 0;
}
We now need to add some functionality to this skeleton, where the comment indicates.
We can start by reading our required arguments into variables and testing them for acceptability. If they are not acceptable, we must inform the user helpfully and quit the program.
Both notes and midinote are integer numbers, so they can both be int. We must declare
all our variables at top level, after the opening brace of main():
int main(int argc, char* argv[])
{
int notes, midinote;

105

Programming in C

First, we read notes from argv[1], and make sure it is between 1 and 24:
notes = atoi(argv[1]);
if(notes < 1){
printf("Error: notes must be positive\n");
return 1;
}
if(notes > 24){
printf("Error: maximum value for notes is 24\n");
return 1;
}
Then we do the same for midinote, from argv[2]. The legal MIDI range is from 0 to 127:
midinote = atoi(argv[2]);
if(midinote < 0){
printf("Error: cannot have negative MIDI notes!\n");
return 1;
}
if(midinote > 127){
printf("Error: maximum MIDInote is 127\n");
return 1;
}
Again, at this point you can compile the program, and test it ﬁrst by giving it a correct pair
of arguments (10 and 69, say), and then by various combinations of out-of-range values, to
make sure the error messages appear as intended.
We can now deal with the core functionality of the program. This is to calculate the frequency of the requested MIDI note, and use that to create a table of notes frequencies spanning one octave from that base note. We can reuse the core arithmetic code from listing 1.2,
remembering to add all the variables used in that code, immediately below the variables we
have already declared. If possible, use the copy and paste facilities of your editor to do this:
int notes, midinote;
double frequency,ratio;
double c0,c5;
Note that what was called semitone_ratio is now just called ratio—we are no longer
calculating just semitones, so a more general variable name is appropriate here. Now, we can
copy the calculation code from listing 1.2, complete with comments, into our source ﬁle,
after all the argument checking code:
ratio = pow(2.0,1.0 / 12.0);
/* find Middle C, three semitones above low A = 220 */
c5 = 220.0 * pow(ratio,3);

106

Chapter 1

/* MIDI note 0 is C, 5 octaves below Middle C */
c0 = c5 * pow(0.5,5);
frequency = c0 * pow(ratio,midinote);
Note that the hard-coded assignment to midinote in the original program is deleted, as we
are now getting that from a command-line argument.
All we have to do now is to generate the list of frequencies, and print them to the console.
There are two ways of doing this, but either way, we need a loop to generate the numbers, as
they may be from 1 to 24 in number.
The ﬁrst way is simply to calculate each note, and print it to the console, all inside the
loop. However, at the back of our minds we are thinking that this data may be useful in
other programs (or maybe even within an extended version of this program), so that it is
worth using an array to contain these notes. We will therefore use two loops—one to create
the frequencies, and the other to print them out.
We decided that the maximum for notes is 24, so we can deﬁne an array that size, of
double. This is the standard type to use for arithmetic calculations, giving maximum precision. Add the following line immediately below the other variable declarations:
double frequencies[24];
To calculate intervals for N notes per octave, we use the same calculation we have already
used for 12 semitones, but replacing 12 with notes:
ratio = pow(2.0, 1.0 / notes);
To generate the complete scale, we just multiply each frequency by this ratio, to get the
next frequency. This is a clear description of an ‘‘iterative process’’—a loop. All C programmers turn to the for loop as their ﬁrst instinct, so we shall be no different:
for(i = 0; i < notes; i++){
intervals[i] = frequency;
frequency *= ratio;
}
We can use the for loop again to print the frequencies to the console:
for(i = 0; i < notes; i++){
printf("%f\n", i, intervals[i]);
}
We are now ready to compile and test the completed program. But it fails to compile. We
have had a compilation error reported. The exact wording will depend on the compiler, but
we will get something like this:
error C2065: 'i' : undeclared identifier

107

Programming in C

The correct response to this error is ‘‘Oops!’’ We forgot to declare the variable i we have used
in the for loops (in C, all variable names are ‘‘identiﬁers’’). This is probably one of the most
common everyday slips for C programmers. Everyone uses i as the counter in a for loop—
typing it is almost an automatic process—and it is very easy indeed to forget to add it to the
variables list.
So add that variable (an int) to the int list at the top of main(), and this time hope that
the program will compile cleanly. Now we can test it, perhaps with numbers from which we
can predict the results. For example, to reproduce the data in table 1.3, use arguments 12 and
57. The complete program is shown in listing 1.5.3.
Listing 1.5.3
/* nscale.c: Display E.T frequencies for an N-note octave, from a
given MIDI note */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <math.h>
int main(int argc, char* argv[])
{
int notes,i,midinote;
double frequency,ratio;
double c0,c5;
double intervals[24];
if(argc != 3){
printf("Usage: nscale notes miditnote\n");
return 1;
}
notes = atoi(argv[1]);
if(notes < 1){
printf("Error: notes must be positive\n");
return 1;
}
if(notes > 24){
printf("Error: maximum value for notes is 24\n");
return 1;
}
midinote = atoi(argv[2]);
if(midinote < 0){
printf("Error: cannot have negative MIDI notes!\n");
return 1;
}

108

Chapter 1

if(midinote > 127){
printf("Error: maximum midinote is 127\n");
return 1;
}
/*** find the frequency of the MIDI note ***/
/* calc standard E.T semitone ratio */
ratio = pow(2.0,1.0 / 12.0);
/* find Middle C, three semitones above low A = 220 */
c5 = 220.0 * pow(ratio,3);
/* MIDI note 0 is C, 5 octaves below Middle C */
c0 = c5 * pow(0.5,5);
frequency = c0 * pow(ratio,midinote);
/* calc ratio from notes, and fill the frequency array */
ratio = pow(2.0,1.0/notes);
for(i = 0; i < notes; i++){
intervals[i] = frequency;
frequency *= ratio;
}
/* finally, read array, write to screen */
for(i = 0; i < notes; i++){
printf("%f\n", intervals[i]);
}
return 0;
}
1.5.8

Exercises

Exercise 1.5.1
Write a short page of user documentation for the program ‘‘nscale’’ in listing 1.5.3. Assume
the user knows what a chromatic scale is but is not familiar with the mathematical basis of
equal temperament.
Exercise 1.5.2
Rewrite the loops in listing 1.5.3 to use (a) the while loop and (b) the do loop. What are you
relying on in the latter case? Be sure to test both changes by running the program.
Exercise 1.5.3
The output of the program does not exactly match the list in table 1.3—the latter lists the
ﬁnal octave frequency, giving 13 frequencies in all. Modify listing 1.5.3 to add this feature.

109

Programming in C

The program will then write one more number than the value given for notes. For example,
if notes = 24, the program will print 25 numbers.
Exercise 1.5.4
Modify the ﬁnal printf() statement to add a counter to the beginning of each line, that
would have the following form:
1: 220.000000
2: 233.081881
. . .
Exercise 1.5.5
(This requires some mathematical acuity.) You have decided that you want to be able to use
an interval other than the octave as the basis for the frequency calculations. Add another argument to ‘‘nscale,’’ deﬁning this interval (2.0 ¼ one octave, 4.0 ¼ two octaves, 1.5 ¼ half an
octave, etc.), and modify the program accordingly. Ensure that the new argument is tested
for reasonableness. Update the documentation you wrote in exercise 1.5.1.
Exercise 1.5.6
If you are familiar with Csound, modify the ﬁnal printf() statement to write the list of frequencies as a single Csound ‘‘f1’’ statement in the score, using ‘‘GEN 2.’’ It would be worth
giving this program a different name. The ﬁrst value ‘‘p-ﬁeld’’ should give the number of frequencies in the list. For example, the 12-note chromatic scale staring at 220 (MIDI note 57)
would be written as
f1 0 16 -2 12 220.000 233.081881 . . . 415.304698
Remember that Csound f-tables must have a size that is a power of two, or power-of-2 plus 1.
(Practical note: Most operating systems support redirection of text output to a ﬁle:
nscale 12 57 > ftable.txt. Thus, the text from your program could be copied from the
ftable.txt ﬁle into a Csound score.)
Exercise 1.5.7
If you forget to declare a variable (‘‘identiﬁer’’) that you are using, the compiler will report
an error. What does your compiler report if you declare a variable but don’t use it? What
does it report if you declare it twice?
Exercise 1.5.8
(a) From listing 1.5.3, arbitrarily remove one of the following characters: ( ) { } [ ]. Then
run the compiler. What errors does the compiler report? How accurate and helpful are they?
(b) Do as in (a), but instead replace the removed character with one of the others.

110

Chapter 1

(c) Ask a non-programming friend to make some subtle arbitrary edit. If the compiler reports
an error, use the information to discover and ﬁx the change.
1.6

Using Pointer Arithmetic and Adding Options to a Program
1.6.1

Introduction

C is unusual among high-level languages in giving the programmer direct access (under the
supervision of the operating system) to memory addresses, via the pointer type. A machine
address, you will recall, is a number identifying the place in memory where some item of
data is stored. As it is just an integer, it can be used with the basic addition and subtraction
operators. This also includes the use of the ++ and -- operators. Programmers generally refer
to this as ‘‘pointer arithmetic.’’ All C programmers have to become adept at pointer arithmetic, but it is especially important for audio programmers, who routinely have to step through
arrays of audio samples, or other data, efﬁciently.
In this section you will learn more about how to read from, and write to, a variable via a
pointer to it. This will enable you to read and write to blocks of memory (for example, lines
of text, or wavetables containing synthetic waveforms or sampled sounds, or lines of text)
and, more generally, to manipulate blocks of data in a way that is both efﬁcient and ﬂexible.
Much of the time, we will be dealing with ‘‘lots of something’’—lots of MIDI notes, lots of
audio samples, lots of wavetables, lots of envelopes, and so on (in other words, collections
of all the same type of data). In this situation, since the compiler knows which memory
space a single item occupies, we can use pointer arithmetic to move this data around, and to
move it around efﬁciently, even when we may not know in advance how much data there is.
This section demonstrates the use of pointer arithmetic to step through command-line
arguments in a way that enables us to support the use of optional arguments to a program,
and, generally, a variable number of arguments. Thus, we begin to see the potential power of
command-line tools wherever a single highly conﬁgurable task is to be performed. As usual,
the program presented here builds further on previously presented code examples. In particular, this program shows just how easy it is to create a ﬁle in C, and to write text to it.
1.6.2

Indirection and the ‘‘contents-of’’ and ‘‘address-of’’ Operators

As we learned in section 1.3, the declaration below deﬁnes ptr as a ‘‘pointer to a double’’:
double* ptr;
This is a variable, then, that contains the machine address of another variable (ﬁgure 1.5).
We cannot do anything with this, however, until it has something proper to point to (as it
stands, the address it contains is random—whatever the memory happens to contain—and

111

Programming in C

Figure 1.5
Pointers and memory addresses.

something we should not use). We have to give it something to point to—to initialize the
pointer:
double buffer[1024];
ptr = buffer;
In C, the name of an array is in effect a pointer to the ﬁrst element of it (buffer[0]). So
this assignment sets ptr to point to the beginning of buffer. We can now both read and
write to buffer by the means of a pointer. The technical term for this is indirection. Instead
of writing
buffer[0] = 1.0594631;
we can now assign this value indirectly, via the pointer:
*ptr = 1.0594631;
We would typically read this as ‘‘set the contents of ptr to 1.0594631.’’ So here * is not a
multiplication (which would be meaningless here, of course), but a ‘‘contents-of’’ operator.
This notation can be used on both the left-hand and the right-hand side of an assignment:
double* ptr; /* pointer; currently uninitialized */
double val;/* a simple number variable */
ptr = buffer; /* now it has something to point to:
the first element of buffer, i.e. buffer[0] */
*ptr = 1.0594631; /* buffer[0] now contains 1.0594631 */
/* read the contents of ptr: */
val = *ptr;
/* val now = 1.0594631 */
This works because the name of the array is equivalent to the ‘‘address of’’ the ﬁrst element
of it. C provides an ‘‘address-of’’ operator, &, to enable us to write such a thing explicitly:
double* ptr;
double val;
ptr = &val; /* find the address of val, and assign it to ptr */

112

Chapter 1

Any time we declare a variable such as val, the compiler has to ﬁnd a place in memory to
store it. It is this address that we assign to the pointer ptr. So in reading the last line of the
above example, we would say ‘‘set ptr to the address of val.’’ With this done, we can initialize val indirectly, via the pointer:
*ptr = 1.0594631;
printf("%f,"val);
This will print the number 1.0594631. So we can replace the assignment
ptr = buffer;
with the exactly equivalent (if rather more awkward-looking) statement
ptr = &buffer[0];
which would be read as ‘‘set ptr to the address of element 0 of buffer.’’
By itself, this notation does not really seem to do very much except make things look confusing. After all, why not just say
val = 1.0594631;
and be done with it?
As will be discussed in the next section (and indeed throughout the book), one of the most
powerful uses of pointers is in conjunction with loops. They enable all sorts of ‘‘massproduction’’ techniques to be used, at high efﬁciency—exactly what we need for writing
audio applications, which can easily demand more CPU power than we have. Often we can
avoid a great deal of costly copying of data by manipulating pointers and addresses. The key
principle to understand is that addresses can themselves be treated as variables. The compiler is
in fact doing just this, behind the scenes—a special aspect of C is that it gives a lot of this
power to the programmer too.
1.6.3

Moving Pointers Around

Because a pointer is an integral type (a memory address), whatever the type of the object it
points to, it is possible to apply the increment operator to them as an alternative way of stepping along an array. It is in tasks such as this that the power and the expressiveness of
pointer arithmetic become most apparent.
The fragment below sets each element of the array buffer to zero:
double buffer[1024];
double* ptr = buffer; /* set ptr to point to the start of table */
int i;
for(i = 0; i < 1024; i++) {
*ptr = 0.0;
ptr++; /* move pointer to next element of the array */
}

113

Programming in C

At the end of the for loop above, the pointer ptr is pointing to the position
table[1024], i.e. one step beyond the end of the array. Audio programmers are especially
fond of this technique, as very often it results in faster code than the array index notation.
Note that you must always make sure that you know what such a pointer is pointing to. If
you follow that loop with another indirect write,
*ptr = 1.0594631;
you could cause a crash, as that memory address is outside the array, and belongs to something else. The same problem arises if the loop test is stated incorrectly:
for(i = 0; i <= 1024; i++) {
*ptr = 0.0;
ptr++;/* move pointer to next element of the array */
}
But few C programmers write this code this way. The most effective use of the ++ operator is
in conjunction with some other operation (again, because such combinations are often available as single machine instructions). Instead, the for loop would be written as follows:
for(i = 0; i < 1024; i++)
*ptr++ = 0.0;
This would be read as ‘‘set the contents of ptr to 0.0, then increment ptr.’’ This is an
example where it is important to understand C precedence rules. (See subsection 1.2.9.) In this
case, the *ptr combination is applied ﬁrst, followed by the increment operation, applied to
the pointer. Note also that, by condensing the loop code to a single statement, this notation
has also enabled us to dispense with braces. You will ﬁnd some form of the above two lines
liberally scattered throughout programs in this book.15
More generally, C supports the use of the addition, subtraction, and comparison operations on pointers. This is perhaps the most striking demonstration of how C can be ‘‘close
to the hardware’’—machine code depends a great deal on pointer arithmetic. Pointer arithmetic is both one of the most widely exploited features of C, and also one of the most
criticized. A major selling point of the language Java, for example, was that it did not permit
either pointers or pointer arithmetic.
The code in listing 1.6.1 demonstrates a way of ﬁnding the value and position of the maximum positive sample in an array, stepping backward one sample at a time. In this way, it
will ﬁnd the maximum sample nearest the start of the buffer. It assumes the same buffer
of 1024 floats, but now ﬁlled with audio samples:
Listing 1.6.1
1
2

double* ptr = buffer + 1024; /* point to last element */
double maxval = 0.0;

114

Chapter 1

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

unsigned long pos = 0;
while(--ptr != buffer) {
if(*ptr >= maxval){
maxval = *ptr;
pos = ptr - buffer;
}
}
printf("the maximum sample is %f, at position %d\n",
maxval, pos);

There are several details to observe in this example:
(1) In the conditional test in line 5, the pre-decrement operator is applied to the pointer
ptr. This steps the pointer back one element before the comparison with buffer is made.
Thus ptr has had to be initialized in line 1, using the addition of a constant integer to a
pointer, to point at the element immediately beyond the array (buffer + 1024). As it happens, this is exactly the position it ended up at in the previous code example.
(2) The != operator is used to compare ptr with the address of the start of the array
(buffer). As pointers are integral numbers, such comparisons can be relied upon to be exact,
and as we are stepping back one element at a time, toward the beginning of the array, we
cannot fail to ﬁnd it eventually. It would be equally safe to use the > (‘‘greater than’’) operator instead.
(3) To ﬁnd the maximum value nearest the start of the buffer, the >= operator is used in line
6. If only the > operator were used, this would fail to ﬁnd the nearest maximum sample
where several samples have the same value (e.g. in a square wave).
(4) The position of the maximum sample is found by the calculation in line 8, subtracting
one pointer from another. This exploits the fact that the name of an array (buffer) is equivalently the address of the ﬁrst element. The difference between that and the value of ptr
gives the distance from the start of the buffer to the maximum sample.
Automatic pointer increments are commonly used in processing blocks of audio samples.
In such cases, the size of the block is often ﬁxed, and can be guaranteed to not be zero. This
is the case, for example, in all the audio processing code in Csound, which uses buffers of
samples that are always ksmps in size. As a result, Csound uses the do loop in an especially
interesting way, in conjunction with pointer increments. Listing 1.6.1 shows a typical example from code that implements a simple ﬁlter to block DC in a signal. The variable nsmps is
initialized to ksmps, and the arrays pointed to by samp and ar are both nsmps in size.
Listing 1.6.2
1
2

nsmps = ksmps;
do {

115

Programming in C

Figure 1.6
The compiler’s view of an array.

3
4
5
6
7

float sample = *samp++;
output = sample - input + (gain * output);
input = sample;
*ar++ = output;
} while (--nsmps);

Note the use of pointer increments (line 3, line 6) to step forward through the blocks of samples, while the loop counter nsmps is pre-decremented inside the while test (line 7). The
loop will terminate when nsmps no longer evaluates to ‘‘true,’’ which will be the case when
it reaches zero. At that point, the loop has counted down from 30 to 1, as required.
In the expression sample = *samp++, the operator ++ has a higher precedence than the dereference operator *. This means that the pointer is incremented, not the value pointed at.
Because the postﬁx þþ increments after the variable is used, the dereferencing (i.e. the value
pointed at is assigned to sample) occurs before the pointer increment. The counter variable is
not used inside the processing block.
This example demonstrates a very common practice in C programming—increments tend
to be post, while decrements tend to be pre. Why this back-to-front way of stepping through
a block? It is often the case that auto-decrement is faster than auto-increment, and similarly
that a comparison against zero is faster than comparison with some non-zero value. As this
loop repeats at the audio sample rate, even small gains (maybe just one CPU instruction) can
accumulate to give a big gain.
Figure 1.6 illustrates how array indexing works at the compiler level—the compiler knows
how large each element is, and automatically calculates the distance from the start of the
array.

116

Chapter 1

Don’t worry if pointer arithmetic looks daunting—you don’t have to use it. The code in
listing 1.6.1 can just as well be written stepping forward and using index notation, as in listing 1.6.3.
Listing 1.6.3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
12

double maxval = 0.0;
unsigned long pos = 0;
int i;
for(i=0; i < 1024; i++){
if(buffer[i] > maxval){
maxval = buffer[i];
pos = i;
}
}
printf("the maximum sample is %f, at position %d\n", maxval,
pos);

Note that as we are now stepping forward, the >= operator is now replaced by the > operator. Many programmers tend to code loops this way to begin with, aiming initially for as
much clarity as possible, and look for ways to optimize it for speed after it has been tested.
It can be argued that a good modern compiler will optimize this code better anyway, and
there is a good case for leaving well alone, unless the speed gain is really signiﬁcant. In the
end it is often far more important that you write code you understand, and feel comfortable
with—especially if you are likely to want to change it or add to it later.
1.6.4

Extending the Command Line with Optional Arguments

One way of measuring the ‘‘power’’ of a computer program is to look at the amount of control it offers the user. A program that does just one thing may be useful, but a program that
offers the user choices may be both useful and powerful. In this subsection the task is to add
to the usefulness of the program presented in the previous section (listing 1.5.3) by adding
some optional controls to change the content of the output, and to add the possibility of
writing the output to a text ﬁle. So far, the command line for a program has been completely
ﬁxed—either it is correct or it is not. In this section you will learn how to create a command
line that incorporates optional elements. Parsing it will therefore involve not only reading
and testing required arguments, but also detecting and testing optional ones.
Optional arguments are a standard feature of UNIX-style command-line programs, and
some conventions are established which are reﬂected in the approach presented here. To
keep things manageable, all required arguments are kept together, and all optional arguments are placed either before or after these.

117

Programming in C

The program developed in the previous section (listing 1.5.3) printed a list of frequencies
to the screen. The ﬁrst reﬁnement added in this section is an option to print the plain frequency ratios as well. This will generate the ﬁrst two columns of data shown in table 1.2. Secondly, the option is provided to specify the base frequency as a MIDI note value, instead of
a raw hertz value. Finally, an option is provided to write the generated information to a text
ﬁle. The ﬁrst two of these options are simple switches, to turn a facility on, or to change format to a single alternative; the third requires a ﬁlename to be provided by the user.
For the new program iscale, the command line will be deﬁned by the usage message
below (which would be printed to the command line):
iscale [-m] [-i] N startval [outfile.txt]
where:
-m means: interpret startval as a MIDI note
(default: interpret as frequency in hertz)
-i means: print interval ratios as well as frequency values
(default: print just frequency values)
outfile.txt: name of (optional) file to write output to
The purposes of the conventions illustrated here are (1) to indicate optional arguments (in
the usage message) by enclosing them within brackets (not typed by the user) and (2) to
indicate optional arguments placed before required ones by a required preﬁx character: -.
Such arguments are often referred to as ‘‘switches’’ or ‘‘ﬂags,’’ especially if, as here, they serve
to turn on a special facility, or to change behavior. This means that the code required to
parse the command line can be very simple. There are two required arguments; there may
be a fourth argument after these; and all optional arguments preceding them use the character - as a preﬁx. To parse this command line, therefore, is a simple three-stage procedure:
(a) Handle any ﬂag arguments, stepping along the argument list. (b) Check that we have at
least two remaining arguments, and process them. (c) If we have a third argument, process
that too.
The ﬁrst stage (a) is of course essential. We cannot assume that any of the optional ﬂags are
used, so when we parse the argv[] array of the main() function we cannot rely on N being
argv[1], for example.
We can use pointer arithmetic to solve this problem. Recall from section 1.4 that the various arguments supplied by the user are delivered to the main() function as an array of character strings, together with an argument count (which includes the name of the program):
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
Suppose that the supplied command line is as follows:
iscale -m 19 57
This would be contained in argv as

118

Chapter 1

argv[0]
argv[1]
argv[2]
argv[3]

=
=
=
=

"iscale"
"-m"
"19"
"57"

and argc would be set to 4. We can equivalently say that argv is ‘‘pointing to’’ the beginning of the array of arguments, and we know there are four arguments.
Each element of argv is simply a char pointer (an address), and the compiler knows how
big this is, just as it does in the case of the buffer[] array in listing 1.6.1. So, as in that
example, we can use the ++ operator to move argv along the array, eliminating each argument as it does so. At the same time, we must decrement argc so that it tells us how many
arguments are left, counting from argv’s current position. The following sequence demonstrates how the argument list changes as this procedure is performed.
Step 1
argv++;
argc--; /* argc now = 3 */
This steps over the name of the program, leaving us with the user’s argument list:
argv[0] = "-m"
argv[1] = "19"
argv[2] = "57"
Step 2
argv++;
argc--; /* argc now = 2 */
Steps 1 and 2 are shown graphically in ﬁgure 1.7, from which we can see that argv now
contains the two required arguments:
argv[0] = "19"
argv[1] = "57"
Figure 1.7 illustrates what is clearly an iterative (repeating) process, for which a loop is
appropriate. In this case, the loop test will be for the presence of the preﬁx character -. Since
we have established the convention that the ﬁrst argument not using this character is the
ﬁrst required argument, the loop must break as soon as this condition is found.
In section 1.3 we learned how to access individual characters of a char array. The same
principle applies to an array of char arrays (strings). Suppose argv[1] contains the address
of the string -m—we can read the individual characters using brackets, but as this is an array
of arrays, we need two pairs (see ﬁgure 1.8):
argv[1][0] contains '-'
argv[1][1] contains 'm'

119

Programming in C

Figure 1.7
Stepping through argv[].

Figure 1.8
argv[] as an array of arrays.

If this looks messy to you, you can create a variable to represent an individual argument:
char* arg = argv[1];
arg[0] contains '-'
arg[1] contains 'm'
Programmers sometimes do this, especially if there is heavy use of brackets or if the code is
being repeated many times (the compiler may have to generate more code to translate the
brackets). This technique reduces the level of indirection with respect to each string.
1.6.5

Dealing with Alternatives: if . . . else

In the iscale program we have introduced two possible ﬂag options: -m and -i. Any other
character following the – will be an error. In English pseudo-code, we would say
if there is a ﬂag
if the ﬂag is ‘m’
set MIDI option
otherwise
if the ﬂag is ‘i’
set interval option

120

Chapter 1

otherwise
report an ‘‘incorrect ﬂag’’ error
In C, the keyword else is used for ‘‘otherwise’’; it is an optional extension to the if keyword, and it must be followed by a complete C statement or statement block. It always
belongs to the immediately preceding if. The example below demonstrates a series of
if. . .else tests; it also shows how the individual characters of an argument are accessed
to parse the argument (see section 1.3).
Listing 1.6.4
if(argv[1][0] == '-'){/* is it an optional flag ? */
if(argv[1][1] == 'm')
ismidi = 1;
else if(argv[1][1] == 'i')
write_interval = 1;
else {
printf("error: incorrect flag option %s\n", argv[1]);
return 1;
}
}
The else keyword is used with both ifs to ensure the error message is reported only if the
ﬂag is neither 'm' nor 'i'. Note the code layout in the above example, with else if run
together on a single line. This is the usual convention for this type of code sequence, even
though this is, strictly speaking, a series of ‘‘nested’’ if. . .else statements. Braces make
the true relationships of the options explicit:
Listing 1.6.5
if(argv[1][0] == '-'){
/* is it an optional flag ? */
if(argv[1][1] == 'm')
ismidi = 1;
else {
if(argv[1][1] == 'i')
write_interval = 1;
else {
printf("error: incorrect flag option %s\n", argv[1]);
return 1;
}
}
}

121

Programming in C

You may want to work through the versions on listings 1.6.4 and 1.6.5 to assure yourself
that the logic is the same in each case for any given ﬂag option. One reason the layout of
listing 1.6.4 is preferable is that it shows that each alternative lies at the same logical ‘‘level’’
(and should thus be indented identically).
This also gives a very practical advantage: should you want to add another ﬂag option, all
that is required is the insertion of another if. . .else combination; or rather, an
else. . .if combination. For example, if you had code that could play the calculated scale
through the audio output, you might deﬁne a new command-line ﬂag ‘‘-p,’’ with an associated variable:
int playit = 0;
This would be detected using a new else. . .if combination inserted into the code above:
Listing 1.6.6
if(argv[1][0] == '-'){
if(argv[1][1] == 'm')
ismidi = 1;
else if(argv[1][1] == 'i')
write_interval = 1;
else if(argv[1][1] == 'p')
playit = 1;
else {
printf("error: incorrect flag option %s\n", argv[1]);
return 1;
}
}
This conveniently minimizes the amount of code indentation, while enabling rapid additions (and removals) without affecting code elsewhere.
1.6.6

Using Local Variables—the Scope of a Variable

In the above example, the expression argv[1][1] is used three times. It would be good to
simplify this (and maybe even make the code more efﬁcient) by removing this duplication.
This can be done by declaring a new char variable to contain the ﬂag character:
Listing 1.6.7
char flag;
if(argv[1][0] == '-'){
flag = argv[1][1];

122

Chapter 1

if(flag == 'm')
ismidi = 1;
else if(flag == 'i')
write_interval = 1;
else if(flag == 'p')
playit = 1;
else {
printf("error: incorrect flag option %s\n", argv[1]);
return 1;
}
}
C requires that all variables be declared at the top of main(), before any other C statements. However, C also supports the use of variables local to a statement block (enclosed by
braces); these are, naturally enough, termed local variables. As the if test above is followed
by a statement block enclosed by braces, we can place the declaration of flag at the top of
the block.
Listing 1.6.8
if(argv[1][0] == '-'){
char flag;
flag = argv[1][1];
if(flag == 'm')
ismidi = 1;
else if(flag == 'i')
write_interval = 1;
else if(flag == 'p')
playit = 1;
else {
printf("error: incorrect flag option %s\n", argv[1]);
return 1;
}
}
Used this way, the variable char exists only within the block; it cannot be accessed from
outside. The variable is therefore a temporary one, used a few times and then discarded. The
technical term for this behavior is scope—the variable has ‘‘local scope’’ within the block in
which it is declared. The basic principle of scope is that a variable exists at a given statement
block level, and at any lower level. Thus the variables declared at the top of main have scope
within main, and also within any statement blocks inside main.
Because a local variable exists only within the block in which it is declared, there is no
reason not to use the same name in other blocks at the same level.

123

Programming in C

Listing 1.6.9
float buffer[1024];
float* bufptr = buffer;
int ascending = 0;
/* create ascending or descending ramp */
if(ascending){
int i;
for(i = 0; i < 1024; i++)
*bufptr++ = (float) i;
}
else {
int i;
for(i = 1024; i; i--)
*bufptr++ = (float) i;
}
If the variable i declared in the else block is omitted, the compiler will report an error
because the previous i is not accessible outside its block.
1.6.7

Creating a Text File—the Special FILE Type

In addition to optional ﬂag arguments preceding our required command-line arguments, we
have also speciﬁed an optional extra ﬁnal argument giving a ﬁlename to which to write the
output of the program (which we will in any case be writing to the screen as usual). Detecting this argument is easy—if we have used the procedure of the previous section to step past
any ﬂag arguments, we know that our required arguments are in argv[0] and argv[1],
and that argc must be at least 2. If it is in fact 3, we know that argv[2] contains the ﬁlename. Of course, if argc is more than 3, the user has typed something superﬂuous. In this
case, it is purely a matter of courtesy to point this out to the user, if we so choose.
To create and write to a text ﬁle, we will need the three functions (declared in stdio.h)
listed in table 1.4. These all use a pointer to a strange object called FILE. As well as the
Table 1.4
Standard C functions to create, write, and close a text ﬁle.
Function

Description

FILE *fopen(const char* name, const char* mode);

Open a ﬁle for reading or writing.

int fprintf(FILE *fp, const char* format, ...);

Write formatted text to FILE.

int fclose(FILE *fp);

Close an open FILE.

124

Chapter 1

simple types used so far, such as int, double, and char, C allows the programmer to
invent any arbitrary types. The FILE type is also deﬁned in stdio.h, and we need know
nothing about it at all except that it is used by these functions to represent an instance of
a ﬁle, that it must always be typed in upper case, and that it is always referred to indirectly
via a pointer.
These functions are far from the full extent of the facilities the C library provides for dealing with ﬁles (to say nothing of those speciﬁc to a particular operating system), but for
the simple requirements of this program (writing lines of text to a ﬁle) they are all we need.
The function fprintf() is perhaps the most interesting, as it is almost identical to the
printf() function we have been using since section 1.2, the only difference being the initial FILE pointer argument. The text formatting options are, however, identical, which
means that we can use the same format string for fprintf() that we use for printf().16
Perhaps unexpectedly, the single function fopen() can be used both for reading and writing a ﬁle. It is worth considering brieﬂy what sorts of tasks we may want to perform on a ﬁle.
Here are some candidates:
n
n
n
n

Create a new ﬁle (for writing).
Read an existing ﬁle.
Append data (writing) to an existing ﬁle.
Overwrite some or all of a ﬁle.

The second mode argument to fopen() enables us to specify what we want, in a simple
way. It is a pointer to a const char string (the const qualiﬁer meaning, as you will recall,
that the function guarantees not to modify the string in any way). The basic options are: ‘‘w’’
for writing, ‘‘r’’ for reading and ‘‘a’’ for appending.
In the program as speciﬁed, all we need do is create a ﬁle and write lines of text to it, so the
‘‘w’’ mode is as much as we need. Note that this will overwrite an existing ﬁle of the same
name.
1.6.8

Putting It All Together

The full program iscale is shown in listing 1.6.10. It falls into distinct blocks, indicated by
an empty line. The ﬁrst stage (lines 1–40), after the declarations of top-level variables, looks
for any optional ﬂag arguments, setting the ﬂag variables ismidi and write_interval if
required. Note that these are both initialized, in their declarations, to the required ‘‘default’’
values. Note also how the ﬂag checking code illustrated in subsection 1.6.6 is embedded in a
loop stepping through the argument list, with pointer arithmetic used to move argv along
the array. Because the code reads argv[1], it is necessary to check that argc is at least 2
(line 24), otherwise the code would be reading outside the argv array. The loop breaks if
the test in line 25 fails, indicating that all optional ﬂags, if any, have been read.

125

Programming in C

The required arguments are processed in the next section (lines 42–72). Note that this
code depends on the variable ismidi, in order to interpret the startval argument correctly. The comments in the code show how these arguments are tested for reasonableness.
The error messages are useful not only for the user but also for the person reading the code.
The next stage (lines 74–82) checks for the optional ﬁle argument by checking the value of
argc. At the very end of the program, we must close this ﬁle (line 126), if it has been created.
We will know whether it has been created because the FILE* pointer fp is initialized to
NULL (line 75); if it is still NULL at the end, we know it is unused, and there is nothing
to close. One user-friendly aspect of this code is that if for some reason the ﬁle cannot be
created (fopen() returns NULL in this case) the program does not terminate (it can still write
information to the screen) but merely prints a warning message. A C library function
perror() is used—this prints a message describing the cause of the most recent system
error. A ﬁle may fail to be created for many reasons; for example, it may be already open in
another application, so access is denied, the disk may be full, the ﬁlename may be incorrectly
formed, or there may be a hardware fault. Similarly, any attempt to write to a ﬁle (indeed,
any attempted access at all) may result in an error, so it is equally important to test the return
value of fprintf()—this will be the number of bytes written, or a negative value in the case
of an error. In all such situations, perror() can be used to display the cause of the error.
One habitual exception to this rule is fclose(); while this does return a value indicating
success or failure, there is not much that can be done, especially when the program is terminating anyway, so this value is often ignored by programs, as here. In other situations, for
example where multiple ﬁles are being used, it may be more important to advise the user if
an error arises.
The next stage (lines 84–103) comprises the heart of the program, in which the array of
frequencies is calculated. In line 88 the variables c0 and c5, which have no other use, are
declared local variables. If you tried exercise 3 in the previous section, you may notice that
this program implements one solution to that problem. The array intervals[] is declared
to be one larger than the maximum accepted value for notes, and the loop tests (line 100,
107) use the <= operator, rather than the < operator normally used in such loops.
The ﬁnal section of the program (lines 105–121) prints the results to the screen, using
printf(), and also to the ﬁle if requested, using fprintf with the same format strings.
The program offer the possibility to write out the raw interval values as well as speciﬁc frequency values, so the if and else keywords are used several times to deal with each pair
of options, all inside a single loop running through the intervals array. Note that the calls
to fprintf() read the return value into the variable err, and if non-zero break out of the
loop. That variable is then tested (line 123), and perror() used with an optional custom
message (line 124), to report the cause of the error. In line 18 err is initialized to 0. By ensuring that it is not used in any other context, we can simply test this for a negative value (line
123), which is then sufﬁcient to indicate both that the optional ﬁle facility was used, and
that there was an error.

126

Chapter 1

Listing 1.6.10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42

/* iscale.c */
/* generate E.T tables for N-notes to the octave (N <= 24) */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <math.h>
/* usage iscale [-m][-i] N startval [outfile.txt]
-m : sets format of startval as MIDI note
-i : prints the calculated interval as well as the abs freq
outfile: optional text filename for output data
*/
int main(int argc, char* argv[])
{
int notes,i;
int ismidi = 0;
int write_interval = 0;
int err = 0;
double startval,basefreq,ratio;
FILE* fp;
double intervals[25];
/* check first arg for flag option: argc at least 2 */
while(argc > 1){
if(argv[1][0]=='-'){
if(argv[1][1]== 'm')
ismidi = 1;
else if(argv[1][1]== 'i')
write_interval = 1;
else {
printf("error: unrecognized option %s\n",argv[1]);
return 1;
}
/* step up to next arg */
argc--;
argv++;
}
else
break;
}
if(argc < 3){

127

Programming in C

43
printf("insufficient arguments\n");
44
printf("Usage: itable [-m][-i] N startval [outfile.txt]\n");
45
return 1;
46
}
47 /* now read and check all arguments */
48 /* we now expect argv[1] to hold N and argv[2] startval */
49
notes = atoi(argv[1]);
50
if(notes < 1 || notes > 24){
51
printf("error: N out of range. Must be between 1 and 24.\n");
52
return 1;
53
}
54
startval = atof(argv[2]);
55
if(ismidi){
56
if(startval > 127.0){
57
printf("error: MIDI startval must be <= 127.\n");
58
return 1;
59
}
60
/* for MIDI, startval = 0 is legal */
61
if(startval < 0.0){
62
printf("error: MIDI startval must be >= 0.\n");
63
return 1;
64
}
65
}
66
else { /* it's freq: must be positive number */
67
/* check low limit */
68
if(startval <= 0.0){
69
printf("error: frequency startval must be positive.\n");
70
return 1;
71
}
72
}
73
74
/* check for optional filename */
75
fp = NULL;
76
if(argc==4){
77
fp = fopen(argv[3],"w");
78
if(fp==NULL){
79
printf("WARNING: unable to create file %s\n",argv[3]);
80
perror("");
81
}
82
}
83
84 /* all params ready - fill array and write to file if created */
85

128

Chapter 1

86
/* find basefreq, if val is MIDI */
87
if(ismidi){
88
double c0,c5;
89
/* find base MIDI note */
90
ratio = pow(2.0,1.0 / 12.0);
91
c5 = 220.0 * pow(ratio,3);
92
c0 = c5 * pow(0.5,5);
93
basefreq = c0 * pow(ratio,startval);
94
}
95
else
96
basefreq = startval;
97
98
/* calc ratio from notes, and fill the array */
99
ratio = pow(2.0,1.0/notes);
100
for(i=0;i <= notes;i++){
101
intervals[i] = basefreq;
102
basefreq *= ratio;
103
}
104
105/* finally, read array, write to screen, and optionally to file */
106
107
for(i=0; i <= notes; i++){
108
if(write_interval)
109
printf("%d:\t%f\t%f\n", i, pow(ratio,i), intervals[i]);
110
else
111
printf("%d:\t%f\n", i, intervals[i]);
112
if(fp){
113
if(write_interval)
114
err = fprintf(fp,"%d:\t%f\t%f\n",
115
i, pow(ratio,i), intervals[i]);
116
else
117
err = fprintf(fp,"%d:\t%f\n", i, intervals[i]);
118
if(err < 0)
119
break;
120
}
121
}
122
123
if(err < 0)
124
perror("There was an error writing the file.\n");
125
if(fp)
126
fclose(fp);
127
return 0;
128 }

129

Programming in C

1.6.9

Testing the Program

This program is clearly more complex than previous ones (shown not least by its length),
and the use of optional command-line arguments gives greatly increased importance to the
process of testing it. Once you have compiled it, be sure to test all combinations of optional
and required arguments, and also make sure that incorrect command lines (e.g. use of a nonexistent ﬂag) are tested. Try your best to make the program crash. What you miss, someone
else (perhaps a paying customer) will be sure to ﬁnd, sooner or later. Some speciﬁc suggestions for tests are given in the exercises. Before doing this, study the code carefully, while
thinking about all the errors a user might make. Can you anticipate user errors that the
code does not deal with? Don’t forget to check the contents of the optional text ﬁle, to
make sure it corresponds to the information written to the screen.
1.6.10

Exercises

Exercise 1.6.1
Add the description of all arguments to the usage message in line 44 (see subsection 1.6.4).
Exercise 1.6.2
Without running the program (i.e. by reading the code), decide how the following command
lines will be handled:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

iscale -m -i -m 19 60
iscale -i - 19 60
iscale m 19 60
iscale 19 data.txt

Test your conclusions by running the program with these command lines. If you have found
problems, explain their causes and suggest possible solutions. (Hint: the library documentation for your compiler is your friend.).
Exercise 1.6.3
In lines 107–121, the expression pow(ratio,i) is used twice, and the expression
intervals[i] is used four times. Eliminate this repetition by using two variables local
to the for block.
Exercise 1.6.4
Extend iscale with an optional ﬂag that appends data to the output text ﬁle, if it already
exists. Thus successive runs of the program will add another set of tables to the ﬁle. Using
fprintf(), ensure that these tables are clearly separated, and add a line of text giving a
descriptive name for each set. Remember to update the usage message.

130

Chapter 1

Table 1.5
A simple envelope breakpoint ﬁle.
x

y

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.75

1.00

0.85
1.50

0.25
0.25

1.95

0.10

2.00

0.00

Exercise 1.6.5
Adding to the above exercise, before each set of data, print to the ﬁle the full command line
used.
Exercise 1.6.6
In lines 107–121, if fprintf() returns an error, the loop is broken, with the result that output to the screen is also stopped. Is this a serious problem? If so, rewrite the code so as to
separate writing to the screen from writing to the ﬁle.
1.7

Creating Types, Functions, and Memory
1.7.1

The Time/Value Breakpoint File

After devoting so much attention to calculating musical scales, it may come as something
of a relief to move onto a different area of musical processing. The object that is the focus of
this section is the standard time/value breakpoint ﬁle. If you have explored the compiled
versions of the programs included on the DVD, you will have found several that use such
ﬁles, for making time-varying changes to a sound. Some example breakpoint ﬁles (with the
ﬁle extension ‘‘.brk’’) are also provided. You will use the knowledge gained in this chapter
to create some of these programs yourself. You may like to devote a little time to trying out
those programs, before proceeding further with this chapter.
As its name suggests, a breakpoint ﬁle is a text ﬁle comprising at least two lines containing
pairs of numbers—time and value—deﬁning how some parameter (e.g. amplitude) varies
over time. A simple breakpoint ﬁle describing an amplitude envelope is shown in table 1.5.
The same data is represented graphically in ﬁgure 1.9. If you think that this looks like the
‘‘automation’’ tracks often used in audio editors, you would be right—that is exactly what it
is. Depending on the product, such automation tracks can be more or less sophisticated (e.g.

131

Programming in C

Table 1.6
Some common shell commands.
Action

DOS

UNIX

Directory separator

\

/

Change directory

cd

cd

Copy ﬁle

copy

cp

List directory
Move ﬁle

dir
move

ls
mv

Delete ﬁle

del

rm

Create directory

mkdir

mkdir

Remove directory

rmdir

rmdir

Current directory

.\

./

Parent directory

..\

../

Figure 1.9
A simple envelope.

some may allow the deﬁnition of curves between points, as well as simple linear ramps), but
the principle is the same.
In order to use a breakpoint ﬁle reliably, with multiple applications, we must rely on the
data having certain properties and boundaries. A breakpoint ﬁle must comply with a number
of rules, if it is to be portable, and of long-term use. Even from studying the one example in
table 1.5 we can deduce a number of these:
The ﬁle lists one breakpoint per line.
A breakpoint comprises two ﬂoating-point numbers separated by white-space (spaces and/
or tabs).

n
n

132

Chapter 1

The ﬁrst number gives the time for the breakpoint, the second number gives the value at
that time.
n
The times must be increasing.
n
The ﬁrst point must have a time of 0.0.
n
There can be any (ﬁnite) number of breakpoints.
n

Additional rules might include the following:
Two breakpoints cannot have the same time (i.e. the difference between points must
be 4 0).
n
No empty lines are allowed, except (perhaps) at the end.
n
Only one breakpoint set allowed per ﬁle.
n
A breakpoint ﬁle must contain at least two points.
n

A breakpoint ﬁle has certain properties:
The time difference between adjacent points can vary.
A given breakpoint set will have a duration (time of ﬁnal point), and minimum þ maximum values.

n
n

Some breakpoint ﬁles will have properties speciﬁc to an audio process:
Breakpoint ﬁles with values between 0.0 and 1.0 inclusive can be used as amplitude envelopes.
n
Breakpoint ﬁles with values between 1.0 and 1.0 inclusive can be used as (stereo) pan trajectories, where 1 deﬁnes ‘‘full Left,’’ 0 deﬁnes ‘‘Center (mono)’’ and 1 deﬁnes ‘‘full Right.’’
n

This information is sufﬁcient to enable a programmer, even without seeing an example of a
breakpoint ﬁle, to write a program that can read a ﬁle, decide if it is legal, and determine its
properties. The same code can also be used as part of a larger application that uses the breakpoint data to perform audio processing. The use of the word ‘object’ is no accident. In this
section, you will embark on some elementary ‘‘object-oriented’’ programming. The time/
value breakpoint is the ‘‘object’’ in question, and we will learn how to represent it as an
object in C. We will also learn how to deﬁne functions that use or create this object—in
Object-Oriented Programming these would be called ‘‘methods,’’ though we would need to
move into C++ programming to realize that concept fully.
The remaining challenge presented by the breakpoint ﬁle arises from the fact that it can be
of any size. As we cannot know in advance how many breakpoints a given ﬁle contains, we
cannot deﬁne an array in advance, in which to store them (as an array can only be deﬁned
with a ﬁxed size). So we need to be able both to obtain memory of some arbitrary size from
the operating system, but also, if required, we will need to be able to expand the size. In
learning how this is done, we will also, at last, discover exactly how NULL is deﬁned.

133

Programming in C

1.7.2

Deﬁning Custom Objects in C using the struct Keyword

So far, we have learned about the ‘‘simple’’ variable types supported by C (int, float, char,
etc.), and about the array, which is a collection of a single type. We can also use arbitrary
combinations of these types to deﬁne new ones. We have to be able to do two things—
deﬁne a type, and deﬁne a variable of that type. The ﬁrst task is fulﬁlled by the C keyword
struct (short for ‘‘structure’’). The code below uses this to deﬁne a breakpoint as two
doubles:
struct breakpoint {
double time;
double value;
};
Note the use of braces to enclose the elements comprising the structure, and the terminating
semicolon. The name following struct (‘breakpoint’) is formally termed the struct ‘‘tag.’’
This structure would be identical to an array of two doubles, except for the crucial difference
that each element has a name. Although not as useful for the program developed in this section, it is also possible, and very common, to deﬁne structs containing different types. Suppose that it was convenient to deﬁne a breakpoint where time is measured not in seconds,
but in discrete ‘‘ticks’’ (perhaps, samples). The struct could be deﬁned as
struct tickpoint {
unsigned long ticks;
double value;
};
The struct demands more work from the compiler than does the array, as in the former
the type and size of each element has to be recorded, and used whenever that struct is
referenced.
For example, an instance of the breakpoint structure deﬁned above could be declared
simply as
struct breakpoint point;
Note that the keyword struct must be used as well as the struct name; ‘‘point’’ is the name
of the variable we have deﬁned. We can combine structure deﬁnition and variable declaration into one statement:
struct breakpoint {
double time;
double value;
} point;

134

Chapter 1

We can now ﬁll in the elements of the new variable by name. To do this, the element name
is appended to the variable name separated by a stop character:
point.time = 0.0;
point.value = 0.5;
It is also possible to use an initializer list (see subsection 1.3.2):
struct breakpoint point = {0.0,0.5};
An important operation allowed for structs is assignment or copy:
struct breakpoint point1,point2 = {0.0,0.5};
point1 = point2; /* point1 now contains {0.0,0.5} */
No other operators are allowed with structs—for example, you cannot write arithmetic
expressions with them:
struct breakpoint point3;
point3 = point1 + point2;/*error: + not allowed with structs*/
To be able to do such things, we will have to progress to C++, which among many other
things allows such operators to be ‘‘overloaded’’—that is, deﬁned for any custom object. In
C, we will have to deﬁne our own functions to do these things17.
1.7.3

Deﬁning Custom Types using the typedef Keyword

It is probably already apparent that typing the struct keyword plus the tag is a somewhat
tiresome amount of typing. We really want to use a single name to specify the object, so that
we can write
breakpoint point;
instead. The magic C keyword that enables us to do exactly that is typedef. The format for
typedef is simple (note the ﬁnal semicolon):
typedef <existing type> <typename> ;
A common use for typedef is to deﬁne shorthand names for unsigned integer variables. The
example below is familiar to all Windows programmers:
typedef unsigned short WORD;
typedef unsigned long DWORD;
Though it can seem that typedef simply performs some form of text substitution, it really
does deﬁne a new C type that can, for example, be given to sizeof:
long size = sizeof(DWORD);
As soon as an object has been typedefed in this way, it can be used in struct deﬁnitions,
and even as part of a further typedef:

135

Programming in C

/* define an object describing a soundfile */
typedef struct soundfile_info {
DWORD nSamples;
DWORD samplerate;
WORD nChannels;
char* name;
} SFINFO;
/* create an instance of the SFINFO object, and initialize it */
SFINFO info;
info.nSamples = 1234567;
info.samplerate = 96000;
info.name = "main title";
info.nChannels = 6;
You may reasonably ask at this point why we now seem to need two names for this structure
—‘‘soundﬁle_info’’ and ‘‘SFINFO,’’ the ﬁrst of which is not used. As it happens, when we use
typedef the structure tag (soundfile_info) is optional.18 Thanks to typedef, the declaration can be simpliﬁed:
typedef struct {
DWORD nSamples;
DWORD samplerate;
WORD nChannels;
char* name;
} SFINFO;
The two forms are about equally likely in modern C programs.
Returning to the task at hand, we can now use typedef to create the breakpoint type in
the form we wanted:
typedef struct breakpoint {
double time;
double value;
} BREAKPOINT;
By convention, such names are usually written in upper case, as demonstrated above, to
make them distinctive. This is not a hard and fast rule (as you read more code from various
sources you will ﬁnd many examples where lower-case type is used), but it is a good convention to adhere to for such type deﬁnitions. You can correctly deduce, for example, that FILE
is a type created using typedef—as you can easily discover if you study the code in the
stdio.h header ﬁle.
We can also declare an array of BREAKPOINTs:
BREAKPOINT points[64];

136

Chapter 1

Should we so choose, we can initialize the ﬁrst breakpoint using array index notation
(brackets) and the dot notation for accessing elements of a structure :
point[0].time = 0.0;
point[0].value = 1.0;
1.7.4

Text Substitution: Introducing the #define Preprocessor Directive

While typedef is a C keyword to deﬁne possibly complex types, it is also possible in simple
cases to use text substitution via the C preprocessor directive #define. A simple text substitution would be to replace an explicit constant value with a symbol:
#define BUFFERSIZE 1024
Note that there is no semicolon terminating the line—this is not C code as such, but instructions to the preprocessor. This symbol can then be used in an array declaration:
short sampbuf[BUFFERSIZE];
Similarly,
#define SAMPLE float
This might be used to facilitate experimentation with alternative sample types in a program:
SAMPLE sampbuf[BUFFERSIZE];
This now declares an array of ﬂoats. The symbol SAMPLE will probably be used everywhere a
numeric type would be: if late in the design you decide you want to use doubles instead, you
merely have to change the deﬁnition and re-compile:
#define SAMPLE double
Thus the preprocessor supports a form of global search and replace—anywhere the same
value is used, with the same meaning, it is better to use a #defined symbol for it, both to
enable to value to be changed globally without tedious editing and to contribute to the documentation of the program, than to use numeric constants directly.
The #define directive, used widely in C programming, can be employed to substitute
complex sequences of frequently used code text with simpler ones.19 The difference between
#define and typedef is that the former is literally text substitution—before the compiler
itself is invoked, whereas typedef is a language keyword, understood by the compiler itself,
and thus can create true abstract types in ways that are beyond the scope of the preprocessor.
The main hazard at this stage is getting the order right. With #define, the synonym or alias
name (e.g. SAMPLE) is written ﬁrst, followed by the text to be substituted, whereas with
typedef, the order is opposite, and the type description must be a correct C type declaration:
typedef float SAMPLE;

137

Programming in C

1.7.5

Working with Types: User-Deﬁned Functions

Given an array of breakpoints (e.g. read from a ﬁle), one of the important pieces of information we may require is the maximum breakpoint value contained in the data. It is easy to see
that any application dealing with breakpoints is likely to want this information. This is a primary reason for wanting to create a set of functions speciﬁc to the BREAKPOINT type, which
can be used repeated, in any application.
Creating a function in C is not at all difﬁcult (you do it every time you write a program
involving main()), but there are a few rules to observe, demanded by ANSI C. From what
you have learned already, you know that a function is deﬁned by a name, followed by parentheses that may contain arguments supplied to the function:
float larger(float first, float second);
In this case, the function called larger takes two float arguments and returns a float
result. As its name suggests, it returns the value of the larger of the two arguments. However,
this is not a function buried in some standard C library; we have to implement it in full ourselves. The line above is in fact the ‘‘declaration’’ of the function—its prototype, to use the
correct terminology. ANSI C requires that every function used in a ﬁle must be provided
with a prototype declaration such as this, ahead of the ﬁrst use of the function. Normally,
the function prototype is placed at the top of the source ﬁle, or is stored in a header ﬁle
which is #included in the usual way.
To complete the deﬁnition of the function, we have to write the function body:
float larger(float first, float second)
{
if(first < second)
return second;
else
return first;
}
The only difference between this user-deﬁned function and main() is that as well as writing
the function, we have to provide a prototype declaration, which replaces the function body
(enclosed in braces) with a semicolon. It could hardly be simpler, could it? Given the prototype declaration at the top of the ﬁle (or supplied in a header ﬁle), we can place this function
deﬁnition anywhere we like in a source ﬁle, other than inside another function. The prototype ensures that wherever the function is used, the compiler knows exactly what to do. It
also protects the programmer from what can be easy mistakes:
result = larger(0.5);
/* error: function requires two arguments */
result = larger(0.5,0.4,0.1);
/* error: too many arguments */
larger("one",2.5);
/* error: incorrect argument type */

138

Chapter 1

One possible error (which as far as C is concerned is not an error at all) that will not be
reported by most compilers is discarding the return value:
larger(0.5,0.2);

/* no warning message! */

Listing 1.7.1 shows the prototype and deﬁnition of a function that reads an array of
BREAKPOINTs and returns a BREAKPOINT containing the maximum value, and the time.
Note the pointer argument—as BREAKPOINT is a type, it can be used like any other C type,
including the deﬁnition of pointers. Also note that the function returns a BREAKPOINT,
which is not a single value but a struct. This is something that the original version of C
(known as Kernighan and Ritchie C after its authors) did not allow, but was introduced
with ANSI C.
Listing 1.7.1: The User-deﬁned Function—maxpoint
/* The prototype*/
BREAKPOINT maxpoint(const BREAKPOINT* points, long npoints);
/* input: points = array of BREAKPOINTS,
npoints gives the length of the array */
/* output: copy of the BREAKPOINT containing largest value */
/* the function definition */
BREAKPOINT maxpoint(const BREAKPOINT* points, long npoints)
{
int i;
BREAKPOINT point;
point.time = points[0].time;/* initialize from first point */
point.value = points[0].value;
for(i=0; i < npoints; i++){
if(point.value < points[i].value){
point.value = points[i].value;
point.time = points[i].time;
}
}
return point;
}
Note also from this example that a user-deﬁned function can have its own private (‘‘local’’)
variables, not visible outside the function. In the return statement, a copy of the internal
variable point is made, so that though that variable will not exist after the function is
called, the output is valid.

139

Programming in C

1.7.6

The void and size_t Types: Creating Memory and Dealing with Variable Quantities

Before we can use the new function, we need to obtain some breakpoints. The problem is, as
stated earlier, that when we are reading them from a ﬁle, we do not know how many there
are, in advance, so we cannot simply declare an array, and trust that it will be enough.
Instead, we need to request some memory directly from the operating system, and if need
be, request some more later. When we are ﬁnished with it, we must release it back to the
system. The technical term for this procedure is ‘‘dynamic memory allocation.’’ The standard
C library supports four functions to enable us to do this, declared in stdlib.h:
void* malloc(size_t size);
void* calloc(size_t nobj, size_t size);
void* realloc(void *p, size_t size);
void free(void *p);
These functions introduce two new C types:
(1) size_t: This is a symbol #defined by the compiler (in <stdio.h>) according to the
target machine architecture. It will typically be deﬁned as an unsigned int (which is itself
deﬁned according to the platform—see subsection 1.2.6). It is rare for programmers to need
to pay attention to this. Most requests for memory will use an int or a long (which on 32-bit
systems are the same size anyway), and the compiler will take care of any type conversion
without fuss. However, pedantic programmers will ensure that all arithmetic destined for use
with malloc is performed using the type size_t, or at least is cast to that type beforehand.
(2) void*: Of the two types, this is by far the more important. As a C programmer you will
be working with the void keyword a great deal of the time. A memory request to the system
is simply for a block of bytes, and all the system can do is return a generic or type-agnostic
pointer to this block. The name chosen for this is ‘void’ in the sense of ‘‘void of meaning.’’
The one thing the system will guarantee to do is to supply a pointer that is suitable for the
largest single C type (usually a double)—e.g. aligned to a memory address that is a multiple
of eight bytes. This will then equally be suitable for any other type. The programmer simply
casts this pointer (see subsection 1.2.10) to the required pointer type. For the same reason,
the amount of memory requested (in bytes) has to be calculated with respect to the type
using the sizeof keyword. Listing 1.7.2 shows an attempt to allocate a block of 4 megabytes
to hold a large sound sample.
Listing 1.7.2
1 /* request enough memory to hold a lot of samples */
2 #define SAMPLELEN 1048576
3
4 float* sampbuf;

140

Chapter 1

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

sampbuf = (float*) malloc(SAMPLELEN * sizeof(float));
if(sampbuf == NULL){
puts("Sorry - not that much memory available!\n");
exit(1);
}
/* do something useful with all this memory. . ...*/
process_sample(sampbuf);
/* and remember to return it at the end */
free(sampbuf);

Note that the return value from malloc will be NULL if the system is unable to meet the
request.20 We can now understand how NULL is deﬁned in <stdio.h>:
#define NULL ((void*) 0)
This deﬁnes NULL to be integer 0, cast to a ‘‘pointer to void.’’ The special aspect of the void*
exploited here is that is can be compared to any pointer type, without need for a cast. There
is no need, for example, for a test such as
if(sampbuf == (float*) NULL)
The code in lines 8 and 9 warrants some comment. If the memory request is rejected, we
cannot assume that there is any memory available at all.21 A problem with the library function printf() is that it may itself request some memory internally, while generating the
string to be output. This may likely also fail in this situation, so that printf() is not a safe
function to use to report memory allocation errors. Instead, the simpler library function
puts() is used.
1.7.7

Expanding Allocated Memory on Demand: Reading Breakpoints from a File

Reading data from a text ﬁle presents many challenges, the primary one being, as already
noted, that we do not know in advance how much storage to provide for the data. We also
have to allow for the possibility, since this is a plain text ﬁle, very possibly written by hand,
that the contents may be incorrect in some way. Fortunately, the format of a breakpoint ﬁle
is very simple, and we can survive with a simple method to read it.
From the list of memory functions above, you will have noted the function realloc().
This offers exactly what we need—it will take an existing allocated block and change its
size, returning a pointer to the modiﬁed block (or NULL on failure). That pointer may or
may not be the same as the original one. If realloc fails, the original block is still valid,
with all its data, and we have the choice whether to keep that, even though incomplete, or
abandon the task altogether. The solution presented here takes the latter course, conﬁdent
that for the data quantities involved, memory failure is not likely.

141

Programming in C

The logical design of this function (for that is what we will write) is worth setting out in
pseudo-code before coding in C. The procedure is, in essence, to start with a small block of
memory obtained using malloc, and commence reading breakpoints from the ﬁle, one line
at a time. If we ﬁll that block, we have to expand it by some amount, then continue. When
reading the line, we will do some basic format checking, to ensure we ﬁnd two numbers per
line, and we can also check that the ﬁrst value (time) is always greater than the previous one,
by keeping track of the current time value. In pseudo-code, this could be written as follows:
blocksize ¼ 64
count ¼ 0
allocate initial block of blocksize breakpoints
while(we have read a line from the ﬁle){
if(line is incorrect) break
if(block is full)
expand block by blocksize; break on realloc error
copy breakpoint to next place in array, increment count
}
return the block and count to user
Since we are designing a function, the information on the input and output speciﬁcs is
essential, in order to create the function prototype. The output is a list of BREAKPOINTs—
this is simply a pointer to a BREAKPOINT, or NULL if there was an error. A second output
is the size of the array, and as a function can only return a single object, we will have to use
a function argument for this, using a pointer to an external variable. The other input is a
pointer to an open FILE. This leads to the following prototype:
BREAKPOINT* get_breakpoints(FILE* fp, long* psize);
We expect this function to be used this way, given an input ﬁle envelope.brk (ignoring error
checks for now):
FILE* fp;
long size = 0;
BREAKPOINT* points;
fp = fopen("envelope.brk","r");
points = get_breakpoints(fp,&size);
As a block of allocated memory is created by our function, and returned to the caller, it will
be the caller’s responsibility to free() the block at the end of the program.
To read and parse a line of text from a ﬁle, we will use two functions from the standard C
library. These functions are declared in <stdio.h>:
char *fgets(char *line, int maxline, FILE *fp);
int *sscanf(char *string, const char* format, ...);

142

Chapter 1

The function sscanf() has a clear relationship to the now familiar printf(); indeed the
conversion speciﬁers are almost identical. To extract two ﬂoating-point numbers from a
string, sscanf would be used as follows:
char* string = "0.0 0.5\n");
double time;
double value;
if(sscanf(string,"%lf%lf",&time,&value) != 2)
printf("There was an error\n");
Note that the addresses of the target variables are passed to the function (their types must of
course correspond to the type speciﬁers), and that it returns the number of conversions that
were successfully made. sscanf returns the special value EOF (usually 1) if the string is
empty. Note especially that whereas printf() uses the speciﬁer %f regardless of whether
the supplied variable is a float or a double, sscanf needs to make the distinction
explicit—you must use %f when you supply the address of a float, and %lf (‘‘long ﬂoat’’)
if you supply the address of a double.
There is one aspect of sscanf about which we can do nothing without making things
very much more complicated: as soon as the required number of conversions is made, the
function will return. This means that a string such as the following will be scanned successfully, using the above code, with no error reported:
"0.0 0.5 this is the first line of a breakpoint file\n"
Therefore, our parsing of the breakpoint ﬁle will not be utterly unforgiving. Any text following the two required numbers will be ignored. It is entirely up to you whether you regard this
as a bug or as a feature.
1.7.8

Skipping Parts of a Loop: The continue Keyword

One facility that sscanf allows us to implement easily is to accept empty lines. Handwritten
text ﬁles can easily contain these at the end (from repeated pressing of Enter), and it will
seem silly to report an error in such cases. In this situation there is no other work to do,
except to read the next line. The keyword continue enables us to do just this:
while(fgets(line,size,fp)){
if(sscanf(line,"%lf%lf",&time,&value) < 0)
continue; /* go read the next line */
/* we got data - do other processing from here*/
}
Of course we don’t want an endless loop—so how is the loop broken? The function
fgets() will return NULL when it has reached the end of the ﬁle, and as far as while (or
any conditional test) is concerned, that counts as a zero value, which will terminate the loop.

143

Programming in C

1.7.9

Putting All the Components Together

Listing 1.7.3 shows a complete implementation of get_breakpoints(), incorporating all
the elements discussed. It presumes a command-line environment, and prints some error
and warning messages. The starting size for the breakpoint array is set internally at 64 (line
4), and the size of the string to hold a line is set at 80 (line 7), which should be ample. The
variable lasttime (line 5) is used to track the time of each new breakpoint (lines 29–34),
and break if there is an error. Much of the code is devoted to testing the various possible
return values from sscanf, to detect essential errors (lines 16–28). Note that sscanf writes
directly into the appropriate element of a private BREAKPOINT. The precedence of the various C operators works in our favor here—simply by preﬁxing the address-of operator to the
array expression
&points[npoints].value
the expression evaluates to the address of the required element of the selected BREAKPOINT.
It is worth analyzing this step by step:
(1) points[npoints] evaluates to a BREAKPOINT object at position npoints in the array.
(2) points[npoints].value evaluates to the value element of that breakpoint.
(3) &points[npoints].value evaluates to the address of that element (type double*).
Finally, the auto-incremented count is tested against size, and if they are equal, realloc is
called to expand the memory (lines 35–47). The code allows for the possibility of the
expanded block having a different address, using a temporary pointer private to the if block
(line 36). If realloc fails, it is essential to set the pointer points to NULL, as this will be
checked by the calling function, and if it is not NULL, the caller will expect to free() it after
processing. Freeing a block of memory twice is an error that in the worst case will cause a
program to crash.
Listing 1.7.3: The Function get_breakpoints()
1 BREAKPOINT* get_breakpoints(FILE* fp, long* psize)
2 {
3
int got;
4
long npoints = 0, size = 64;
5
double lasttime = 0.0;
6
BREAKPOINT* points = NULL;
7
char line[80];
8
9
if(fp==NULL)
10
return NULL;
11 points = (BREAKPOINT*) malloc(sizeof(BREAKPOINT) * size);
12 if(points==NULL)

144

Chapter 1

13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52

return NULL;
while(fgets(line,80,fp)){
got = sscanf(line, "%lf%lf",
&points[npoints].time,&points[npoints].value);
if(got <0)
continue;
/* empty line */
if(got==0){
printf("Line %d has non-numeric data\n",npoints+1);
break;
}
if(got==1){
printf("Incomplete breakpoint found at point %d\n",
npoints+1);
break;
}
if(points[npoints].time < lasttime){
printf("data error at point %d: time not increasing\n",
npoints+1);
break;
}
lasttime = points[npoints].time;
if(++npoints == size){
BREAKPOINT* tmp;
size += NPOINTS;
tmp=(BREAKPOINT*)realloc(points,sizeof(BREAKPOINT) *size);
if(tmp == NULL)
{
/* too bad! */
/* have to release the memory, and return NULL to caller */
npoints = 0;
free(points);
points = NULL;
break;
}
points = tmp;
}
}
if(npoints)
*psize = npoints;
return points;
}

Now we can write a full program to read breakpoints and report the maximum value, using
these two functions, get_breakpoints() and maxpoint(). First, the deﬁnition of BREAK-

145

Programming in C

POINT must be written, followed by the prototypes of the two functions, followed in turn by
the full deﬁnition of those functions, as shown in listings 1.7.1 and 1.7.3. The main program
is responsible for parsing the command line as usual, opening the ﬁle, and after processing,
releasing the array of breakpoints obtained from get_breakpoints(). The main() function is shown in listing 1.7.4, and the full program ﬁle (‘‘breakdur.c’’) is available on the
DVD. No further comment will be made about this program here—you should now be able
to understand how it works just by reading the code.
Listing 1.7.4: The ‘‘breakdur’’ main Function
int main(int argc, char* argv[])
{
long
size;
double
dur;
BREAKPOINT point, *points;
FILE* fp;
printf("breakdur: find duration of breakpoint file\n");
if(argc < 2){
printf("usage: breakdur infile.txt \n");
return 0;
}
fp = fopen(argv[1],"r");
if(fp == NULL){
return 0;
}
size = 0;
points = get_breakpoints(fp, &size);
if(points==NULL){
printf("No breakpoints read.\n");
fclose(fp);
return 1;
}
if(size < 2){
printf("Error: at least two breakpoints required\n");
free(points);
fclose(fp);
return 1;
}
/* we require breakpoints to start from 0 */
if(points[0].time != 0.0){
printf("Error in breakpoint data: first time must be 0.0\n");
free(points);

146

Chapter 1

fclose(fp);
return 1;
}
printf("read %d breakpoints\n", size);
dur = points[size-1].time;
printf("duration: %f seconds\n", dur);
point = maxpoint(points,size);
printf("maximum value: %f at %f secs\n", point.value,point.time);
free(points);
fclose(fp);
return 0;
}
1.7.10

Exercises

Exercise 1.7.1
Listing 1.7.1 can be improved. The local variable point is initialized to the ﬁrst point in the
supplied list. The loop then makes a redundant comparison with that same point. Modify the
code to skip this ﬁrst test. Include tests to validate the input points argument accordingly.
(Hint: the function should not rely on the caller (main) validating supplied arguments.)
Exercise 1.7.2
Defensive programming: The number of points in a list cannot be negative. Change the
breakpoint code to use unsigned long rather than long. Hint: To write an unsigned
long using printf, use the format speciﬁer %lu.
Exercise 1.7.3
Test breakdur by supplying a variety of non-breakpoint ﬁles—a C source ﬁle, even a soundﬁle.
Exercise 1.7.4
Make some functions that apply simple processing to a BREAKPOINT array. These might
include
(a) stretch/shrink times
(b) normalize values relative to some maximum value
(c) shift values up or down
(d) scale values by some arbitrary factor
(e) truncate or extend to a given duration
(f) insert or delete a point.
(g) something of your own devising.
Which tasks can be performed ‘‘in place’’ rather than by creating a new array? What does
this exercise demonstrate about the advantages and disadvantages of arrays?

147

1.8

Programming in C

Generating and Displaying Breakpoints
1.8.1

Introduction

If you have worked through the code and exercises in the previous section, you may already
have discovered that reading breakpoints as columns of numbers is less than ideal, the more
so when evaluating possibly subtle changes. Almost by deﬁnition an envelope (being what a
breakpoint ﬁle typically represents) is a shape. The most intuitive way to inspect such data it
is therefore graphically, as seen in ﬁgure 1.9. Fortunately, tools are available that enable such
data to be displayed with very little work from the user. Such displays are of special importance to audio programmers, who deal as a matter of routine both with breakpoints in
general and amplitude envelopes in particular. We may be able to inspect breakpoint ﬁles
numerically when they consist of only a few lines, but for anything more extended a graphical display is essential. This is even more the case with regard to audio data itself, which we
will study in subsequent chapters.
This section introduces the widely used free package Gnuplot, available for all platforms.
See the software section of the DVD for instructions on installation for your platform (note
that on OS X you also need to install AquaTerm). It can be used to display any data represented as numeric text ﬁles. This may be in the form of a breakpoint ﬁle, or of audio data
presented as text. Advanced uses enable multiple data ﬁles to be plotted on the same display
for comparison purposes, together with a wide range of formatting and annotation facilities.
In this section, however, we will need only the simplest plotting facilities. It extends the
work done in the previous section by looking at the programmatic creation of simple attack
and decay shapes, where the number of data points generated can easily exceed what can be
meaningfully inspected in text form. The creation of such data may be the goal of a whole
programming project. However, it is at least as important to understand graphical display as
part of the development process for a project; for example to verify that some block of data is
being created or processed correctly. Tools such as Gnuplot thus become part of the testing
and debugging techniques employed by all programmers.
1.8.2

The Basic Gnuplot Plot Command

Gnuplot is an interactive text-based program (a form of interpreter). On launching, it presents
an internal command prompt at which various plotting or other commands are typed. Note
the difference between usage on Windows, compared to OS X and other UNIX-based platforms. On Windows, when launched (the Windows version is called ‘‘wgnuplot’’) a selfcontained command window is created, leaving your DOS window free for other work. For
UNIX-like systems such as OS X and Linux, you will want to use two command windows—
one for Gnuplot itself, one for running the programs that generate the data to be plotted. In
typical usage, a program may be run multiple times with different parameters to generate the

148

Chapter 1

data, which can then be plotted by reusing the same command within Gnuplot. The description that follows is based on the use of Terminal in OS X.
The ﬁrst step is to create a breakpoint ﬁle, such as the one shown in table 1.5. Create the
text ﬁle exactly as shown, and call it envelope.txt. Open a Terminal session and change to
the directory in which you have stored the ﬁle (here assumed to be called datafiles).
Launch Gnuplot (without any arguments) by typing its name. Some announcement text is
printed, followed by the Gnuplot prompt:
G N U P L O T
Version 4.0 patchlevel 0
last modified Thu Apr 15 14:44:22 CEST 2004
System: Darwin 8.11.0
Copyright (C) 1986-1993, 1998, 2004
Thomas Williams, Colin Kelley and many others
This is gnuplot version 4.0. Please refer to the documentation for
command syntax changes. The old syntax will be accepted throughout the
4.0 series, but all save files use the new syntax.
Type 'help' to access the on-line reference manual.
The gnuplot FAQ is available from http://www.gnuplot.info/faq/
Send comments and requests for help to
<gnuplotinfo@lists.sourceforge.net>
Send bugs, suggestions and mods to
<gnuplot-bugs@lists.sourceforge.net>
Terminal type set to 'aqua'
gnuplot>
Now type the following command exactly and press Enter:
plot "envelope.txt" with lines
Gnuplot will launch an AquaTerm window and display the data, with a simple annotation
giving the name of the ﬁle (ﬁgure 1.10). Note in particular that Gnuplot automatically scales
and marks the axes of the plot to match the range of the data. Later we will use a small enhancement to this plot command, but for 99 percent of the time the above basic command
is all you will need. You are nevertheless encouraged to study the Gnuplot documentation
(e.g. type ‘‘help plot’’ at the Gnuplot prompt) to see a description of all the plotting commands and options. Gnuplot is widely used to create ﬁgures for technical papers and
books—the various formatting, titling, and annotation commands are well worth getting to
know, as is the facility for outputting to graphic ﬁle formats as an alternative to the screen.
Having displayed envelope.txt for the ﬁrst time, experiment with changing the data and
reissuing the plot command. You can do this manually using a text editor, but if you worked

149

Programming in C

Figure 1.10
An example of Gnuplot output.

exercises 1.7.4 and 1.7.5 you should have at least one program that applies a transformation
and outputs the new data. Explore changes to both the time and value columns, to see how
they are reﬂected in the display. Note that Gnuplot uses a command history facility, so that
to repeat a command you do not have to retype it. Use the up-arrow key to select any previous command, and press Enter. Changes can be made and observed very quickly this way.
1.8.3

Generating Breakpoint Data: The Exponential Decay

The principle of the basic time/value breakpoint ﬁle is that (as we see in the output of Gnuplot) values at intermediate times lie on a straight line between adjacent points. The values
can mean whatever the user chooses. However, where the data represents amplitude (as in
the case of the amplitude envelope) straight lines do not result in a musically natural sound.
A ‘‘natural decay’’ (as heard in a plucked string, or in reverberation) follows a curved amplitude trajectory. Thus, instead of the simple linear decays in envelope.txt between 1.0 and 0.25,
or between 0.1 and 0.0; we need a curved line—speciﬁcally, we need an exponential decay.
Expressed at its simplest, this says that the decay starts quickly, then slowly (almost) levels
off over time, as in this simple series of reducing amplitude values:
1.0, 0.5, 0.25, 0.125, 0.0625, 0.03125, 0.015625, . . . .
We recognize this as a geometric series, with a constant ratio of 0.5—each value is half the
preceding one. Clearly, the numbers become unmanageable very quickly, the more so when

150

Chapter 1

we consider how long we may want a natural decay to last, suggesting both a lot of numbers,
and a lot of very small numbers. The answer, of course, is to use the power of the C language
to generate all these numbers for us, and to verify the correctness of the code by displaying
the output via Gnuplot. It is hardly important to a program these days whether it is processing 10 numbers or 10,000, but it is clearly important to us, if the only alternative is to
attempt to write them manually.
One general formula for an exponential decay is
x ¼ aek/T ,

(2)

where a and k are constants and T represents the time constant—the rate of decay.22 For our
purposes, a always equals 1, for the starting value of the decay envelope. We can implement
this directly in C using the math library function exp(). The great merit of this calculation
is that we need to use exp only once, to obtain the value for the constant ratio (which we
know will be a value less than 1). To generate the decay, we simply multiply the previous
output by the constant ratio the required number of times. This is illustrated in the program
expdecay (listing 1.8.1), which for brevity omits the argument error checking a full program would have to employ.
Listing 1.8.1
/* expdecay.c */
/* implement formula x[t] = a* exp(-k/T) */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <math.h>
int main(int argc, char**argv)
{
int i,nsteps;
double step,x,a,T,k;
double dur;
if(argc != ARG_NARGS){
printf("usage: expdecay dur T steps\n");
return 1;
}
dur = atof(argv[1]);
T = atof(argv[2]);
nsteps = atoi(argv[3]);
k = dur/nsteps; /* the constant time increment */
a = exp(-k/T); /* calc the constant ratio value */
x = 1.0; /* starting value for the decay */

151

Programming in C

step = 0.0;
for(i=0; i < nsteps; i++){
printf("%.4lf\t%.8lf\n",step,x);
x = a * x;
step += k;
}
return 0;
}
One further reason the code is so short is that no attempt is made to write the data to a
ﬁle. We can instead use output redirection at the command line to send the output text to
a ﬁle, for example using the command
expdecay 1 0.5 200 > expdecay.txt
Then plot the data using the Gnuplot plot command, as shown above.
This example demonstrates a particularly compact way to add data output to a program
temporarily, for the purposes of testing and debugging. Such small programs are also commonly written by C programmers to test something such as a mathematical function or process, prior to incorporation in a more complex application.
Even this small program offers useful scope for exploration. This is especially important for
any readers less familiar with the mathematics. Experiment ﬁrst with the value for T (the
time constant). Small values such as 0.5 and lower create a very steep decay, while higher
ones (perhaps above 1.0) create shallow decays. The shallower the decay, the longer it takes
for the values to reach a low level that we might call silent (perhaps down to 0.0001). The
more points that are used, the smoother the displayed curve will be, and the closer the values
will approach 0 without ever reaching that value.
Note that the format speciﬁer for the breakpoint value in the printf statement asks
for eight decimal places. One clear disadvantage of text output is that the precision of the
numbers is determined by that of the output text. Even apparently small values of amplitude
matter in audio. The use of eight decimal places ensures that the behavior of the decay calculation can be observed to a sufﬁciently low level to cover all reasonable audio requirements.
1.8.4

The Exponential Attack and the stdout and stderr Output Streams

The fact that the exponential decay never reaches zero presents the audio programmer with
a problem. Just as the most musical shape for the decay stage of an envelope for a musical
note is the exponential, we ﬁnd that we really want a similar shape for the attack stage of a
note (e.g. the ﬁrst breakpoint pair in envelope.txt). The intuitively obvious solution is simply
to generate the decay envelope in reverse. However, we have to ask ourselves, at what point
can we say the decay envelope has terminated? Naturally for musical purposes it must do so,
but mathematically the decay continues forever. The numbers become ever smaller but, like

152

Chapter 1

Zeno’s hare, never reach their target.23 Furthermore, we have to remember that any number
multiplied by zero remains zero. If we are to retain the loop that creates the data, some small
but non-zero start value has to be provided. While the program above represents in some
sense a ‘‘pure’’ implementation using the exp function directly, it does not necessarily give
us the control we need for practical and general envelope generation. We need ﬁrst to be able
to create both attack and decay curves, and second to be able to create them over a variety of
numerical ranges.
We encountered a very similar problem in section 1.2, where we used the pow function to
calculate the frequencies of MIDI notes. These ideas lead to the solution shown in listing
1.8.2, which can be used to create exponential attack and decay breakpoint data over an
arbitrary range. Mathematically, the functions exp, pow, and log are members of a family
expressing the same underlying concepts in different ways, and the audio programmer will
seek to use whichever combination is best suited to the task at hand.
Listing 1.8.2: General Exponential Attack and Decay
1 /* expbrk.c generate exponential attack or decay breakpoint data */
2
#include <stdio.h>
3
#include <stdlib.h>
4
#include <math.h>
5
6
7
int main(int argc, char** argv)
8
{
9
int i,npoints;
10
double startval,endval;
11
double dur,step,start,end,thisstep;
12
double fac,valrange,offset;
13
const double verysmall = 1.0e-4;/*~-80dB */
14
if(argc != 5){
15
fprintf(stderr,
16
"Usage: expbrk duration npoints startval endval\n");
17
return 1;
18
}
19
dur = atof(argv[1]);
20
if(dur <=0.0){
21
fprintf(stderr,"Error: duration must be positive.\n");
22
return 1;
23
}
24
npoints = atoi(argv[2]);
25
if(npoints <= 0){
26
fprintf(stderr,"Error: npoints must be positive!\n");

153

Programming in C

27
return 1;
28
}
29
step = dur/npoints;
30
31
startval = atof(argv[3]);
32
endval = atof(argv[4]);
33
valrange = endval - startval;
34
if(valrange == 0.0){
35
fprintf(stderr,
36
"warning: start and end values are the same!\n");}
37
/* initialize normalized exponential as attack or decay */
38
if(startval > endval){
39
start = 1.0;
40
end = verysmall;
41
valrange = -valrange;
42
offset = endval;
43
}
44 else{
45
start = verysmall;
46
end = 1.0;
47
offset = startval;
48
}
49
50
thisstep = 0.0;
51 /* make normalized curve, scale output to input values, range */
52
fac = pow(end/start,1.0/npoints);
53
for(i = 0; i < npoints; i++){
54
fprintf(stdout,"%.4lf\t%.8lf\n",thisstep,
55
offset + (start * valrange));
56
start *= fac;
57
thisstep += step;
58
}
59
/* print final value */
60
fprintf(stdout,"%.4lf\t%.8lf\n",
61
thisstep,offset + (start * valrange));
62
63
fprintf(stderr,"done\n");
64
return 0;
65 }
As a somewhat more complete program than expdecay.c, expbrk.c incorporates basic error
checking of input arguments. These necessarily involve printing messages to the user;
additionally, a simple message is printed at the end to conﬁrm the program has run to

154

Chapter 1

completion. However, this does not interfere with the primary task, inherited from
expdecay.c, of printing the breakpoint output in such a way that it can be redirected to a ﬁle
for display by Gnuplot. It achieves this by making use of the fact that C (in conjunction with
the operating system) deﬁnes not one but two standard output text streams, stdout and
stderr. The former is automatically used by the plain printf function, but in this case
both are used via the fprintf function to make the difference explicit. When text output
is redirected, only text written to stdout is redirected to a ﬁle; anything written to the
stderr stream remains directed to the screen. Thus, a program can generate both primary
output and secondary error, or informative, output, and the two can be clearly separated
when that is required.
The very small starting value for the attack curve is deﬁned internally in line 13; this is
nevertheless something to be experimented with. As the comment indicates, this value
affects the steepness of the attack. As before, the program should be tested and explored
using Gnuplot to display the data. Note that the program arguments now include start and
end values—it is possible to create exponential decays descending from 2 to 1, from 4 to 3,
and so on.
1.8.5

Not All Curves Are Exponentials: The log10 Gnuplot Test

It has already been noted that the tail of an exponential decay comprises very small numbers. We discover early on that displaying such numbers graphically, in the context of the
data as a whole, is difﬁcult, as eventually they are too small to be drawn even by a one-pixel
line. A solution is to use a logarithmic vertical scale. A standard scale for amplitude values is
the Decibel, deﬁned by the formula
P(dB) ¼ 20.0 log10 (x).

(3)

This is discussed further in later chapters. Sufﬁce it to say here that this calculation can be
performed within Gnuplot as an extension of the basic plot command, so that there is no
need to add it to the programs themselves. Using this calculation on an exponential decay
(within the range 1 to 0) is especially illuminating. Example:
plot "longdecay.txt" using (20.0 * log10($2)) with lines
Here the notation $2 picks out values in the second column in the ﬁle. An exponential curve
plotted this way appears as a straight line, covering the full range of the data. Other nonexponential curves will typically convert to some form of curve when using the log transformation. The slope of the line correlates directly with the time constant of the exponential.
Audio amplitude values in the range 0 to 1.0 are said to be in the ‘‘normalized range.’’ If
your data includes any zero values,24 the above command has to be extended further by
adding a small constant, since a value of zero is illegal for logs:
plot "longdecay.txt" using (20.0*log10($2+0.00001)) with lines

155

Programming in C

This example gives but a hint of the very extensive support within Gnuplot for mathematical computation—you can apply a wide range of arithmetical modiﬁcations to your
data before displaying it.
1.8.6

Exercises

Exercise 1.8.1
The code archive of the musicdsp mailing list (www.musicdsp.org) includes an example
under the Synthesis category of an exponential decay generator (‘‘Fast Exponential Envelope
Generator’’). Make a program to implement and test this code, using Gnuplot to display the
output.
Exercise 1.8.2
The simplest possible envelope generator for sound synthesis comprises a two-segment
attack-decay shape, where the peak value is user-controllable, as is the duration of each segment. Write a program to generate such an AD envelope as standard breakpoints. Use two
duration arguments and a single-level argument, together with an argument to set the overall number of points. Use Gnuplot to verify correctness.
Exercise 1.8.3
(a) The following program generates either an attack or decay curve using the exp function.
How does the attack curve differ from the example of expdecay.c? Where might such an
attack curve be found?
(b) Modify the code that computes thisval within the for loop, to eliminate duplicate calculations. Here is the original program:
/* expad.c generate exponential attack or decay breakpoint data */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <math.h>
int main(int argc, char** argv)
{
int i,npoints;
double T,k,a;
double ystart,yend;
double dur,thisval,thisstep;
if(argc != 6){
fprintf(stderr,"insufficient arguments.\n");fprintf(stderr,
"Usage: expad duration npoints startval endval T\n");

156

Chapter 1

return 1;
}
dur = atof(argv[1]);
if(dur <=0.0){
fprintf(stderr,"Error: duration must be positive.\n");
return 1;
}
npoints = atoi(argv[2]);
if(npoints <= 0){
fprintf(stderr,"Error: npoints must be positive!\n");
return 1;
}
ystart = atof(argv[3]);
yend = atof(argv[4]);
if(yend == ystart){
fprintf(stderr, "Warning: start and end values are the
same!\n");
}
T = atof(argv[5]);
k = dur/npoints; /* npoints = "sample rate" */
a = exp(-k/T); /* T = time constant */
thisstep = 0.0;
thisval = ystart;
fprintf(stderr,"a = %.6lf\n",a);
/* make normalized curve, scale output to
input values and range */
for(i=0;i < npoints;i++){
printf("%.4lf\t%.8lf\n",thisstep,thisval);
thisval = a * thisval + (1.0-a) * yend;
thisstep += k;
}
/* print final value */
printf("%.4lf\t%.8lf\n",thisstep,thisval);
fprintf(stderr,"done\n");
return 0;
}
Exercise 1.8.4
(a) Revisit the exercises in the previous section, and develop the transformation functions
into programs that output a breakpoint ﬁle to the screen so that it can be displayed by
Gnuplot.

157

Programming in C

(b) Read the documentation for the Gnuplot plot function; then create a single plot that
reads two breakpoint ﬁles, to compare breakpoint data before and after transformation.
Exercise 1.8.5
In the example programs, the precision for the times and values is set at 4 and 8 decimal
places respectively (%.4lf, %.8lf). Is this enough? Test with (a) a large number of points
(e.g. 44,100 per second) and (b) very long steep decays. What is the maximum meaningful
precision for writing doubles in text form using printf?
1.9

Toward the Soundﬁle: From Text to Binary
1.9.1

Introduction

In this section we take a signiﬁcant step on our journey toward the goal of working directly
with sound. So far, our programs have generated output in the form of text, either to the
screen or to a text ﬁle. We have seen how general-purpose tools such as Gnuplot can be
used to present such data graphically. This will continue to be an important activity, but
without some audio data to work with, breakpoint ﬁles remain inert, in some sense meaningless until we can hear their effect. Visualization remains an important tool in the programmer’s armory; this section extends that work to include the generation of audio data
ﬁrst in text form, and secondly in the form of a ‘‘raw’’ binary ﬁle. The soundﬁle editor
Audacity (available on the DVD) is introduced here as a freely available tool that can be
used to display and audition raw binary soundﬁles.
The introduction of the raw binary soundﬁle inevitably raises the subject of how such data
is represented in the computer and on disk. Indeed, it immediately exposes programmers not
only to relatively familiar issues such as sample formats, but also to some very low-level
aspects of number representation in the computer, such as byte ordering. As we delve further
into the programming of audio processes, and into the use of soundﬁles and other data formats, we need to become progressively conversant with these subjects. Readers for whom
this aspect is very new may ﬁnd it useful to study the appendixes in this book on computer
architecture, number representations, and mathematics. While these topics are referenced as
necessary within individual sections, there is much to be said for a concerted independent or
at least parallel study of them. By their nature these topics lie in the background of the business of designing creative audio software. However, as we progress in our knowledge of C
and of computer audio processing, we will ﬁnd that that background becomes increasingly
prominent; indeed it soon becomes indispensable for success as audio and music programmers. With this in mind, the material presented in this section may be taken as a foretaste
of things to come.

158

Chapter 1

Figure 1.11
The sine wave.

1.9.2

The sin Function: Creating a Sine Wave

The sine wave (ﬁgure 1.11) is arguably the most important signal both in audio and in audio
processing. We will learn more about its signiﬁcance in later sections, where we will use it for
(among other things) additive synthesis. Mathematically it describes the motion of a swinging pendulum (a classic example of ‘‘simple harmonic motion’’), and similarly the motion of
vibrating strings. It is a particular form of the more general waveform called a sinusoid, which
deﬁnes the shape of the waveform without consideration of the starting value. By itself it is
an extremely simple vibration and musically relatively uninteresting as a sound—the great
majority of sounds in which musicians are interested are much more complex.
There is one familiar musical tool that is conventionally regarded as producing a sound
almost as ‘‘pure’’ as a sine wave: the tuning fork. In this section we will combine our knowledge of the exponential decay with a sine wave to create a simple software tuning fork. Our
focus is here not so much on the theory or the mathematics of the sine wave but on the creation of a data ﬁle or a sound ﬁle containing a tuning fork tone that we can both display
graphically and listen to. This in turn will lead us ﬁrst to a consideration of the information
we need to associate with such ﬁles in order to represent or audition them as intended, and
second to a consideration of the issues we have to bear in mind concerning the representation of numeric data in the computer and on disk. We will also need to consider, even at this
preliminary stage, what we might want in such a program to make it usable, whether musically or for study and experimentation.

159

Programming in C

Listing 1.9.1 presents the minimal code used to create the plot in ﬁgure 1.11. It is indeed
more minimal that most of the previous code examples in that it uses no command-line
arguments. It uses the method introduced in section 1.8, writing a list of numbers to stdout
that can be redirected to a text ﬁle:
./sinetext >sine.txt
Listing 1.9.1: Generate Single-Cycle Sine Wave
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27

/* sinetext.c */
/* write sinewave as text */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <math.h>
/* conditional compilation - is M_PI defined? */
#ifndef M_PI
#define M_PI (3.141592654)
#endif
int main(int argc, char** argv)
{
int i,nsamps;
double samp;
double twopi = 2.0 * M_PI;
double angleincr;
/* set number of points to create */
nsamps = 50;
/* make one complete cycle */
angleincr = twopi / nsamps;
for(i=0; i < nsamps; i++){
samp = sin(angleincr *i);
fprintf(stdout,"%.8lf\n",samp);
}
fprintf(stderr,"done\n");
return 0;
}

In section 1.7 we encountered the C preprocessor directive #define. In line 7 of listing
1.9.1 we encounter #ifndef, one of the two complementary directives for conditional
compilation used to detect if some symbol has not been deﬁned. The positive form is #ifdef.
Each of the two forms requires a terminating #endif directive (line 9). Any legal C code can
be placed between ifndef and endif—either a simple deﬁnition or extensive blocks of
code. In this case we are looking for M_PI, which is deﬁned in the header ﬁle <math.h> in

160

Chapter 1

all standard UNIX C compilers, including gcc in OS X and Linux. As its name indicates, it
supplies the value of the fundamentally important mathematical number (.This is, however,
not a deﬁnition mandated by ANSI C. And Microsoft compilers do not provide such a deﬁnition, so users of those compilers have to deﬁne it themselves. The term conditional compilation is exact—if the test expressed by the directive fails, the associated code is removed before
the ﬁle is delivered to the compiler itself. Indeed, the #ifdef/#endif combination is a
handy way of excluding a block of code from compilation—or even a whole ﬁle of code
if that is necessary. This might be done to select between alternatives, or (as here) to
modify code differences between compilers or platforms. It is also often used (especially in
C++ programs) to prevent the duplication of code in header ﬁles that may otherwise be
included more than once.
Lines 15 and 20 of listing 1.9.1 represent the mathematics involved. We will learn more
about the mathematics in future sections. At this stage, the essential aspect to bear in mind
is that a single cycle of a sine wave has a length deﬁned mathematically as 2p radians.
Because the C sin function (line 22) takes an argument in radians, the only number we
need is 2p, which we have deﬁned in line 15 as a variable. The output is a double, with
values ranging between 1.0 and þ1.0. We must then sample this cycle over a number of
points to generate the list of numbers to supply to Gnuplot. We met this principle of sampling in section 1.8 when we generated an exponential decay as a breakpoint ﬁle. While
handwritten breakpoint data can deﬁne points at arbitrary times, we also deﬁned a special
form of breakpoint data with equally spaced points. This therefore becomes an example of
sampling. The exponential decay drawn with ten points is not very smooth—it is in effect a
coarsely sampled approximation of the smoothly curved decay shape. When Gnuplot is
given a single column of numbers, it automatically treats then as equally spaced in this
way. In this example the sine wave is generated using a modest 50 points. The calculation
in line 20 deﬁnes the distance (expressed as a small angle increment) between each two
points, here 1/50 of the complete cycle. This angle increment is multiplied by the loop index
to calculate each successive value (line 22).
Although only 50 points were used, the curve in ﬁgure 1.11 looks very smooth. We can see
the underlying sampled nature of the data by using a slightly different plot command in
Gnuplot:
plot "sine.txt" with impulses
or
plot "sine.txt" with steps
The latter illustrates the output of a digital-to-analog converter (DAC) when supplied with a
sampled sine wave—it requires a special ﬁlter to remove the steps and reconstruct the waveform as intended.

161

Programming in C

1.9.3

Toward the Tuning Fork: Frequency Generation and the Keyword enum

To develop sinetext.c into a full tuning-fork simulation, we need ﬁrst to elaborate the arithmetic to incorporate a sample rate. As it stands, with our ﬁxed 50-point sine wave we can
only generate different pitches by deﬁning a different sample rate. At the standard CD
sample rate of 44,100 Hz, our 50-point sine wave will have a frequency of 882 Hz. To obtain
the international tuning standard frequency for ‘‘Concert A’’ (440 Hz), we would have to use
a sample rate of 22,000 Hz. Clearly, this is impractical—we need to scale the number of
points instead.
Listing 1.9.2 expands sinetext.c into a more complete program with arguments. Line 27
employs the revised arithmetic to incorporate both a sample rate and a requested frequency.
This formulation is worth bearing in mind, as it will be used frequently in nearly every program concerned with audio synthesis or processing.
Listing 1.9.2: Expanded Version of sinetext.c with Arguments
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

/* sinetext2.c */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <math.h>
#ifndef M_PI
#define M_PI (3.141592654)
#endif
/* define our program argument list */
enum {ARG_NAME,ARG_NSAMPS,ARG_FREQ,ARG_SR,ARG_NARGS};
int main(int argc, char** argv)
{
int i,nsamps;
double samp,freq,srate;
double twopi = 2.0 * M_PI;
double angleincr;
if(argc != ARG_NARGS){
fprintf(stderr,"Usage: sinetext2 nsamps freq srate\n");
return 1;
}
nsamps
= atoi(argv[ARG_NSAMPS]);
freq
= atof(argv[ARG_FREQ]);
srate
= atof(argv[ARG_SR]);

162

Chapter 1

27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36 }

angleincr = twopi*freq/srate;
for(i=0;i < nsamps; i++){
samp = sin(angleincr*i);
fprintf(stdout,"%.8lf\n",samp);
}
fprintf(stderr,"done.\n");
return 0;

This program introduces a new method for managing program arguments. Hitherto we have
simply used numeric indices into the argv array to pick up arguments. Here we use the C
keyword enum to deﬁne a meaningful name for each value. The great value of enum lies in
its automatic assignment of ascending numbers (simple integers) to the symbol list (enclosed
in braces on line 11), starting with zero. (Remember, argv[0] is always the name of the
compiled program.) We can then use those names to select the required argv entry (lines
24–26). This technique offers two beneﬁts to the programmer. First, it is self-documenting
—a name is always more meaningful than a raw number. This is therefore a simple example
of defensive programming, as it helps to reduce the possibilities for errors. Second, this is a program under development, and it we may add, remove, or reorder program arguments as
development proceeds. In the present case we can arbitrarily reorder the arguments, and use
of the enum list ensures that the correct value is always obtained from a given argv entry.
Note that for the sake of brevity (with the exception of the test associated with the usage
message in line 20) input arguments are not checked for correctness. This is reasonable in a
small intermediate test program such as this; should it be found useful as a general-purpose
program among many others, those error checks will have to be added.
1.9.4

The Utility Program text2sf: Converting Text to a Soundﬁle

The program in sinetext.c can be used as before, directing the output to a text ﬁle for inspection using Gnuplot. However, since the data clearly represents a sound, we want to hear it,
and we want to conﬁrm that we are indeed generating the frequency we requested. In future
sections we will be writing fully practical programs that output standard soundﬁles. However
the principle introduced in the previous section is still relevant—that in testing and debugging code it is convenient to add simple text output of audio data to programs under development, in just this way, using a bare minimum of code. All we need is a tool that enable us
to audition the output as well as inspect it visually.
The utility program text2sf supplied on the DVD (in both executable and source form)
is provided to perform this task. It is written using the small-scale cross-platform soundﬁle
library portsf which is introduced in the next section, and which is fully amenable to editing
and modiﬁcation. As supplied, its command line is

163

Programming in C

Figure 1.12
Interleaving samples in a ﬁle.

text2sf infile outfile srate chans gain
where infile ¼ input text data ﬁle, outfile ¼ output soundﬁle (.wav or .aiff formats),
srate ¼ sample rate of the data, chans ¼ number of interleaved audio channels in infile,
and gain ¼ amplitude factor applied to input data (1.0 ¼ no change)
The outﬁle format is set by the ﬁlename extension—use .wav for a WAVE ﬁle and .aiff (or
.aif) for an AIFF format ﬁle. One argument that may be conspicuous by its absence is a selector for the output soundﬁle sample type. As supplied, this is set internally to create a plain
16-bit soundﬁle; it is left as an exercise for the reader to modify this in the manner of their
choice to offer some or all of the choices offered by the portsf library.
The chans argument indicates that a data ﬁle can contain more than one audio channel.
In a soundﬁle, samples are interleaved, leading to the notion of the multi-channel sample
frame (ﬁgure 1.12). In effect, sample for each frame are delivered to the soundcard in order,
followed by the samples for the next frame, and so on.
Once the output soundﬁle has been created, we can play the it using the player or editor of
our choice, and we can verify that the frequency is as speciﬁed. (You may want to seek out a
real tuning fork for purposes of comparison.) The equivalent for a text ﬁle is very simple:
each line corresponds to a multi-channel frame, so a stereo ﬁle would appear as a text ﬁle
with two columns of data. We can explore this aspect by making a small modiﬁcation to
line 23 of listing 1.9.1:
fprintf(stdout,"%.8lf\t%.8lf\n",samp,samp *samp);
This creates a two-channel data ﬁle in which the second channel is the square of the ﬁrst.25
After re-compiling, run the program to create a ﬁle named stereo.txt.
To display the sound data in Gnuplot requires us to know how to interpret multiple columns in a ﬁle. When presented with a single column, these columns are treated as data for
the y axis, and the lines are counted internally to provide equally spaced values for the x
axis. However, a two-column data ﬁle is interpreted as data for the x and y axes respectively
(in other words, a breakpoint ﬁle), which is not what we want here. To overrule this, we have
to ask Gnuplot to plot both columns on the y axis, specifying each column explicitly:
plot "stereo.txt" using($1) with lines, "stereo.txt" using($2) with
lines

164

Chapter 1

The using directive deﬁnes an expression inside the brackets to be used to create the data.
This could be an arbitrary arithmetic expression, but here the preﬁx $ is used by itself to
select a particular column from the ﬁle (counting from 1). Note that the ﬁlename must be
speciﬁed for each column. It is equally possible to plot data from two or more different ﬁles,
using the same syntax.
1.9.5

Our First Tuning Fork Emulation

From section 1.8 we have two alternative forms of the exponential decay. One might be
called a ‘‘purist’’ solution, insofar as it is close to the textbook deﬁnition of the function.
The second is more pragmatic from the musician’s point of view, addressing the very musical
issue of ensuring that the decay always reaches silence whatever the overall length. We need
to explore both solutions. The procedure is, however, broadly the same in the two cases—we
want to apply the exponential decay to our sine-wave generator. We have developed and
tested each component separately, so all that should be required now is to combine them
into one program.
Listing 1.9.3 shows a solution based on expdecay.c. As beﬁts a slightly more user-oriented
program, it incorporates output to a named text ﬁle. The all-important code that transforms
the basic sine wave into a decaying tone is simplicity itself—a simple multiplication (line
45). The raw argument ‘‘T’’ from expdecay.c is changed into the slightly more expressive
name ‘‘slope’’ (line 22).
Listing 1.9.3: Tuning Fork Program Version 1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

/* tfork.c virtual tuning fork combining sinetext.c and expdecay.c */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <math.h>
#ifndef M_PI
#define M_PI (3.141592654)
#endif
enum {ARG_NAME,ARG_OUTFILE,ARG_DUR,ARG_HZ,
ARG_SR,ARG_SLOPE,ARG_NARGS};

11
12 int main(int argc, char** argv)
13 {
14
int i,sr,nsamps;
15
double samp,dur,freq,srate,k,a,x,slope;
16
double twopi = 2.0 * M_PI;
17
double angleincr;

165

Programming in C

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51 }

double maxsamp = 0.0;
FILE* fp = NULL;
if(argc != ARG_NARGS){
printf("Usage: tfork outfile.txt dur freq srate
slope\n");
return 1;
}
fp = fopen(argv[ARG_OUTFILE],"w");
if(fp==NULL){
fprintf(stderr,"Error creating output file %s\n",
argv[ARG_OUTFILE]);
return 1;
}
dur = atof(argv[ARG_DUR]);
freq = atof(argv[ARG_HZ]);
srate = atof(argv[ARG_SR]);
slope = atof(argv[ARG_SLOPE]);
nsamps = (int)(dur * srate);
angleincr = twopi * freq / srate;
k = dur/nsamps;
a = exp(-k/slope);
x = 1.0;
for(i=0;i < nsamps; i++){
samp = sin(angleincr*i);
/* apply exp decay */
x *= a;
samp *= x;
fprintf(fp,"%.8lf\n",samp);
}
fclose(fp);
printf("done\n");
return 0;

Apart from that, there is essentially nothing new in this program beyond the fact that it
merges two previous programs—except perhaps that, because the functional aspects have
already been developed and tested, we can reasonably expect such a merge to work correctly
ﬁrst time. We cannot really call this a modular program, but in a sense its development has
been modular. We can expect our programs to increase ever more in complexity (certainly
in length), such that it will become more and more important to test sections of such code

166

Chapter 1

in isolation as much as possible, making full use of tools such as Gnuplot and text2sf and
any other such tools that we may discover or develop along the way.
1.9.6

Tuning Fork Program Version 2

Following the same principles, listing 1.9.4 demonstrates a tuning fork emulator based on
expbrk.c. However, this example does feature a couple of changes to enhance the overall
utility of the program, again in the spirit of looking ahead. The ﬁrst of these is the new
command-line argument amp. So far, all the programs have generated exponential decays
starting from the normalized maximum value of 1.0. Any music-oriented program will have
to offer control of amplitude, so this argument is added in case it comes in handy. The exponential decay itself is formally deﬁned always covering the full normalized range, shown
explicitly in lines 38–39, while the amplitude parameter is applied to the output of the
sine-wave generator (line 44).
Listing 1.9.4: Tuning fork v2 with maxsamp report
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

/* tfork2.c alternate tuning fork generator based on expbrk.c
* - decay is always to ~silence regardless of duration. */
#include <stdio.h>
include <stdlib.h>
#include <math.h>
#ifndef M_PI
#define M_PI (3.141592654)
#endif
enum {ARG_NAME,ARG_OUTFILE,ARG_DUR,
ARG_HZ,ARG_SR,ARG_AMP,ARG_NARGS};

12
13 int main(int argc, char** argv)
14 {
15
int i,sr,nsamps;
16
double samp,dur,freq,srate,amp,maxsamp;
17
double start,end,fac,angleincr;
18
double twopi = 2.0 * M_PI;
19
FILE* fp = NULL;
20
21
if(argc != ARG_NARGS){
22
printf("Usage: tfork2 outfile.txt dur freq srate amp\n");
23
return 1;
24
}

167

Programming in C

25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56 }

fp = fopen(argv[ARG_OUTFILE],"w");
if(fp==NULL){
printf("Error creating output file %s\n",
argv[ARG_OUTFILE]);
return 1;
}
dur = atof(argv[ARG_DUR]);
freq = atof(argv[ARG_HZ]);
srate = atof(argv[ARG_SR]);
amp = atof(argv[ARG_AMP]);
nsamps = (int)(dur * srate);
angleincr = twopi*freq/ nsamps;
start = 1.0;
end = 1.0e-4; /* = -80dB */
maxsamp = 0.0;
fac = pow(end/start,1.0/nsamps);
for(i=0;i < nsamps; i++){
samp = amp * sin(angleincr*i);
samp *= start;
start *= fac;
fprintf(fp,"%.8lf\n",samp);
if(fabs(samp) > maxsamp) {
maxsamp = fabs(samp);
}
}
fclose(fp);
printf("done. Maximum sample value = %.8lf\n",maxsamp);
return 0;

The second addition, following the same philosophy, is the tracking of the maximum sample in the ﬁle (lines 40 and 48–49). This is such a useful facility in general that it is incorporated as an automatic facility into the portsf library, introduced in chapter 2—and indeed
optionally into the header of the soundﬁles themselves. In the context of a simple exponential decay it is almost redundant as the maximum sample would be expected to be the
starting value of the exponential; however, we are generating a sine wave (whose values start
from zero), so that the peak value will not be the ﬁrst value in the audio data but at the ﬁrst
peak of the waveform. Later in chapter 2 we will be applying envelopes and all manner of

168

Chapter 1

other transformations to soundﬁles, and the automatic reporting of the peak amplitude will
be of considerable value in generally monitoring results and in identifying any gross errors.
1.9.7

The Raw Binary Soundﬁle

An alternative to writing audio streams as text data is to write them directly in binary form.
The difference in code is minimal, but it offers some signiﬁcant advantages. The most obvious
of these is the size of the generated ﬁle. In the examples presented so far, each sample has
been written as ﬂoating-point numbers with some eight decimal digits of precision. With
the additional leading zero and decimal point, this requires ten bytes of storage per sample,
plus further bytes representing white space and end of line. In contrast, a 32-bit ﬂoatingpoint sample by deﬁnition requires only four bytes of storage, with no further overhead. A
32-bit ﬁle may well be one-third the size of the equivalent text ﬁle, and a 16-bit ﬁle further
reduces that by half while still offering CD-quality precision. It is thus a more tractable format for general storage and distribution, especially where the need is more to display the
data graphically or to audition it than to inspect individual sample values. It is also signiﬁcantly more resistant to casual and error-prone editing than a text ﬁle.
Starting from listing 1.9.4, the changes required to generate a raw binary ﬁle are slight
indeed. The simplest change is to the format speciﬁed for fopen (line 25) to indicate ‘binary’
mode:
fp = fopen(argv[ARG_OUTFILE],"wb");
This change is not strictly necessary on UNIX-based platforms, but it is required by Visual
C++ and some other Windows compilers.
A slightly more involved change must be made to the code that writes the data to disk.
Instead of using fprintf, which by deﬁnition writes formatted text, we must use the function fwrite, which writes arbitrary blocks of memory to disk:
size_t fwrite(const void * ptr,size_t size,size_t count, FILE* fp);
In this declaration, we have the following:
size_t is deﬁned by the compiler as an integer type appropriate to the platform. It can be
assumed to be at least a 32-bit unsigned type, but it may be larger (e.g. 64 bits on a 64-bit
platform).
n
ptr is a pointer to the memory block to be written; being a pointer-to-void the address
can be that of any object, whether a single local variable or a large block of memory.
n
Together, size and count deﬁne the size of the memory block to be written. Typically,
size will refer to the size of any standard or user-deﬁned type such as char or int (i.e.
where its size can be found using the sizeof() operator), while count deﬁnes the number
of such elements to be written. This is also the value returned by the function.
n
fp is the pointer-to-FILE to be written, as created by fopen.
n

169

Programming in C

For example, to write a single 32-bit float to the ﬁle, line 47 has to be modiﬁed to
float fsamp; /* declared at the top of the code block */ . . .
fsamp = (float) samp;
if(fwrite(&fsamp,sizeof(float),1,fp) != 1){
printf("error writing data to disk\n");
return 1;
}
1.9.8

Platform Particulars: The Endianness Issue

Being written in English, the words in this book are read from left to right across the page.
There are other languages, most familiarly Arabic and Hebrew, that are written from right
to left. For reasons too arcane and ancient to discuss here (mainly concerned with very lowlevel implementation of some arithmetic operations), a similar situation exists for the ordering of multi-byte numeric data (such as a 4-byte float) in memory and on disk. Instead of
right and left, we have lower and higher memory addresses. In a big-endian system, the most
signiﬁcant byte (MSB) lies at the lower memory address. This corresponds in general terms to
the left-to-right reading order. The alternative is a little-endian architecture, in which the
MSB lies at the higher memory address.
Figure 1.13 shows how a given 32-bit integer is represented in big-endian and little-endian
architectures. The main thing about the little-endian representation is that, while the ordering of the bytes is reversed, the ordering of individual bits within each byte is not. The consequence of this is that when we write a multi-byte numeric value to a ﬁle, it is written with
the endianness native to the platform. On Intel-based platforms, data will be written in littleendian form; on machines based on the PowerPC as used in older Macintoshes, it will be
written in big-endian form. Applications that offer the facility to read soundﬁles in raw
binary format have to be told when endianness to use in reading the ﬁle. If we want to
read a big-endian ﬁle on a little-endian machine, or vice versa, we must reverse the bytes
of each number. As with text ﬁles, we must inform the receiving application of the sample

Figure 1.13
Big-endian and little-endian storage.

170

Chapter 1

rate and number of channels. For raw binary ﬁles, we also must tell the application what
types and sizes of numbers the ﬁle contains, and the endianness.
1.9.9

A Raw Binary Version of tfork2.c

Listing 1.9.5 shows the revised version of tfork2.c that is to write output as a raw binary
soundﬁle. Only minor changes are required. However, the main loop that generates the
data has been expanded to offer a choice between two sample types: 16-bit shorts and 32bit ﬂoats (lines 76–108). It also uses a small utility function (lines 17–25) to report the platform endianness that I came across many years ago when looking at the code of an audio
analysis tool called SNDAN.26 This origin is acknowledged in the code, which uses a simple
pointer-based technique to detect endianness in order to report that information to the user
as a reminder.
Listing 1.9.5: tforkraw.c
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

/* tforkraw.c gen raw sfile with native endianness */
/* based on tfork2.c */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <math.h>
#ifndef M_PI
#define M_PI (3.141592654)
#endif
enum
{ARG_NAME,ARG_OUTFILE,ARG_DUR,ARG_HZ,ARG_SR,
ARG_AMP,ARG_TYPE,ARG_NARGS
};
enum samptype {RAWSAMP_SHORT,RAWSAMP_FLOAT};
/* thanks to the SNDAN programmers for this */
/* return 0 for big-endian machine, 1 for little-endian machine*/
/* so we can tell user what order the data is */
int byte_order()
{
int one = 1;
char* endptr = (char *)
return (*endptr);
}

171

Programming in C

27 const char* endianness[2] = {"big_endian","little_endian"};
28
29 int main(int argc, char** argv)
30 {
31
unsigned int i,nsamps;
32
unsigned int maxframe = 0;
33
unsigned int samptype, endian, bitreverse;
34
double samp,dur,freq,srate,amp,step;
35
double start,end,fac,maxsamp;
36
double twopi = 2.0 * M_PI;
37
double angleincr;
38
FILE* fp = NULL;
39
float fsamp;
40
short ssamp;
41
42
if(argc != ARG_NARGS){
43
printf("Usage: tforkraw outsfile.raw dur"
44
"freq srate amp isfloat\n");
45
return 1;
46
}
47
48
dur = atof(argv[ARG_DUR]);
49
freq = atof(argv[ARG_HZ]);
50
srate = atof(argv[ARG_SR]);
51
amp = atof(argv[ARG_AMP]);
52
samptype = (unsigned int) atoi(argv[ARG_TYPE]);
53
if(samptype > 1){
54
printf("error: sampletype can be only 0 or 1\n");
55
return 1;
56
}
57
/* create binary file: not all systems require the 'b' */
58
fp = fopen(argv[ARG_OUTFILE],"wb");
59
if(fp==NULL){
60
fprintf(stderr,"Error creating output file %s\n",
61
argv[ARG_OUTFILE]);
62
return 1;
63
}
64
65
nsamps = (int)(dur * srate);
66
angleincr = twopi * freq / nsamps;
67
step = dur / nsamps;
68
/* normalized range always - just scale by amp */
69
start =1.0;

172

Chapter 1

70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113 }

end = 1.0e-4;
maxsamp = 0.0;
fac = pow(end/start,1.0/nsamps);
endian = byte_order();
printf("Writing %d %s samples\n",nsamps,endianness[endian]);
/* run the loop for this samptype */
if(samptype==RAWSAMP_SHORT){
for(i=0;i < nsamps; i++){
samp = amp * sin(angleincr*i);
samp *= start;
start *= fac;
/* use 32767 to avoid overflow problem */
ssamp = (short) (samp * 32767.0);
if(fwrite(&ssamp,sizeof(short),1,fp) != 1){
printf("Error writing data to file\n");
return 1;
}
if(fabs(samp) > maxsamp) {
maxsamp = fabs(samp);
maxframe = i;
}
}
}
else {
for(i=0;i < nsamps; i++){
samp = amp * sin(angleincr*i);
samp *= start;
start *= fac;
fsamp = (float) samp;
if(fwrite(&fsamp,sizeof(float),1,fp) != 1) {
printf("Error writing data to file\n");
return 1;
}
if(fabs(samp) > maxsamp) {
maxsamp = fabs(samp);
maxframe = i;
}
}
}
fclose(fp);
printf("done. Maximum sample value = %.8lf at frame %d\n",
maxsamp,maxframe);
return 0;

173

Programming in C

Lines 81 and 82 demonstrate a simple if not necessarily purist solution to the problem of
generating 16-bit audio. Audio signals are bipolar—in terms of normalized values, samples
range between 1.0 and þ1.0. However, all signed integers present a problem: the maximum
16-bit positive value (32,767) does not exactly match the maximum negative value
(32,768). If we scale our ﬂoating-point values by 32,768, both þ1.0 and 1.0 will translate
to 32,768, which is enough to introduce severe clicking in the output. In tforkraw.c this
danger is avoided by scaling by 32,767 instead. However, by no means do all audio programmers approve of this approach. When a conversion is performed in the opposite direction, receiving 16-bit samples and converting to the normalized range, the natural (and safe)
approach is to divide by 32,768. Only when the same factor is employed in both directions
will the conversion be bit-accurate—an important criterion for many professional audio
users. This remains a subject for debate among programmers (especially those implementing
ﬁle format support). A simple answer is to avoid generating signals close to digital peak in the
ﬁrst place—but Murphy’s Law dictates that when users can do something, they will do it.
1.9.10

Auditioning Raw Soundﬁles: the Audacity Soundﬁle Editor

Audacity is an open-source cross-platform soundﬁle editor that is in wide use throughout the
audio and music community. (Versions for all major platforms can be found on the DVD.)
Among its many facilities is the loading of raw binary soundﬁles. From the File menu select
‘‘Import’’ ( ‘‘Raw Data.’’ After you select a ﬁle, a small dialog window is displayed in which
you can set the required properties of the ﬁle (ﬁgure 1.14).
A wide range of sample type options is supported in the ﬁrst drop-down list. The
Macintosh version has one oddity: by default, the ‘‘Start offset’’ entry box (the byte position
at which conversion should start) is pre-ﬁlled with the value 1. Expect to set this value to
zero for the plain raw soundﬁles considered here. The main purpose of that box is to allow

Figure 1.14
Opening raw soundﬁles in Audacity.

174

Chapter 1

soundﬁles with unrecognized or damaged headers to be opened. This requires knowing how
large that header is, which may require some detective work with a binary ﬁle editor; or some
guesswork. Any header data translated into samples will almost invariably appear as rubbish
audio, easy to see and easy to eliminate on a second attempt. Select sample type, endianness,
and channel count according to your knowledge of the ﬁle, or make a guess. If in any doubt,
when you have opened a ﬁle, set your playback volume to low before playing. Files imported
with the wrong format will almost always be both loud and grossly distorted, though often
audio is recognizable even in this extreme situation.
1.9.11

Exercises

Exercise 1.9.1
Add all necessary error checking to the programs in this section, including testing the return
value from fprintf.
Exercise 1.9.2
A quick revision question: what does const signify for the ﬁrst argument to fwrite?
Exercise 1.9.3
Replace the freq argument in the program of your choice with a MIDI note argument.
Exercise 1.9.4
In the waveform generation code of any of the tuning fork programs, change the call to the
sin function with a call to the cos function. View and audition the output in both text and
binary forms.
Exercise 1.9.5
Modify sinetext.c to write both sin and cos outputs in that order (i.e. per line) to a twochannel text ﬁle. Use Gnuplot to display the data using its default x/y mode (i.e. do not use
a ‘‘using’’ directive). Before doing this, predict what the display will show. What does this
demonstrate about the relationship between the sin and cos functions?
Exercise 1.9.6
Look on the DVD for a raw ﬁle called ‘‘mystery.raw.’’ Use Audacity to display and audition
this ﬁle, by discovering the properties of the ﬁle—sample type, number of channels, byte
order, and sample rate.
Exercise 1.9.7
Modify sinetext.c to output sample values as full-scale 16-bit integers (written as a text ﬁle).
Conﬁrm the change by displaying the data in Gnuplot. Ensure that the data is represented
correctly.

175

Programming in C

Conclusion
The nine sections of this chapter formed a more or less complete course on the C language
with a particular music and audio direction. If you have followed the examples carefully and
completed some of the exercises, you should be able to start doing some proper audio programming, dealing with digital signals and embarking on an interesting journey through
the ﬁeld of musical signal processing. The following chapters will guide you in this exploration, so please proceed to chapter 2, where the focus will start to shift from programming in
general to the speciﬁc goal of manipulating sound.
Notes
1. However, this is not quite the whole story. Programmers use the term ‘variable’ to describe all data
elements deﬁned in a program, whether they are literally variable or not. As we will see in the next section, we can even have a ‘‘constant variable.’’ To the programmer, a variable is anything that can exist
on the left-hand side of an assignment—something that has a symbolic name.
2. Readers will occasionally ﬁnd the integer type name size_t employed in programs. This relatively
esoteric name attempts to avoid the problems of guessing what the ‘‘native’’ integer size is on a particular platform. It is used by some functions in the C standard library and is described in section 1.7.
3. It is illuminating to compare these intervals with those of ‘‘pure’’ or ‘‘Just intonation’’ tuning. For
example, the perfect ﬁfth in mean tone has the ratio 3/2 ¼ 1.5, very slightly wider than in E.T. The
major third has the ratio 5/4 ¼ 1.25; the E.T equivalent is much wider, and really out of tune. These
pure ratios derive directly from the natural harmonic series: the major third is the distance from the
fourth harmonic to the ﬁfth harmonic.
4. According to the C89 standard, used in this book and generally the most commonly implemented.
Later standards have changed this.
5. This may be too arcane, but actually you can declare variables in C code at the start of blocks anywhere in your program. The following is legal C code:
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
int i;
for(i = 0; i < 5; i++){
float x; /* check this out! */
x = i * 2.5;
printf("%f\n", x);
}
}
6. However, this is not the only way to implement a string. In the language Pascal, for instance, the
length of a string is stored as the ﬁrst element, followed by the characters that make up the string. Pascal
was the original programming language for the Macintosh, and Mac developers still need to know about
‘‘Pascal strings.’’

176

Chapter 1

7. In some cases, white space (spaces and tabs) is important to C; in other cases, it is not. A pointer declaration can be made in any of these styles:
char* message;
char *message;
char * message;
char*message;
They all mean the same thing to the compiler. The ﬁrst two forms are about equally popular; the last is
legal but very uncomfortable to the eye, and is not recommended.
8. Regarding the placement of braces in if statements, there are a number of layout styles in common
use. The two most common styles are as follows:
if(a == b)
{
do_something();
}
and
if(a == b) {
do_something();
}
Both of these styles clearly show where the end of the block is in relation to the controlling if expression. The degree of indentation is the same whether or not braces are used. The second style is probably
the most common, not least because is the more economical of space.
9. We will encounter the concept of a container again in DVD chapters 3–5.
10. This runs somewhat counter to the traditional UNIX command-line tool, which is designed to work
as part of a chain or sequence of programs, the output of one becoming the input to another. The system
as a whole is called a pipe, and the format of the data piped from one process to another is almost always
plain text. For this reason, a usage message can only be invoked by using a special command argument
such as -help; otherwise the program simply starts, and it may run forever waiting for text input.
11. Warning: A variant of the above code that programmers can be tempted to use changes the conditional expression to use the!= (‘‘not equal to’’) operator:
while(i != 0){
printf("%d",i);
i = i - 1;
}
This form of test expression can be simpliﬁed further to
while(i){
...
The logic of this is reasonable enough: as the integer variable is reduced by one each time, it must reach
the value 0 eventually, and the test will evaluate to true. However, unlike the ﬁrst example using the >=

177

Programming in C

operator, this loop is vulnerable to a bug. If i is initialized to a negative value (which might be caused by
a typing error), the dependent code will make it more negative each time, and the loop will continue to
iterate with the variable becoming increasingly negative ‘‘forever’’—or, rather, until the number overﬂows the numeric range of the integer type and ‘‘wraps around’’ from negative to positive. If this variable is being used to access an array, a crash is inevitable. The safe use of loops depends on the
programmer being absolutely sure that the loop tests can deal with all eventualities. It can also be argued
that the use of the >= operator is more self-documenting, as it expressly indicates that the variable i
cannot be negative.
12. If the destination variable is declared as float, and the expression uses a constant:
float x = 1.0;
x += 2.1;
The compiler may issue a warning about loss of precision, as the constant is treated as a double, forcing
the whole calculation to be performed at double precision, which has to be converted back into a float.
To avoid this warning, the constant can be declared as a ﬂoat by using the ‘f’ sufﬁx:
x += 2.1f;
13. Programming reminder: In any for loop that reads or writes to an array using an increasing
index, as in the example above, the conditional test is always of the form i < arraysize. This is
because C array indices always counts from zero, so that in an array of 12 elements the highest element
is at index ¼ 11. The conditional test above ensures that at the ﬁnal increment, when i ¼ 12, the test
evaluates to false and control passes to the instruction after the for block. Even after many years of experience, programmers can still get caught by indexing errors that point outside the array, so this
warning is likely to appear several times in this book. As a result, techniques to trap such errors are very
important.
14. Style note: Consistent with other C idioms, braces are not required when the dependent code is a
single statement:
do
printf("%d ",i++);
while(i < 10);
Many programmers prefer to use braces anyway, especially while developing a program—what starts out
as a single statement can very often become several. Others will go in the other direction and reduce the
code to two lines:
do printf("%d ",i++);
while(i < 10);
Both forms make the do loop look rather strange, and the use of braces at all times is strongly recommended.
15. Indirect auto-increment: What would be the meaning of applying ++ to the expression *ptr? This
would be read as ‘‘increment the variable pointed to by ptr,’’ and it is a common procedure. You must
use parentheses to force the compiler to do it the way you want:

178

Chapter 1

double count = 0;
double* ptr = &count;
(*ptr)++; /* count now = 1.0, ptr still points to it */
Using ++ this way, on a ﬂoating-point variable, is legal, and has the expected result. You may occasionally see this in code, but it is rare, and is not recommended, as it is not really idiomatic for ﬂoating-point
variables (there are no corresponding machine instructions to exploit). The increment/decrement operators are best used with integral variables, such as counters, as illustrated by all the other examples in this
section.
16. File streams: The use of a computer screen display is taken so much for granted these days that it is
easy to forget that there was a time before such devices were available. Output devices on early computing systems included such things as punched cards and tape, and the classic ‘‘teletype’’ printer/typewriter. What these devices had in common was that they received (or sent) a stream of data, one
character at a time. Thus the screen, the keyboard, and a disk ﬁle are all examples of a ‘‘stream device.’’
In C, three standard input/output (‘‘i/o’’) streams are deﬁned:
stdout /* primary output stream */
stderr /* stream to receive error messages */
stdin /* stream from which input is received e.g. teletype keyboard */
A data ﬁle on disk is merely a further instance of a stream device. The difference between printf and
fprintf is that printf outputs only to stdout, whereas the more general fprintf can write to any
named stream. It is often used, for example, to write to stderr:
fprintf(stderr,"there was an error\n");
Note that printf and fprintf can be used with the same set of formatting options.
In UNIX-based systems, stdin and stdout have a further stream-related signiﬁcance, in that the
stdout stream from one program can be piped to the stdin of another. Many of the arcane programs
found in classic UNIX systems (including Gnu/Linux and OS X) are designed with this piping technique
in mind—by default they read from stdin and write to stdout, and only to/from a disk ﬁle if expressly
commanded to do so by means of the UNIX redirection command >. This example uses the UNIX command ls to redirect a detailed directory listing to a text ﬁle: ls -l >directory.txt. The UNIX pipe
symbol | connects the output of one process to the input of another: ls | grep sine > sinefiles.txt.
This writes the names of all ﬁles containing ‘‘sine’’ to the ﬁle sineﬁles.txt.
17. What would it mean to add two breakpoints together? Think about it. It seems obvious enough to
add the value elements, but what about the times? The compiler has no idea what the variables signify. A
struct can contain any deﬁned C type, including pointers. In many, perhaps most cases, even a human
programmer would ﬁnd it impossible to deﬁne a meaningful arithmetic operation on a struct, so it is
hardly surprising that the compiler cannot do it.
18. We just need a name somewhere. We can name the struct:
struct
int
int
};

mystruct {
var1;
var2;
/* we can now declare a variable of type struct mysruct */

179

Programming in C

or we can declare a variable using an ‘‘anonymous struct’’:
struct{
int var1;
int var2;
} mystructvar;/* mystructvar is a variable: */
mystructvar.var1 = 440;
or we can use typedef as shown in the text.
19. Note the use of an outer pair of brackets in the deﬁnition of NULL. This is done to avoid any misinterpretations that might arise through C precedence rules. Here is a simple example of the need for
such brackets:
#define SQUARE(n) n * n
This is a small macro deﬁnition, replacing any instance of the text represented by the symbol n (which is
not a variable but a placeholder for whatever text the programmer supplies) with the given substitute
text. The idea is that to square a number of any type, the one macro can be used:
int w, x = 5;
double y,z = 10.0;
w = SQUARE(x);
y = SQUARE(z);
These initializations of x and z will result in the expected values: 25 in w and 100.0 in y. Upper-case
letters for the macro symbol are used here to show, by convention, that this is a macro and not a function call. But suppose the innocent programmer uses an expression instead of a single variable:
w = SQUARE(x+1);
After text substitution (‘‘macro expansion’’) by the preprocessor, the expression will become
w = x + 1 * x + 1;
Since the C precedence rules require that the multiplication be performed ﬁrst, the result will be not 36
but 11. By enclosing both the target of the macro in brackets, and the placeholder symbol each time it is
used,
#define SQUARE(n) ((n) * (n))
the problem is avoided. The macro will now expand to
w = ((x+1) * (x+1));
which will give 36, as required. Note that the presence of many levels of brackets is a burden only to the
compiler—it will not result in any extra machine code. So if in any doubt, use brackets freely.
20. In line 9, the library function exit() is used, rather than return. As its name suggests, exit()
immediately quits the program, releasing all resources (memory, open ﬁles) in the process. The argument
value given to exit is the same as the value that would be used with a call to return. You will see that
exit is very commonly used in command-line programs, especially in response to allocation failures. The
advantage to the programmer is obvious (no cleanup code has to be written), but if this function were to
be incorporated into a GUI-based application (where an internal process may be run and rerun many

180

Chapter 1

times) calls to exit() must be eschewed in favor of a more controlled recovery to a higher level of the
application, with a warning message presented to the user. This does demand much more planning by
the programmer, as it may be that the allocation failure occurs low down in some function, and the error
return has to be rippled back through many parent functions before it can be presented to the user. For
the same reason, calls to functions such as printf or puts may need to be removed or changed, as they do
not generally have a place in a GUI application. In a VST plug-in, for example, if the plug-in initialization function cannot obtain memory, or has any other problem, it has to return an error value, and the
host application will notify the user accordingly.
21. Can malloc() fail these days? The problem is that it is increasingly rare for memory requests to fail,
unless for a truly huge amount. Even here, the machine will try to use virtual memory using space on a
hard disk, and it is more likely that the operating system itself will start to warn that virtual memory is
low, before rejecting a memory request. Thus code written to deal with allocation failures may never get
executed, and therefore may never get tested. Tools do exist (sometimes supplied by compiler vendors)
that deliberately ‘‘stress’’ memory, to enable such code to be tested. A comparatively simple solution, if
hardly rigorous, is to create a ‘‘wrapper function’’ for functions such as malloc, in which you can add
code to deliberately reject a request, say if it exceeds some arbitrary limit:
void* stress_malloc(size_t size)
{
size_t limit = 1024 * 1024 * 2; /* limit to 2MB */
if(size < limit)
return malloc(size);
else
return NULL;
}
You can then use #define to make all calls to malloc become calls to your wrapper function:
#define stress_malloc malloc
Note that this memory is all ‘‘virtual memory.’’ Many operating systems have special function calls that
request memory that must be in hardware RAM. Audio programmers often rely on this to create buffers
used to record or play back audio. These requests are much more likely to fail, and it is especially important to ensure that code to deal with such allocation failures is fully tested.
22. There is also the highly important number e, the base of the natural logarithms, one of several
numbers named and studied by the great 18th-century mathematician Leonhard Euler—who among a
multitude of mathematical accomplishments wrote a substantial treatise on harmony. The value of e is
approximately 2.718, but like its close companion p it is a transcendental number with no ﬁnite numerical representation. One unique property of e is that it is its own derivative. That is, if you measure the
slope of the curve at each point, the result is another exponential curve. The genius of Euler is something
to be celebrated by both musicians and mathematicians.
23. Until of course they fall below the smallest number that the hardware can represent. For doubles this
is a very small number indeed, but even this will be reached eventually, such numbers become ‘‘denormalized,’’ and this can create problems, especially on Intel-based machines (where it is know as ‘‘the
denormal problem’’), which work inconveniently hard to maintain precision, resulting in processing
suddenly slowing to a crawl.

181

Programming in C

24. This can happen if the precision with which values are written to a text ﬁle is too low; small values
will be misleadingly written as zero.
25. We are relying on the very useful fact that the square of a number between 0 and 1.0 is a smaller
number within that range; and we remember also that the square of a negative number is a positive
number. Readers are invited to predict what the square of a sine wave will look like, and then to conﬁrm
that prediction with Gnuplot.
26. It is nevertheless a widely documented and employed ‘‘hacker’’ technique, so it has probably been
reinvented multiple times.

Audio Programming Basics

2

Audio Programming in C

Richard Dobson

In the previous chapter we learned how to play and display ‘‘raw’’ binary soundﬁles using
Audacity. In order to play such a soundﬁle, we needed to tell the program, not only the sample rate, sample type and channel count; but also the endianness of the samples themselves.
The purpose of a dedicated soundﬁle format such as WAVE and AIFF is to encapsulate this
information in a header section preﬁxed to the audio data itself, which an application can
read to determine the format of the ﬁle. Such a ﬁle format can thus be described as ‘‘selfdescribing.’’ Writing code to read and write such soundﬁles is a complicated job, not least
because of the many alternative formats a soundﬁle can have. There is a clear trade-off for
the audio programmer. It is easy to write a raw soundﬁle, as we have seen, but such ﬁles are
only portable with the greatest difﬁculty, and more cumbersome to play. The possibility of
forgetting what format a given ﬁle has is very great. Conversely, writing the code to write
(and more particularly, to read) a self-describing ﬁle format is a non-trivial task, especially
where that format is very complex with many variations and options.1
Fortunately, several C libraries have been created that deal with all the arcane details of
writing modern soundﬁle formats, so that reading and writing such ﬁles need be no more
difﬁcult than reading or writing a text ﬁle. The formats deﬁne all the above information,
and often much more, including optional information that while not essential to play a
ﬁle, is nevertheless useful.
This chapter demonstrates how to generate simple waveforms, such as a triangle wave and
a sine wave, and write them to a soundﬁle, and also how to modify or combine sounds. In
the process we are introduced to further elements of the C language, and to further techniques of code design. As you may suspect, these programs will be longer, and more complex
than before, as many more tasks are being performed. This complexity includes the use of
multiple source ﬁles, and the use of external libraries that need to be linked to our program.
This is, however, such a common task that many tools have been developed over the years to
streamline the process as much as possible. One such tool is the makeﬁle, a text ﬁle that
deﬁnes all the elements and actions needed to build a program, together with any dependencies such as external libraries.

186

Chapter 2

Behind the details of new C keywords, the arithmetic of sine waves, and the deﬁnition of
new functions lie deeper and increasingly important issues of robustness, ﬂexibility, extensibility, and, embracing all these, comprehensibility. As our programs develop in sophistication, so will our ambitions as programmers rise, and it becomes more and more likely that
in writing any one program we will anticipate many further possibilities.
In particular, just as the programs in this section make use of a pre-written code library,
you will yourself be writing many functions that are likely to be required for many different
projects, and which could therefore also form components of your own library. So in reading
the following sections, consider not only the immediate task at hand, but also how general a
block of code or a function is, and whether you might ﬁnd uses for it in other projects.
This chapter therefore assumes and expects that you will now be contemplating, at least,
writing your own programs, above and beyond the examples given here. You will be creating
building blocks of code; and it almost goes without saying that building blocks can be used
to make many very different ediﬁces. The challenge is in designing those blocks for maximum re-usability, while ensuring that they are also as easy to use as possible. It remains one
of the most interesting and intriguing exercises for the programmer, to anticipate the future
use of something. Often, new ideas demand that a function be rewritten a posteriori. Yet in
writing a program the programmer’s ﬁrst thought is understandably, to ‘‘get it working,’’
and worry about other possibilities later. As a result, it can often happen that a program is
written twice. The ﬁrst is a ‘‘proof of concept’’ version that works; the second version learns
from the ﬁrst and implements enhancements, alternative approaches to design, increases
modularity and robustness, and identiﬁes blocks of code worth generalizing into a library
for use elsewhere. Once this is done, the program may even be rewritten a third time. This
is normal.
2.1

A Simple Soundﬁle Library: portsf
2.1.1

The Portsf Header Files—Public and Private Files

The portsf soundﬁle library, developed especially for this book, was designed to be as simple
as possible to use. It is not intended in any way to be an alternative to ‘‘industrial-strength’’
libraries such as libsndﬁle. It comprises only two source ﬁles, each with an associated header
ﬁle:
ieee80.c
ieee80.h
portsf.c
portsf.h
This relatively small size reﬂects the fact that only the two most common soundﬁle formats
are supported, AIFF and WAVE, though this includes 24-bit and 32-bit formats (both integer

187

Audio Programming in C

and ﬂoat), and multi-channel ﬁles, including the new WAVE_FORMAT_EXTENSIBLE format
introduced by Microsoft to support surround sound and high-precision audio (e.g. 24-bit and
beyond). Libraries such as libsndﬁle (demonstrated elsewhere in this book) support a very
wide range of formats (including compressed formats such as ADPCM), and are highly efﬁcient, but are also very much larger, using a large number of source ﬁles, with code that is
very much less accessible to beginning programmers.
The two ﬁles ieee80.c and ieee80.h are very small (the header ﬁle especially so), and are
made distinct as a courtesy to the author, Bill Gardner of MIT and Wave Arts (you can read
the details in the header ﬁle). Both are ‘‘private’’ ﬁles required by portsf.c (speciﬁcally, to deal
with the sample-rate ﬁeld in AIFF headers). There is no technical reason why these ﬁles could
not be concatenated into one; you might like to try this as an exercise. However, in the form
shown, they conveniently illustrate an important distinction between private and public
header ﬁles.
To use the library, the only header ﬁle the user needs to #include is portsf.h—this deﬁnes
all the structures and functions in the library. We will be making frequent reference to this
ﬁle in the following sections. As this is a public header ﬁle, we will use the angle brackets
with #include:
#include <portsf.h>
This header ﬁle deﬁnes all we need to know about the portsf library—various custom types
and structures, and the specialized functions for handling soundﬁles. The main implementation ﬁle portsf.c on the other hand is large and complex, making use of several C language
idioms not so far presented. It will nevertheless repay study. You will for example notice immediately the use of conditional compilation (as introduced in the previous chapter) using
#ifdef and #ifndef. With long headers such as this, any technique that can be used to
avoid duplication of effort is very welcome. In this case, the conditional compilation is used
to detect if portsf.h has already been included by another source ﬁle. If so, the whole body of
the ﬁle is skipped. As it happens, this also enables the ﬁle to be read by Cþþ programs, Cþþ
being especially disapproving of duplicated type deﬁnitions. If at this stage you are alarmed
by portsf.c and feel you do not understand it, the answer is that it doesn’t matter (much).
Often, code for a general-purpose library is very complex, not least because it seeks to be
general-purpose; but all we need to know about are the various deﬁnitions and declarations
in the header ﬁle.
Unlike portsf.h, the header ﬁle ieee80.h is, conversely, a private ﬁle used internally by the
two C ﬁles, and if you inspect these, you will notice that the other form of the #include
directive is used there:
#include "ieee80.h"
This, you will recall from chapter 1, asks the compiler to search ﬁrst in the directory that
contains the current source ﬁle (i.e. the ﬁle containing the #include directive).

188

Chapter 2

When portsf is created as a true library module, the ﬁles ieee80.h and ieee80.c, together with
portsf.c, will in effect disappear; the main header ﬁle portsf.h will be your only means of access
to the library. Thus the ieee80-related functions are private to the library, not accessible to
the programmer, and in some future implementation may be redeﬁned, or maybe even eliminated completely. This is a form of code encapsulation. If the user depended directly on the
existence and exact form of these functions they could not be removed or modiﬁed without
breaking user projects. In the following sections you will discover further mechanisms in C
for supporting such encapsulation (you may also encounter the expression ‘‘data hiding’’ in
this context); the language Cþþ develops this much further into a core principle of software
design.
2.1.2

The Makeﬁle

For the ﬁrst time, we require a special (non-system) header ﬁle stored not in our project
directory but elsewhere. As a result we will need to tell the compiler where to ﬁnd it, by adding the directory containing required header ﬁles (their path) to the list to be searched by the
compiler. The procedure for doing this is compiler-speciﬁc, but whichever one you use will
give you an option to set this ‘‘search path’’ for header ﬁles. The recommended approach in
this book is to use the UNIX-style development system based on the use of a ‘‘makeﬁle.’’ This
includes Linux, OS X and the MinGW environment on Windows. On the DVD, a makeﬁle is
provided for all example programs in each chapter.
A makeﬁle deﬁnes all the stages of compiling a program—or indeed of several programs; It
is read by a special command-line program called make, standard on all UNIX-based systems
(including OS X). You will ﬁnd that a single makeﬁle supports building all the programs in a
chapter. Typing make will automatically build all of them (building portsf as well if necessary). For projects involving a number of source ﬁles, external libraries, and other special
build options (such as whether to make a ‘‘debug build,’’ or a ‘‘release build’’ optimized for
speed), such a makeﬁle is essential. The proprietary project ﬁles used by compilers such as
Visual Studio or Xcode are themselves in essence makeﬁles, albeit typically somewhat
extended and verbose. One important task handled by make, in conjunction with the makeﬁle, is tracking whether source ﬁles need to be rebuilt or not—i.e. by noting the creation date
of object ﬁles and other dependencies. If a project comprises dozens (or hundreds) of source
ﬁles, this speeds up development considerably by avoiding unnecessary recompilation.2
The supplied makeﬁles are written speciﬁcally for the directory structure as found on the
DVD—the paths are relative to the examples directory, for example using the ‘‘../’’ notation
to indicate the parent directory. Later on, you may feel conﬁdent enough to create your own
project directory structure, and create or modify makeﬁles accordingly. You will use make in
conjunction with your makeﬁle to ensure that common ﬁles and libraries exist in only one
place, but can be used in any project by setting their paths in the makeﬁle. You will see that
all the makeﬁles have much in common, with ﬁle and program names being the main differ-

189

Audio Programming in C

ences. Eventually you will become conﬁdent enough to write your own makeﬁle, by modifying one of these examples.
Despite the observations above, try to resist the temptation to copy all of the examples
from the DVD together, or to build all the programs at once. A key element of learning to
program lies in physically writing code—creating new ﬁles, maybe new directories, even
modifying a makeﬁle to support a new program. In some cases, the text presents a preliminary version of a program that is not provided as such on the DVD. It is especially important
to follow the detailed step-by-step descriptions of the process, adding and changing code as
you go. It is only through this direct hands-on experience that you will gain the conﬁdence
to work independently on your own projects.
2.1.3

Soundﬁle Formats—enum and typedef

We have already encountered the enum keyword for deﬁning a list of symbols, associating
them in order with ascending integer values. This offers a convenient alternative to a possibly long list of individual deﬁnitions using the preprocessor directive #define. It is also
possible to apply the typedef keyword to the enum statement, so that, in principle, each
symbol in the enum list is no longer the default int, but has the new custom type. This
results in a more expressive form of self-documentation than if, for example, a plain int
were to be used, or a list of #defines. The new type can then be employed both for function arguments and return values. For example, portsf.h deﬁnes an enum type for a number of
soundﬁle channel properties:
typedef enum { STDWAVE, MC_STD, MC_MONO, MC_STEREO, MC_QUAD,
MC_LCRS, MC_BFMT, MC_DOLBY_5_1, MC_WAVE_EX }
psf_channelformat;
This deﬁnes the possible speaker formats supported by portsf. It includes support for the most
common WAVEFORMATEXTENSIBLE speaker position deﬁnitions (meaningful only for the
WAVE format). The symbol STD_WAVE serves as a ‘‘default’’ value, representing any ‘‘standard’’ soundﬁle with no special speaker positions—any soundﬁle format can be represented
this way. Additionally, the symbol MC_WAVE_EX acts as a category for any other speaker-feed
combinations not otherwise supported explicitly.
Similarly, portsf.h deﬁnes enum types for the available ﬁle formats and the all-important
sample type:
typedef enum {
PSF_FMT_UNKNOWN = 0,
PSF_STDWAVE,
PSF_WAVE_EX,
PSF_AIFF,
PSF_AIFC
} psf_format;

190

Chapter 2

typedef enum {
PSF_SAMP_UNKNOWN = 0,
PSF_SAMP_8,
/* not yet supported! */
PSF_SAMP_16,
PSF_SAMP_24,
PSF_SAMP_32,
PSF_SAMP_IEEE_FLOAT
} psf_stype;
The signiﬁcance of distinguishing PSF_STDWAVE and PSF_WAVE_EX in psf_format is
that ﬁles in these formats have the same ﬁle extension, .wav, so it is not sufﬁcient to deduce
the ﬁle format solely from the ﬁle name. Similarly, it is not uncommon for a ﬁle with the
extension .aif or .aiff to be in the newer AIFF-C format, despite the fact that Apple advocate
a distinct extension—.afc or .aifc.
These custom types are then used in the main structure deﬁned in portsf.h to contain the
essential properties of a soundﬁle, again using typedef:
typedef struct psf_props
{
long
long
psf_stype
psf_format
psf_channelformat
} PSF_PROPS;

srate;
chans;
samptype;
format;
chformat;

This custom type is used variously as argument and return value in a number of functions in
portsf. When a soundﬁle is opened for reading, a PSF_PROPS structure is automatically ﬁlled
in; when a ﬁle is written, the programmer must likewise ensure that all ﬁelds contain valid
values. Taken together, the custom types and the portsf functions deﬁne an application programming interface (API). An API is intended to hide all the low-level implementation details
(e.g. byte-swapping), while providing sufﬁcient ﬂexibility and power to support a range of
projects. We will see how all the elements of the portsf API work together in the following
sections, which begin with a demonstration program using the library to convert a soundﬁle
from one format to another. For more details, see appendix C.
There is a limit to the amount of documentation a developer can supply with a library—
some degree of prior knowledge has to be assumed. In the case of portsf, it is assumed the
user is familiar with the use of soundﬁles, and with the use of WAVE and AIFF soundﬁles in
particular. The structure PSF_PROPS introduced in the previous section collects this essential
knowledge into one object; the fact that it contains only ﬁve elements demonstrates that
one need not know very much about a soundﬁle in order to be able to use it. This knowledge
can be summarized as follows:

191

Audio Programming in C

Figure 2.1
Interleaved sample frames.

A soundﬁle contains audio data at a particular sample rate (number of samples per second).
Most audio systems support a range of standard sample rates—22,050, 44,100, 48,000,
96,000 and even 192,000 hertz for DVD audio. We can store this parameter in

n

PSF_PROPS structure element: srate
A soundﬁle can contain several channels of audio—one for mono, two for stereo, six for
Dolby 5.1, and so on. In a multi-channel ﬁle, the sample rate deﬁnes the frame rate, where
one frame contains one sample for each channel. As a soundﬁle represents audio that has
either been recorded through, or is intended to be played back through, a soundcard, these
samples are necessarily interleaved, see ﬁgure 1.12 in chapter 1. An alternative view of interleaved samples is shown in ﬁgure 2.1. This is represented by the following structure element:

n

PSF_PROPS element: chans
A soundﬁle can contain audio samples in a range of data formats. By far the most common
format is 16-bit, represented by the C short data type. Other formats in widespread use
include 24-bit ‘‘packed’’ (stored in three bytes), and 32-bit ﬂoats, represented by the C float

n

192

Chapter 2

data type. Less common, but possible, is the 32-bit integer format, represented (at least in a
32-bit platform) by the C long (and, usually, int) data type. Other formats are possible: the
older 8-bit sample type is still in use here and there, but is not currently supported in portsf,
though provision has been made for its support at some future date. A 64-bit ﬂoating-point
sample is possible in both the AIFF and WAVE formats, but this is currently not supported by
portsf. A more exotic sample format is supported by the WAVEFORMATEXTENSIBLE ﬁle format. This distinguishes between the actual sample size and the ‘‘container size.’’ A typical
example of this would be a 24-bit ‘‘unpacked’’ format in which the three bytes of the sample
are contained in a 32-bit word. Such formats (which will be very rare in a soundﬁle) are not
currently supported in portsf, which records only the overall container size. Note the ﬁrst
symbol PSF_SAMP_UNKNOWN, which is used to indicate that a soundﬁle has some unrecognized sample type.
PSF_PROPS element: samptype
A soundﬁle can be written in a number of ﬁle formats. One reason for this variety is the
different storage formats on different platforms (see note 1). The WAVE and AIFF formats
are the most familiar, but there are many others, only two of which are currently supported
by portsf. The new WAVEFORMATEXTENSIBLE format from Microsoft has already been
mentioned—this is intended to replace WAVE, and includes support for multi-channel audio
with deﬁned speaker positions, and support for high-resolution sample formats including
the concept of a container size, as described above. It also supports user-deﬁned custom formats (new versions of WAVE had to be registered with Microsoft; the new format enables
anyone to deﬁne a new custom format without this requirement). You can ﬁnd full technical
documentation on this format at http://www.microsoft.com/hwdev/tech/audio/multichaud
.asp. Additionally, the new AIFF-C format is supported. This was originally designed by
Apple to support a range of compressed sample types, but a recent extension added support
for a 32-bit ﬂoating-point format, which the original AIFF format could not support. The
portsf library does not support compressed audio types in any of the ﬁle formats. Again, it
is possible that a user may seek to open or create a ﬁle in an unsupported format; accordingly, this is provided for in the custom format entry PSF_FMT_UNKNOWN.
n
A soundﬁle can contain audio channels associated with speciﬁc speaker positions. This
property is relatively new, but has greatly increased in importance thanks to the popularity
of surround sound. With a stereo signal, it is established largely by convention that channel
1 is front left, and channel 2 is front right. Beyond that, speaker positions were undeﬁned
inthe standard WAVE format, and it was primarily for this reason that the WAVEFORMATEXTENSIBLE format was introduced by Microsoft. Apple had, in the initial speciﬁcation for
the AIFF format, proposed standard speaker positions for several surround formats, but in so
doing highlighted the difﬁculties in doing so. Two four-channel conﬁgurations were deﬁned,
for quad surround and LCRS Surround, but there was no means of indicating which of these
was contained in a given soundﬁle—a four-channel AIFF ﬁle is therefore ambiguous, accordn

193

Audio Programming in C

ing to its own speciﬁcation. At the time of writing, the only soundﬁle formats unambiguously supporting deﬁned speaker positions are WAVEFORMATEXTENSIBLE, and the new CAF
ﬁle format introduced by Apple (not supported by portsf, but supported by libsndﬁle). The
portsf library supports only the primary subset of many possible channel conﬁgurations, as
deﬁned for psf_chformat. One symbol in that list, MC_BFMT, requires further explanation.
This refers to a custom version of WAVEFORMATEXTENSIBLE designed to hold an Ambisonic
B-Format signal. This is an advanced form of surround encoding, representing the specially
processed outputs of three coincident ﬁgure-eight microphones (oriented to the three spatial
axes), which together can record a complete spherical ‘‘soundﬁeld’’—this includes information about the height of a sound, as well as its distance and position in the horizontal plane.
This format therefore contrasts with the other channel formats in that the channels represent not speaker feeds, but a compact encoding of a full three-dimensional soundﬁeld, which
has to be decoded before being passed to loudspeakers. It is possible to decode to speaker layouts containing a large number of speakers; a minimum of four speakers would be required
to decode the signals for horizontal surround sound, and a minimum of eight speakers in a
cube layout, to decode with height.
PSF_PROPS element: chformat
This it is currently only relevant when the ﬁle format is PSF_WAVE_EX; it is ignored for all
other formats (STDWAVE is assumed).
Finally, one important property of all the ﬁle formats supported by portsf is that the ﬁle
header (which stores the properties of the ﬁle such as sample rate, sample type and number
of channels) can also contain further optional information contained in special ‘‘chunks’’—
collectively, the AIFF and WAVE formats store all information in distinct chunks, each of
which has a unique name (both ‘‘WAVE’’ and ‘‘AIFF’’ are examples of chunk names). We
will see in the next section how portsf includes support for one very useful optional chunk.
2.1.4

Initializing the portsf Library

Somewhat unusually for a soundﬁle library (and unlike any of the ﬁle i/o functions in the C
standard library), portsf includes an initialization function, to be called before any other
functions in the library are called:
int psf_init(void);
Currently this function does very little, but it is expected that future versions of the library
will be more dependent on it. Portsf maintains an internal block of information on all active
soundﬁles, up to an internal ﬁxed limit, currently set at 64. The function psf_init ensures
that this block is in a clean state at startup. There is a corresponding function that should be
called at the end of a program, as part of ﬁnal ‘‘cleaning up’’:
int psf_finish(void);

194

Chapter 2

This closes any soundﬁles that have been left open and returns the library to the same clean
state. In command-line programs, such things do not matter (as the operating system will
close any open ﬁles anyway when the program terminates); but in GUI-based programs that
can in effect restart multiple times (they are ‘‘re-entrant’’), these functions will ensure that the
library is always in a stable state.
Both functions return the value 0 to indicate success. Currently, psf_init() cannot in
fact fail, so no harm is done in ignoring the return value. The function psf_finish() will
return a non-zero value if there is an error closing a ﬁle. In future versions of the library, both
these functions may increase in importance.
2.1.5

Basic Soundﬁle Handling in portsf—the switch. . .case Keywords

A soundﬁle API of any usefulness must support the basic tasks associated with all ﬁle handling—opening and creating ﬁles, reading and writing data, and closing them again. Error
reporting is also essential—for example, in the case that a user tries to open a ﬁle that doesn’t
exist, or tries to write to a ﬁle that is not open, and also in the case of a system error such as a
disk failure. The API may also offer other useful secondary facilities.
Opening a Soundﬁle for Reading
The function to open an existing soundﬁle is shown in portsf.h as
int psf_sndOpen(const char *path, PSF_PROPS *props, int rescale);
The comments in the header ﬁle indicate how this function is to be used:
/* open existing soundfile. Receive format info in props.
Supports auto rescale from PEAK data, with floats files.
Only RDONLY access supported.
Return sf descriptor >= 0, or some PSF_E_+ on error.
*/
Though somewhat terse, these comments provide quite a lot of information:
(1) ‘‘open existing soundfile’’ tells the programmer that this function cannot be used
to create a new ﬁle.
(2) ‘‘only RDONLY access supported’’ tells the programmer that you can read from the
opened ﬁle but cannot write to it. ‘‘RDONLY’’ is standard C shorthand for ‘‘ReaD ONLY’’
(echoing the standard C ﬁle i/o API). Thus, portsf enforces ‘‘non-destructive’’ processing—
you cannot modify an existing soundﬁle.
(3) ‘‘Return sf descriptor >= 0’’ tells the programmer that the int value returned from
the function will be a value that identiﬁes the ﬁle (for future use with other functions). Any
value below zero will signify an error. The portsf.h header ﬁle deﬁnes a long list of possible
error values (needless to say, as an enum list). Most programmers will just test the value
against zero, and if negative, will simply tell the user ‘‘there was an error,’’ but ideally the

195

Audio Programming in C

speciﬁc error value can be used to give the user a more informative message, such as ‘‘that is
not a soundﬁle.’’
The comments also describe the input arguments to the function. The ﬁrst of these should
be fairly obvious—the name of the ﬁle. The second is almost as obvious—a pointer to the
PSF_PROPS structure described in subsection 2.1.3; the comments indicate that if the function succeeds, the structure will then be ﬁlled with information describing the ﬁle.
The third argument is, however, very strange-sounding, and is an example of a nonessential but sometimes useful facility. The comments refer to ‘‘PEAK data.’’ This is a reference to an optional header chunk that a WAVE or AIFF ﬁle can contain, which records the
value and position of the loudest sample, for each channel in the ﬁle. We encountered a
prototype for this facility at the end of chapter 1 (see listing 1.9.4). In portsf this is encapsulated as an automatic facility. It is especially useful with ﬂoating-point soundﬁles. While the
‘‘normal’’ range of a ﬂoating-point sample is e1.0, it is also possible to have numbers larger
than that—‘‘over-range samples.’’ You would expect that playing such a soundﬁle would
result in unpleasant clipping and distortion. However, if the ﬁle contains the PEAK chunk,
the information about the largest sample can be used to rescale the audio data automatically,
to bring it within the normal range. This facility is represented by the rescale argument to
psf_sndOpen. If rescale is non-zero (one would usually just use the value 1), rescaling is
applied, otherwise samples will be read unaltered. Of course, if the ﬁle does not contain a
PEAK chunk, the rescale argument is simply ignored. This facility is provided primarily for
use in soundﬁle playback applications, where over-range samples will necessarily be clipped.
By reading the PEAK data from the header when the ﬁle is opened, portsf can automatically
rescale the audio data so that such soundﬁles can be rendered without clipping. In most
other situations, we want to read in the data unchanged, so that the rescale argument to
psf_sndOpen would be set to zero.
To open an existing soundﬁle, therefore, we need an instance of the PSF_PROPS structure,
to receive format information about the ﬁle, and an int variable (‘‘soundﬁle descriptor’’), to
receive the return value from psf_sndOpen. Given, for example, a 16-bit stereo WAVE ﬁle at
44,100 Hz, called ‘‘sample.wav,’’ we can open it as follows, and give the user some information about it:
PSF_PROPS props;
int sf;
sf = psf_sndOpen("sample.wav",&props,0);
if(sf < 0){
printf("Error: unable to open soundfile\n"):
return 1;
}
printf("Sample rate = %d\n", props.srate);
printf("number of channels = %d\n", props.chans);

196

Chapter 2

However, the use of custom types in PSF_PROPS leads to a difﬁculty. The function
printf() cannot know anything about this type—were we to try to display it using the
method above, it would merely write whatever number PSF_SAMP_16 happened to have
been given by the compiler—not very informative to the user. Instead, we need to write
code to test for each possible value, and print an appropriate message:
if(props.stype == PSF_SAMP_8)
printf("sample type: 8bit\n");
else if(props.stype == PSF_SAMP_16)
printf("sample type: 16bit\n");
. . .
We encountered this potentially long sequence of if...else tests in chapter 1. To handle
such situations a little more elegantly, C provides the keywords switch and case, which
together provide a ﬂexible system for selecting among alternatives, where the variable being
tested is of an integral type, such as char, short or int (recall that C treats all enum types as
being equivalent to int). It is demonstrated in listing 2.1.2 in the form of a function
int check_sampletype(psf_stype type);
that will display the sample type of the ﬁle and will return a value indicating whether we can
accept it or not. The function can be used to replace the code suggested above:
if(!check_sampletype(props.stype)){
printf("file has unsupported sample type\n")l
return 1;
}
Listing 2.1.2: Selecting Among Alternatives—the switch. . .case Keywords
1
int check_sampletype(psf_stype type)
2
{
3
int accept = 1;
4
5
printf("sample type: ");
6
switch(type){
7
case(PSF_SAMP_8):
8
printf("8 bit\n");
9
accept = 0;
/* No 8bit files! */
10
break;
11
case(PSF_SAMP_16):
12
printf("16 bit\n");
13
break;
14
case(PSF_SAMP_24):
15
printf("24 bit\n"):

197

Audio Programming in C

16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29 }

break;
case(PSF_SAMP_32):
printf("32bit (integer)\n");
break;
case(PSF_SAMP_IEEE_FLOAT):
printf("32bit floating point\n"):
break;
default:
printf("unknown\n");
accept = 0;
}
return accept;

There are several things to note about the use of switch and case:
(1) The keyword switch takes a single argument of any integral type (enclosed in curved
brackets), followed by a code block enclosed by braces (lines 1, 2, 29).
(2) The code block can contain one or more ‘‘selection statements,’’ using either the case
(e.g. line 7) or default (line 23) keywords. Only one default statement can be used, but
any number of case statements can be used.
(3) The case keyword takes a single argument, signifying a speciﬁc value of the variable
used as the argument to switch, followed by a colon, and then by any number of statements
to be executed (e.g. lines 7–10). Execution then passes to the following selection statement,
or reaches the end of the switch block. The default keyword (also followed by a colon)
takes no argument—it applies to all values not matched by the provided case statements.
(4) To stop execution ‘‘falling through’’ from one selection statement to the next, the break
keyword can be used to jump out of the switch block (e.g. line 10).
(5) Selection statements can be in any order. For example, the default statement can be
placed ﬁrst.
(6) As the code belonging to each selection statement is deemed to be just one level below
the switch expression, the switch and case expressions are usually given the same indentation. The programmer is free to change this, however.
(7) The case keyword can only be used inside a switch statement block.
Opening a Soundﬁle for Writing
To create a new soundﬁle, we would expect a similarly named function, and in portsf this
function is somewhat more elaborate than psf_sndOpen:
int psf_sndCreate(const char *path, const PSF_PROPS *props,
int clip_floats, int minheader, int mode);

198

Chapter 2

(1) The ﬁrst two arguments are the same as those for psf_sndOpen, except that the second
is also declared as const, indicating that the PSF_PROPS data is now an input, and will not
be modiﬁed. We will have to ﬁll this structure with the required format data for the ﬁle,
before passing it to psf_sndCreate.
(2) The argument int clip_floats is used to set the way in which ﬂoating-point data is
written to the ﬁle. As was noted above, the unique aspect of ﬂoating-point soundﬁles is that
the samples can contain over-range values. Depending on the application, you may or many
not want these to be clipped to the normal maxima, 1.0 and þ1.0. Use of this facility
depends on whether you have requested that the soundﬁle include the PEAK chunk, which
records the maximum values in the ﬁle. As not all applications will even know about the
PEAK chunk (and will simply ignore it when reading), the safe approach is to set this argument to 1; but for experimental purposes you may want, for example, to offer the user the
choice. Needless to say, this parameter is ignored for all other sample formats.
(3) int minheader: it is an unfortunate fact of life that many applications fail to deal
with WAVE formats that contain optional chunks before the audio data—many older
UNIX-originated programs suffer from this. By setting minheader to 1, the soundﬁle is created with a ‘‘minimum header’’ containing just the required format and data chunks—this
therefore means that no PEAK data will be written to the ﬁle. Ideally, of course, minheader
should be set to 0 always, and will be in all the examples presented here.
(4) int mode: this ﬁnal argument is provided to offer some control over read-write access to
the ﬁle. The possible modes are deﬁned by the custom enum type psf_create_mode
deﬁned in portsf.h:
/* second two are speculative at present! */
typedef enum {PSF_CREATE_RDWR, PSF_CREATE_TEMPORARY,
PSF_CREATE_WRONLY } psf_create_mode;
The comment indicates that in fact only the ﬁrst option is supported, to create a ‘normal’
ﬁle with public read/write access. The other options seek to create ‘private’ soundﬁles, in one
form or another, and may be implemented in future versions of portsf.
To create a soundﬁle, we need, as for psf_sndOpen(), to deﬁne a PSF_PROPS variable,
with the essential difference that this time we have to ﬁll in the format properties explicitly
—if we have not already obtained format information from another ﬁle:
int ofd;
PSF_PROPS props;
/* define a hi-res 5.1 surround WAVE-EX file, with PEAK chunk
support */
props.srate = 96000;
props.chans = 6;
props.samptype = PSF_SAMP_24;
props.format = PSF_WAVE_EX;
props.chformat = MC_DOLBY_5_1;

199

Audio Programming in C

ofd = psf_sndCreate("soundtrack.wav",&props,1,0, PSF_CREATE_RDWR);
if(ofd < 0){
printf("Error: unable to create output file\n");
return 1;
}
Setting a File Format from the Name
A common requirement among users who have to move soundﬁles between platforms (e.g.
from a Macintosh to a PC) is to convert from one format to another—for example, from
WAVE to AIFF. But how does the user indicate this? In command-line applications (and,
arguably, in general), the simplest and best method is for the user to specify the format by
using a ﬁlename with the appropriate ﬁle extension; .wav, .aiff, .aifc, etc. With this
approach, there is no danger of a user specifying, for example, the WAVE format but giving
a ﬁlename with the .aiff extension.3 The portsf API supports this system by means of a
function that returns the ﬁle format from the given ﬁlename:
psf_format format;
format = psf_getFormatExt("soundtrack.wav");
This returns a value of type psf_format, which can therefore be assigned directly to the
appropriate element of the PSF_PROPS structure:
props.format = format;
Note that this function will return the value PSF_FMT_UNKNOWN if an unsupported ﬁle
extension (or no extension at all) is used.4
Closing Soundﬁles (and Recording Peak Sample Values with the PEAK Chunk)
Having opened a soundﬁle, we will have to close it again at some point. We would expect to
ﬁnd a function to do this in the library; one that takes as an argument the descriptor
obtained from psf_sndOpen. Indeed, on examining portsf.h we ﬁnd just such a function:
int psf_sndClose(int sfd);
The return value is used to indicate any error arising from closing the ﬁle. Occasionally, it is
important to tell the user that the function has failed, and why, as it may indicate a problem
with the system. In a command-line program, this is generally not considered so important,
especially right at the end of a program, so the return value is ignored. One interesting aspect
of this function is indicated by the following comment:
/* . . . Updates PEAK data if used. */
As sample frames are written to disk, the maximum value per channel is automatically
tracked, so that when the ﬁle is closed, the PEAK data can be written to the header. For this
to happen, of course, minheader in psf_sndCreate must be set to 0, as shown above. To

200

Chapter 2

support access to this information, portsf.h includes a very simple structure (deﬁned again as
a custom type using typedef) to hold the peak data for one channel. The structure contains
the sample value itself, and the position (in sample frames) in the ﬁle of the ﬁrst such
sample:
typedef struct psf_chpeak {
float val;
unsigned long pos;
} PSF_CHPEAK;
The library necessarily includes a function to read the current PEAK data from the ﬁle:
long psf_sndReadPeaks(int sfd, PSF_CHPEAK peakdata[], long *peaktime);
This function takes a soundﬁle descriptor (as returned from psf_sndCreate), and a pointer
to an array of PSF_CHPEAK structures. It is the responsibility of the user to ensure that the
array is at least large enough to contain the data for each channel in the ﬁle (e.g. as given
in props.chans):
PSF_CHPEAK peaks[6];
long peaks_valid, peaktime;
peaks_valid = psf_sndReadPeaks(ofd, peaks, &peaktime);
In most cases, the number of channels in a ﬁle will have been chosen by the user, so that
you will have to allocate space for the peaks array using malloc:
PSF_CHPEAK* peaks;
peaks = (PSF_CHPEAK*) malloc(props.chans * sizeof(PSF_CHPEAK));
The peaktime value is rarely needed and can generally be ignored. It corresponds to a ﬁeld
in the PEAK chunk itself, which indicates the time when the PEAK data was written to the
ﬁle. This time can be checked (a task that is often system dependent, and which is beyond
the scope of the present chapter), and if it is clearly different from the modiﬁcation time of
the ﬁle as a whole (i.e. substantially older), it indicates that an attempt to modify the audio
data in place may have been made (i.e. using ‘‘destructive editing’’), and therefore that the
PEAK data may be unreliable. If you do not need the peaktime information, it is safe to
supply NULL as the third argument to psf_sndReadPeaks:
peaks_valid = psf_sndReadPeaks(ofd, peaks, NULL);
2.1.6

Reading and Writing—The Sample Frame

The working unit in portsf is the multi-channel sample frame. This means that it is not possible, for example, to read just the ﬁrst (left-channel) sample of a stereo ﬁle. This would in all
but the most abnormal circumstances be an error, and portsf prevents the user from making
such errors.

201

Audio Programming in C

More importantly, the library automatically performs all the low-level calculations and
conversions required to read sample frames (of any supported type) from a soundﬁle into
the user’s working sample buffer. For this, the recommended sample format is the 32-bit
ﬂoat, into which 24-bit samples can be converted without loss of precision:
long psf_sndReadFloatFrames(int sfd, float *buf, DWORD nFrames);
long psf_sndWriteFloatFrames(int sfd, const float *buf, DWORD nFrames);
It is the user’s responsibility to supply a buffer of at least nFrames * props.chans *
sizeof(float) bytes.
The functions both return the value 1 for an error. The function psf_sndWriteFloatFrames will not return a positive value less than nFrames. In the case of psf_sndReadFloatFrames, a return value less than nFrames will indicate that the end of the ﬁle has
been reached. For the same reason, a return value of 0 does not signify an error. Programs
should expect this and always use the return value in future calculations. Note that the
nFrames argument is deﬁned as a custom DWORD type. This name is borrowed from Windows usage, and signiﬁes (on a 32-bit platform) an unsigned long. Clearly, a negative value
for nFrames has no meaning—it is best to prevent such usage altogether.
We can now implement a simple copy procedure with very few lines of code:
float frame* = (float*) malloc(props.chans * sizeof(float));
/* copy file one (multi-channel) frame at a time */
framesread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd,frame,1);
while (framesread == 1){
/* <---- do any processing here! ------> */
psf_sndWriteFloatFrames(ofd,frame,1);
framesread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd,frame,1);
}
This will copy a soundﬁle having any number of channels, and in any of the supported
sample formats, while also tracking the PEAK value and position for each channel. As the
comment indicates, in a program that performs any processing, this compact loop probably
will expand to accommodate code to apply ﬁltering or other signal processing. To change
the ﬁle and sample format from that of the input ﬁle, all that is required is to modify the
PSF_PROPS structure as desired; portsf will take care of all the details.
2.1.7

Streamlining Error Handling—The goto Keyword

The code shown above excludes necessary checks for read and write errors, which a practical
program must always contain. Even a basic soundﬁle copy program requests at least three
resources from the system—two ﬁles and some memory via a call to malloc. Any or all of
these requests can fail, and to be fully responsible we must release all acquired resources

202

Chapter 2

when we encounter such an error before quitting the program. We have already seen some
examples of this in previous programs, where a call to fclose or to free may appear several
times, in code that detects different errors.
While being responsible, programmers also want to be economical, and such duplicated
code seems wasteful. It can also become somewhat complicated—depending on the error,
different combinations of resources need to be released. Ideally, we want to place all error
recovery at one point (e.g. at the end of the program), and simply jump to that point on
detection of an error, at which point we release all resources still active. The keyword goto
does just this, jumping unconditionally to a statement marked by a label:
if(sndWriteFloatFrames(ofd,frame,1) != 1)
goto cleanup;
/* lots of code. . .. */
cleanup:
if(frame)
free(frame);
The label is also referred to as a ‘‘jump target,’’ and takes the form of a unique name followed
by a colon. It can be placed anywhere, but by convention, and not least to promote readability, it is always placed at the start of a line.
The one important restriction with goto is that the jump target must be in the same function as the goto itself—typically this will be the main function. Thus you cannot jump out
of one function into another—which is probably just as well.5
2.1.8

Using portsf for Soundﬁle Conversion with PEAK Support

The conversion program shown in listing 2.1.3 requires the portsf library, either by compiling with all the portsf source ﬁles or by accessing it as a pre-built library. The latter approach
is implemented in the examples folder on the DVD. This build procedure is outlined below,
which should be read in conjunction with the 02BOOKexamples-guide.doc programmer’s
guide found in the chapter 2 ‘‘examples’’ folder on the DVD.
Listing 2.1.3 can be regarded as a simple template or skeleton program for any application
that applies a process to a sound, non-destructively. As was noted in the comments (line 88),
such processing would be placed inside the main loop copying sample frames. It is worth
taking careful note not only of the details of the C language idioms employed, but also of
the overall structure. We are already moving to the situation where we are quite comfortable
with the C language itself, and pay more and more attention to the strategic and design
aspects of programming.
As we have come to expect, the bulk of the code deals with error checking, and messages
to the user—goto is used to direct all error situations to the cleanup code at the end of the
ﬁle (lines 111–119). The secret to this approach is to ensure that all relevant variables

203

Audio Programming in C

(soundﬁle descriptors, pointers to allocated memory) are initialized to default states (lines
12–16); the cleanup code can then easily discover which resources are active and need to be
released. Note that not all errors result in a call to goto: this is only used once a resource
such as the ﬁrst open ﬁle has been acquired (line 51). One small detail is the variable error
that is incremented when an error is detected. This is only used to ensure that the main
function returns the value 0 for success, or 1 for an error.
The code demonstrates a useful aspect of the printf function—it is possible to write several strings in sequence (e.g. lines 21–23), inside one printf call. Note that the strings are
not separated by commas or other characters, but only by (optional) white space.
In line 55, the function psf_sndCreate is called with the clip_floats argument set to
zero. Coupled with the fact that psf_sndOpen is called with rescale also set to zero, any
ﬂoating-point input ﬁle will be copied to the outﬁle with any over-range samples copied
unaltered. It is of course simple to change this behavior (see exercises, below). The program
reports the PEAK values at the end (lines 99–109).6
Listing 2.1.3: sf2ﬂoat.c
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

/* sf2float.c : convert soundfile to floats */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <portsf.h>
enum {ARG_PROGNAME, ARG_INFILE,ARG_OUTFILE,ARG_NARGS};
int main(int argc, char* argv[])
{
PSF_PROPS props;
long framesread,totalread;
/* init all resource vars to default states */
int ifd = -1,ofd = -1;
int error = 0;
psf_format outformat = PSF_FMT_UNKNOWN;
PSF_CHPEAK* peaks = NULL;
float* frame = NULL;

printf("SF2FLOAT: convert soundfile to floats format\n");
if(argc < ARG_NARGS) {
printf("insufficient arguments.\n"
"usage:\n\tsf2float infile outfile\n");
return 1;

204

Chapter 2

26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

}
/* be good, and startup portsf */
if(psf_init()){
printf("unable to start portsf\n");
return 1;
}
ifd = psf_sndOpen(argv[ARG_INFILE],&props,0);
if(ifd < 0){
printf("Error: unable to open infile %s\n",
argv[ARG_INFILE]);
return 1;
}
/* we now have a resource, so we use goto hereafter
on hitting any error */
/* tell user if source file is already floats */
if(props.samptype == PSF_SAMP_IEEE_FLOAT){
printf("Info: infile is already in floats format.\n");
}
props.samptype = PSF_SAMP_IEEE_FLOAT;
/* check outfile extension is one we know about */
outformat = psf_getFormatExt(argv[ARG_OUTFILE]);
if(outformat == PSF_FMT_UNKNOWN){
printf("outfile name %s has unknown format.\n"
"Use any of .wav, .aiff, .aif, .afc,.aifc\n",
argv[ARG_OUTFILE]);
error++;
goto exit;
}
props.format = outformat;
ofd = psf_sndCreate(argv[2],&props,0,0,PSF_CREATE_RDWR);
if(ofd < 0){
printf("Error: unable to create outfile %s\n",
argv[ARG_OUTFILE]);
error++;
goto exit;
}
/* allocate space for one sample frame */
frame = (float*) malloc(props.chans * sizeof(float));
if(frame==NULL){
puts("No memory!\n");

205

Audio Programming in C

69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111

error++;
goto exit;
}
/* and allocate space for PEAK info */
peaks = (PSF_CHPEAK*) malloc(props.chans *
sizeof(PSF_CHPEAK));
if(peaks == NULL){
puts("No memory!\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
printf("copying....\n");
/* single-frame loop to do copy, report any errors */
framesread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd,frame,1);
totalread = 0; /* running count of sample frames */
while (framesread == 1){
totalread++;
if(psf_sndWriteFloatFrames(ofd,frame,1) != 1){
printf("Error writing to outfile\n");
error++;
break;
}
/* <---- do any processing here! ------> */
framesread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd,frame,1);
}
if(framesread < 0) {
printf("Error reading infile. Outfile is incomplete.\n");
error++;
}
else
printf("Done. %d sample frames copied to %s\n",
totalread,argv[ARG_OUTFILE]);
/* report PEAK values to user */
if(psf_sndReadPeaks(ofd,peaks,NULL) > 0){
long i;
double peaktime;
printf("PEAK information:\n");
for(i=0;i < props.chans;i++){
peaktime = (double) peaks[i].pos / props.srate;
printf("CH %d:\t%.4f at %.4f secs\n",
i+1, peaks[i].val, peaktime);
}

206

Chapter 2

112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125 }
2.1.9

}
/* do all cleanup */
exit:
if(ifd >= 0)
psf_sndClose(ifd);
if(ofd >= 0)
psf_sndClose(ofd);
if(frame)
free(frame);
if(peaks)
free(peaks);
psf_finish();
return error;

Building Programs with portsf

There are two approaches readers can take in building sf2ﬂoat and later programs using
portsf. Both are command-line based. The ﬁrst, very simple approach, is to copy the chapter
2 examples directory (complete with its sub-directories) from the DVD to any convenient
location, cd to the chapter 2 examples directory and run make on the selected program:
$ make sf2float
This will ﬁrst build portsf (if not already built) and install the library ﬁle libportsf.a in the
directory lib. It will then build sf2ﬂloat. This is covered in more detail in the accompanying
guide document. Note that, as required for all such development, you will have at least three
basic directories—include for your header ﬁles, lib for your libraries, and one or more working
directories for your projects. As described above, relative paths are used—so long as the
whole examples directory is moved as a unit, the programs will build as described.
The alternative approach is more demanding, but offers a much deeper insight into the
build process, including a ﬁrst step at editing a makeﬁle (see exercise 2.1.7). The goal is to
create a standard working environment supporting all your programming projects, whether
based on portsf or otherwise.7
Test the program ﬁrst by running it without arguments, to conﬁrm that the usage message
is displayed:
./sf2float
Then test using any suitable soundﬁle. This would primarily be a 16-bit WAVE or AIFF ﬁle.
Use Audacity to conﬁrm that the new ﬁle is correct. However it is as important to test the
error handling, e.g. by supplying a soundﬁle in an unsupported format such as a raw binary
ﬁle, or using an outﬁle name with an unsupported extension.

207

Audio Programming in C

2.1.10

Exercises

Many of these exercises invite you to discover things on your own. If you ﬁnd that you are
stuck, consider the possibility that other programs presented in this book may well demonstrate solutions to these exercises.
Exercise 2.1.1
In the program sf2ﬂoat, the main loop to copy samples does so one frame at a time. This is
not very efﬁcient. Modify the code to use a larger multi-frame buffer, so that the loop cycles
per block rather than per frame. Remember to pay attention to the return value from
psf_sndReadFloatFrames.
Exercise 2.1.2
The program sf2ﬂoat does not report the progress of the copy to the screen. For a long ﬁle,
the program may appear to have frozen. Remedy this by adding a variable to count the number of samples copied, and display a progress message at some regular interval. Hint: Use the
format speciﬁer ‘‘\r’’ (carriage return) within printf to overwrite the same line with the
updating message string.
Exercise 2.1.3
Study the description of the function psf_sndSize in portsf.h. Modify the program to copy
up to some limit (which must be less than or equal to the length of the ﬁle) deﬁned by the
user on the command line.
Exercise 2.1.4
(a) Based on the examples shown in this section, add a function to give a complete display
of the inﬁle properties at the start of the program. Include the size of the ﬁle in this information. Use the switch. . .case keywords to print information on the ﬁle format and sample
type.
(b) Adapt this into a new program sfprop that just reports the format information of a soundﬁle. Report the PEAK information if present. You may ﬁnd this useful as a utility to verify
output soundﬁles are as intended.
Exercise 2.1.5
Sound level is often better expressed in decibels (dB), than as simple amplitude. Full-scale
(1.0) is equivalent to 0 dB, and half-amplitude (0.5) is equal to approximately 6 dB. The calculation to convert a normalized amplitude (within e 1.0) to dB is
loudness (dB) = 20.0 * log10 (amp);

208

Chapter 2

Refer to your compiler documentation regarding the math library function (deﬁned in
<math.h>):
double log10(double x) ;
Use this function to modify the display of the PEAK data at the end of sf2ﬂoat.c (lines 106
and 107) to display the PEAK value for each channel in dB, as well as raw amplitude. If you
have built sfprop (Ex 4(b) above), modify that in the same way.
Exercise 2.1.6 (difﬁcult)
Study the description of the function psf_sndSeek in portsf.h. Modify sf2ﬂoat to copy the
inﬁle N times (N speciﬁed by the user), without a break, to the outﬁle, i.e. to perform simple
looping. Use psf_sndSeek to ‘rewind’ the inﬁle back to the beginning each time. (Hint:
Study the compiler documentation for the C library function fseek. This is used internally
by psf_sndSeek.)
Exercise 2.1.7
This exercise involves a makeﬁle. In the ‘‘example’’ directories on the DVD for each chapter,
the portsf directory is replicated for each chapter. Move the whole portsf library to a separate
location on your system, and modify the makeﬁle to put libportsf.a in a personal lib directory
that you create. Do the same for the include directory. This is to have just one copy of both
on your system. Then modify the supplied makeﬁles to use the new locations, and conﬁrm
that all the programs build without errors.
2.2

Processing Audio
The key to this and the following sections is line 92 of sf2ﬂoat.c:
/* <---- do any processing here! ------> */
The focus of most of the work in this chapter will be on inventing code to replace this comment. The simplest possible replacement is proposed in this section. There may be a temptation to go directly to the ‘‘examples’’ directory and build the program as supplied. You
already know how to build programs; the core of the process is to practice writing and modifying code. In the next section no ﬁnal program listing is given; instead, full details are
given for how to modify sf2ﬂoat.c. Dive in.
2.2.1

The First Audio Process: Changing Level

The program shown in listing 2.1.3 was described as a template that can be used as the basis
for a number of simple audio utilities working on a soundﬁle. There are however a few lines
that will need to be removed, to make this a truly neutral template program: delete lines 39–

209

Audio Programming in C

45, which we used to set the output ﬁle format to ﬂoats. With audio processing tools, users
will generally expect the output ﬁle to have the same format as the input ﬁle.
We will begin with one of the simplest yet most fundamental procedures we need to perform on a sound: changing level (amplitude), as done by the ubiquitous volume control.
Again you have the choice either to build a new project from scratch, or use the ﬁles supplied
on the DVD. Writing and building from scratch is much more likely to give you the feeling
of being a real C programmer, however impatient you may be to build and test the program.
The new program is called sfgain. We can describe the basic structure of this program very
simply as a series of stages (which we will be able to refer to and expand in the course of
this chapter):
Stage 1:
Stage 2:
Stage 3:
Stage 4:
Stage 5:
Stage 6:

Deﬁne variables.
Obtain and validate arguments from user.
Allocate memory, open inﬁle and outﬁle.
Perform main processing loop.
Report to the user.
Close ﬁles, free memory.

You might ﬁnd it useful to add some comments to sfgain.c indicating each of these stages. As
you develop new programs, you will typically be moving upward and downward between
these stages as you add functionality, by creating a function or process for stage 4, which
requires variables deﬁned in stage 1, some memory allocated in stage 3, a revised command
line, and maybe some extra ﬁles (stage 3). Any new resources will need to be returned to the
system (stage 6). And at any point, you may need to add or modify messages to the user (e.g.
stage 5). Inﬁltrating all these stages is the constant attention to error detection and recovery.
Intuition would suggest that we should be able to change the amplitude of a soundﬁle just
by multiplying each sample value by the required scale factor—say by 0.5 to reduce amplitude by a half, or by 2.0 to double the amplitude. As it happens, intuition is completely correct here.
All we need is a variable to hold a loop counter, and another to hold the amplitude factor
from the user (stage 1):
int i;
float ampfac;
and a simple loop to step through each channel of the frame, placed in the frame loop as
indicated by the comment (stage 4, lines 81–90 of listing 2.1.3):
while (framesread == 1){
totalread++;
for(i=0; i < props.chans; i++ )
frame[i] *= ampfac;

210

Chapter 2

if(psf_sndWriteFloatFrames(ofd, frame, 1) != 1){
printf("Error writing to outfile\n");
error++;
break;
}
framesread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd,frame,1);
}
To make a complete program, all that remains to do is to ensure that we have an appropriate title message (line 18)
printf("SFGAIN: change level of soundfile\n");
update the usage message to indicate the new argument (stage 2, lines 20–25)
if(argc < 4){
printf("insufficient arguments.\n"
"usage:\n\t"
"sfgain infile outfile ampfac\n"
"\twhere ampfac must be > 0\n");
return 1;
}
and add the code to pick up and check the value:
ampfac = (float) atof(argv[3]);
if(ampfac <= 0.0){
printf("Error: ampfac must be positive.\n");
return 1;
}
You are now ready to build and test the program.
2.2.2

Amplitude vs. Loudness—the Decibel

Exercise 2.1.5 introduced the calculation for converting an amplitude value into decibels
(dB):
loudnessdB ¼ 20  log10 amp

(1)

where amp is in the range 0 to 1.0. We also need the complementary formula for converting
dB to amplitude:
amp ¼ 10 loudnessdb /20 .

(2)

There is a very simple reason why the decibel is so important to audio engineers (and indeed to anyone working with audio): the decibel scale (being logarithmic in nature, as the

211

Audio Programming in C

Table 2.1
Amplitude and dB scales.
Floating-point

16-bit

PCM amplitude

PCM amplitude

1.0

32,768

0.75

24,576

2.4987

0.5
0.25

16,384
8,192

6.0206
12.0412

0.1

3,277

20.0

0.05

1,638

26.0206

0.01

328

40.0

0.001

33

60.0

dB
0

formula shows) reﬂects how the human ear perceives changes in sound level much more
closely than linear amplitudes. However, a value in decibels does not necessarily correspond
to a speciﬁc amplitude value. An amplitude value (e.g. the value of a single audio sample)
corresponds to a voltage in an analog system, and thus in a sense represents an ‘‘absolute’’
value—for example, 0.25 volts. A decibel value is, strictly speaking, a ratio—a comparison between two values. It can tell us that the difference between 0.25 and 1, or between 8,192 and
32,768, is the same—in this case, a difference of about 12 dB. One would say ‘‘0.25 is 12 dB
below 1.0,’’ and equally that ‘‘8,192 is 12 dB below 32,768.’’ Thus the decibel enables us to
refer to level changes independently of the actual range used. However, to use the decibel to
refer directly to levels, we have to have an agreed ‘‘reference level’’ to compare it with, just as
we have to relate the sample value to maximum to appreciate the level it represents.
In the case of a digital waveform, the reference level is digital peak—e.g. 1.0 in the case of
ﬂoating-point samples, or 32,768 in the case of 16-bit samples.8 For a combination of historical and industrial reasons, this reference level is deﬁned in decibels as 0, so that all levels
below it are expressed as negative numbers. Table 2.1 illustrates the relationship between
sample values and dB values, for ﬂoats and 16-bit sample types, using 0 dB to signify digital
peak. Thus, a reduction by 0.5, which intuitively we might think of as a ‘‘half as loud,’’ is
perceived as a much smaller reduction—perhaps as little as one ‘‘notch’’ of a volume control.
A typical listener who sets the volume control to make a sound ‘‘half as loud’’ may be reducing the level by as much as 40 dB.
We can now understand why it is said that the theoretical maximum ‘‘dynamic range’’
(difference between loudest and quietest sounds) is stated as 96 dB for a 16-bit system. Each
bit (representing a factor of 2) represents a difference of approximately 6 dB.9 More to the
point, the sorts of level changes that the listener will perceive correspond to much larger
raw amplitude changes than we might expect. Reducing amplitude by a factor of 0.25
sounds like a lot, but it is only a drop of 12 dB, and a sound at that level is still pretty loud.

212

Chapter 2

Figure 2.2
Reverb decay on (a) dB and (b) amplitude vertical scales.

Thus it can be much more meaningful to the user to be able to express both level differences,
and absolute levels, in dB. Apart from anything else, this means that simple numbers such as
6, 12, and 18 can be used, rather than obscure decimal amplitudes with lots of leading
zeroes.
A vivid example of the difference between the linear amplitude scale and the logarithmic
decibel scale is the envelope shape of a reverberant decay. As we saw at the end of chapter 1,
viewed on a waveform display using the usual amplitude scale, the decay (such as one can
see of it) has the characteristic exponential curve (ﬁgure 2.2b). Viewed on a logarithmic
(loudness) scale, the envelope becomes a straight line (ﬁgure 2.2a). You will also have
noticed that in the linear display, much of the signal is not even visible, though the loudest
sample is only some 3.5 dB below peak. As a general rule of thumb, in the typical waveform
display on a digital audio workstation (DAW), a signal more than 30 dB below peak will be
hidden by the zero line.
2.2.3

Extending sfgain—Normalization

Sometimes the requirement is not to change level by a certain amount, but to change it to a
certain level. A common practice in audio production is to ‘‘normalize’’ a sound, or a whole

213

Audio Programming in C

track, to a standard level, the argument being that it is important to make as much use of the
available dynamic range as possible—especially in a 16-bit medium such as a CD. It is, however, generally a bad idea to normalize a soundﬁle right up to digital peak—most real signals
will in fact clip at the DAC, quite badly. Even in a 16-bit system, where every bit is felt to
be precious, a little headroom is advisable, say about 3 dB. With the increasing use of 24-bit
audio, this headroom can afford to be much larger—it is not unusual for the normalization
point (the point that may be marked as ‘‘0 dB’’ on a VU meter) to be as much as 24 dB below
digital peak. Thus, a program that will normalize a soundﬁle to a speciﬁed dB level will be
very useful. With only a little work, the program sfgain can itself be used as a template for a
normalization tool. We will call this new program sfnorm, and the new source ﬁle sfnorm.c.
We already have the procedure that changes level. The two extra tasks are to obtain the
required output level value from a user parameter expressed in decibels, and to obtain the
maximum amplitude of the input ﬁle, from which we can then calculate the required scale
factor. If we are lucky, the input ﬁle will already have the PEAK information in the header,
but as this header chunk is not yet universally adopted, we must be prepared to scan the
inﬁle to ﬁnd the value the hard way. Thus, in this stage of the program, we will have to use
some conditional code using if. . .else.
To create our new normalization program, we have to augment the basic program structure shown in section 2.1 as follows:
Stage 1: Set up variables.
Stage 2: Obtain and validate arguments from user.
Stage 3: Allocate memory, open the inﬁle.
Stage 4a: Read PEAK amplitude of the inﬁle; if not found,
Stage 4b: Scan the whole inﬁle to obtain peak value; rewind ﬁle ready for processing stage.
Stage 4c: If peak 4 0, open outﬁle; otherwise, quit.
Stage 5: Perform main processing loop.
Stage 6: Report to the user.
Stage 7: Close ﬁles, free memory.
Note that stage 4c deals with the possibility that the inﬁle may be silent (peakval = 0). By
deferring the opening of the outﬁle, not only can we avoid a possible division-by-zero error;
we can also avoid leaving a spurious output ﬁle on the user’s system. The bulk of our attention will be on stage 4, from which we will obtain the amplitude scale factor used in stage 5,
which will remain virtually unchanged from before.
We need a few extra variables to hold the decibel value, the peak amplitude of the inﬁle,
and the calculated scale factor (stage 1):
double dbval, inpeak = 0.0;
float ampfac, scalefac;
The command line is essentially unchanged, except that we must tell the user that the third
argument must be a dB value not above zero (stage 2):

214

Chapter 2

if(argc < 4){
printf("insufficient arguments.\n"
"usage:\n\t"
"sfnorm infile outfile dBval\n"
"\twhere dBval <= 0.0\n");
return 1;
}
We can then read and validate the dbval from the user:
dbval = (atof(argv[3]));
if(dbval > 0.0){
printf("Error: dBval cannot be positive.\n");
return 1;
}
ampfac = (float) pow(10.0,dbval/20.0);
Stage 3: So far, we have no reason to change any of the code to open soundﬁles, and allocate
memory.
Stage 4: Notice where this stage is so far in the program, just before the main processing loop
of stage 5. It requires that all memory is allocated, and that at least the input ﬁle has been
opened. In fact, because of the test in stage 4c, we need to place this stage 4 code before the
code that opens the outﬁle, so that if the input ﬁle proves to be silent, we can avoid creating
an output ﬁle we can’t use.
While developing a program such as this, we recall that any code of general usefulness
might be most conveniently written as a function, for possible incorporation into a library.
In this case, the signiﬁcant added element of this program is step 3b—scanning a soundﬁle
to ﬁnd the maximum sample value. This could even prove useful as a program by itself. In
fact, you have already seen an example of this procedure, applied to a buffer of data (chapter
1, listing 1.6.3).
There is one essential detail to add to this basic buffer-scanning loop. Audio samples are
both positive and negative, and we want the ‘‘absolute value’’ of the largest sample. If, for
example, the maximum positive sample in the ﬁle is 0.5, but the maximum negative sample
is 0.7, the maximum amplitude value we need is 0.7.
The C math library (<math.h>) offers two functions for ﬁnding the absolute value of a
sample, covering integer and ﬂoating-point types:
int abs(int val);
double fabs(double val);
As we are using buffers of ﬂoats, we will need to use fabs. We can then modify the code
of listing 1.6.3 to create a function that returns the maximum absolute value of a sample
buffer:

215

Audio Programming in C

double maxsamp(float* buf, unsigned long blocksize)
{
double absval, peak = 0.0;
unsigned long i;
for(i=0; i < blocksize; i++) {
absval = fabs(buf[i]);
if(absval > peak)
peak = absval;
}
return peak;
}
This function receives a buffer of samples, together with a ‘‘blocksize’’ value that gives the
full size of the buffer. Thus this function is completely general—it can be used to ﬁnd the
absolute maximum value of any buffer of samples. You can place this function anywhere in
sfnorm.c, so long as it is outside main. Some programmers prefer to place such functions after
main, others before. Either way, you will have to add the declaration of the function:
double maxsamp(float* buf, unsigned long blocksize);
below the list of #included ﬁles—which must now also #include <math.h>.
To scan the inﬁle, we can employ the same loop used to process the outﬁle, removing the
calls to psf_sndWriteFloatFrames, changing ofd to ifd, and inserting our required
processing code, which checks the return value from maxsamp against our running value of
inpeak (stage 4b):
framesread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd,frame,1);
while (framesread == 1){
double thispeak;
blocksize = props.chans;
thispeak = maxsamp(frame,blocksize);
if(thispeak > inpeak)
inpeak = thispeak;
framesread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd,frame,1);
}
However, as was suggested in exercise 1 of the last section, it is inefﬁcient to loop over a
single sample or frame. By way of a solution to that exercise, you can #define a buffer size
in frames, near the top of the ﬁle:
#define NFRAMES (1024)
You can then add a variable nframes that is initialized as
unsigned long nframes = NFRAMES;

216

Chapter 2

and modify the code above accordingly. Using this, you can change the size of the buffer
simply by changing the deﬁned value. As warned by that exercise, we can no longer compare
framesread against the value 1, but must simply check that it is positive—the ﬁnal block
read from the ﬁle may be smaller than NFRAMES. Also, note our custom function maxsamp
expects the plain size of the buffer in samples. This is ﬁne, as in this program we are not concerned about which channel contains the maximum sample, so we can simply multiply
framesread by the number of channels:
framesread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd,frame,nframes);
while (framesread > 0){
double thispeak;
blocksize = framesread * props.chans;
. . .
framesread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd,frame,nframes);
}
For this to work, we must also modify the preceding memory allocation to frame by specifying the correct size:
frame = (float*) malloc(NFRAMES * props.chans * sizeof(float));
We can then modify the ﬁnal processing loop in exactly the same way so that that also beneﬁts from the optimization.
We are not quite done with stage 4: as indicated by the conditional test in stage 4a, we
don’t want to do all this work if the inﬁle contains PEAK data already. We already have code
to do this, used at the end of the program to report the ﬁnal peak values of the outﬁle. We
can copy this code almost verbatim for stage 4a, simply by changing ofd to ifd, and removing the messages we don’t need. The PEAK data gives the absolute maximum sample value
for each channel, and we simply want the largest of these (stage 4a):
/* get peak info: scan file if required */
/* inpeak has been initialized to 0 */
if(psf_sndReadPeaks(ifd,peaks,NULL) > 0){
long i;
for(i=0; i < props.chans; i++){
if(peaks[i].val > inpeak)
inpeak = peaks[i].val;
}
}
else {
/* scan the file, and rewind */
}

217

Audio Programming in C

As the comment indicates, after scanning the ﬁle, we must rewind the ﬁle (seek back to the
beginning), so that it can be read again in the main processing loop. Portsf supplies the function psf_sndSeek with which to do this. We need to use the symbol PSF_SEEK_SET,
which asks portsf to jump to the position in the ﬁle given in the second argument. By setting
this to 0, we effectively rewind the ﬁle back to the beginning:
if((psf_sndSeek(ifd, 0, PSF_SEEK_SET)) < 0){
printf("Error: unable to rewind infile.\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
Note that this must be placed at the end of the else { } block above, as it is relevant only if
we have in fact scanned the ﬁle. In theory, it should not matter, but any disk access has the
potential for errors, and it is a good principle to avoid doing anything unnecessary.
Stage 4c requires us to check that the inﬁle is not silent. This code will be placed immediately following the if. . .else block above, before the code that creates the outﬁle:
if(inpeak==0.0){
printf("infile is silent! Outfile not created.\n");
goto exit;
}
We have but one ﬁnal piece of code to add to the original template code before we can calculate the scaling factor from the user’s requested level (converted from dB) and the peak
level of the inﬁle. This can be placed immediately above the ﬁnal processing loop, which is
unchanged except for the use of nframes:
scalefac = (float)(ampfac / inpeak);
This calculation is one of the reasons we checked for a non-zero peak value from the inﬁle. If
inpeak is zero, the statement above will cause a division-by-zero error,10 which can often
crash a program. Even if it doesn’t crash, you can be sure the outﬁle will contain garbage.
All code from stage 5 onward can be retained without changes—so you are done, and
ready to compile and test. Make sure all the messages to the user are appropriate to the new
program—in copying code it is easy to overlook this sort of detail. If you are choosing to
write or edit a makeﬁle, check that you have the correct names for source ﬁles and for the
program name itself. As with sfgain, a complete version of sfnorm is on the DVD in the examples directory, but try to resist looking at this unless you are badly stuck over a compilation
problem.

218

Chapter 2

2.2.4

Exercises

Exercise 2.2.1
In subsection 2.2.3, it is suggested that the process of ﬁnding the peak amplitude of a soundﬁle would be a useful program in its own right. Of course, not every ﬁle has a PEAK chunk.
Using sfnorm.c as a starting point, and linking with the portsf library, write and document
this program, calling it sfpeak. Alternatively, modify sfnorm so that it can also be used just to
ﬁnd the peak of the inﬁle.
Exercise 2.2.2
In sfgain, a value for ampfac of 1.0 would result in an outﬁle identical to the inﬁle—a needless operation. Trap this situation, advise the user, and terminate the program without
creating a ﬁle.
Exercise 2.2.3
Write documentation for sfnorm and include suggestions about what target values to use for
dbval.
Exercise 2.2.4
(a) The program sfgain expects a linear amplitude factor from the user. Modify the program
to take a dB factor instead. Remember to change the usage message accordingly.
(b) Using an optional command-line ﬂag, modify sfgain to enable to user to specify a scale
factor in either linear or dB forms.
Exercise 2.2.5 (advanced)
In sfnorm.c, the task of ﬁnding the larger of two values is applied in several places. This is a
very common operation, and the C language supports a special construct to code it very concisely. The compiler can often ﬁnd extra optimizations for it:
val = val_2 > val_1 ? val_2 : val_1;
The construct is formed by a conditional test, here a comparison:
val_2 > val_1
followed by a question mark followed by two expressions (here, simple numeric values) separated by a colon:
val_2 : val_1
If the conditional test evaluates to ‘true’, the result of the whole expression is the left-hand
value (here, val_2); otherwise it is the right-hand value (here, val_1). Thus, if val_2 = 0.5
and val_1 = 0.7, the statement

219

Audio Programming in C

val = val_2 > va1_1 ? val_2 : val_1;
says ‘‘if val_2 is greater than val_1, set val ¼ val_2, otherwise set val ¼ val_1.’’ Thus val will
be set to the value of val_1 in this case. So common is this procedure that a macro deﬁnition is in very general use:
#define max(x,y) ((x) > (y) ? (x) : (y))
With this macro, code such as
absval = fabs(buf[i]);
if(absval > peak)
peak = absval;
can be rewritten more concisely, but also more expressively:
absval = fabs(buf[i]);
peak = max(absval,peak);
Although the macro looks like a function call, it is inline code where the text is expanded by
the preprocessor. The advantage of the macro is that it can be used with any type, whereas
different functions would have to be deﬁned for each distinct combination of types. This is
also a disadvantage—we must always take care to supply reasonable arguments to such a
macro, or the results will be ‘‘undeﬁned.’’ Add the macro deﬁnition to the top of sfnorm.c,
identify all the instances where the maximum of two values is sought (one is illustrated in
the example above), and replace them with code using the macro.
2.3

Stereo Panning
2.3.1

Introduction

So far, in our handling of soundﬁles, we have not had much interest in the ‘‘width’’ of the
ﬁle—how many channels there are. The programs sfgain and sfnorm can accept soundﬁles
with any number of channels—you can as easily normalize a six-channel ﬁle as a mono
ﬁle. In this section we will be paying particular attention to the number of channels. If you
have ever used either a mixing desk or a software mixer in a DAW application, you will be
familiar with the process of panning a mono sound between two stereo speakers. It is a very
routine, almost mundane process, and you might well imagine that there is not very much
to it for a programmer. However, even for a simple process such as panning, there are better
and worse ways of doing things. Less surprising perhaps is that the better way (‘‘constant
power panning’’) involves a little more mathematics than the worse way.
While there is clear utility in a program that will pan a whole soundﬁle into a single stereo
position, we will make things a little more creative by mimicking what happens in an interactive application, where the pan position is moving—e.g. to move a sound from far left to

220

Chapter 2

far right. To do this within a plain command-line program, we can make use of a breakpoint
ﬁle, as introduced in chapter 1 (subsection 1.1.7), in which the values represent the pan
position ranging from 1 ¼ full left, to þ1.0 ¼ full right. In doing so, you will learn about
one of the cornerstones of audio programming: linear interpolation.
In this section, the task at hand is to create some functions—design algorithms—so as to
do some serious audio processing. In doing this, we will have an opportunity to practice further all the skills learned so far, such as using multiple source ﬁles and creating functions.
We are starting to think less about the C language and more about how to design and implement musical and useful audio tools. Increasingly, we will be developing functions, and
families of functions, that are of general usefulness, and a major concern now is to establish
a tidy and practical system for storing general-purpose source ﬁles. In due course, these may
be used to create new custom libraries, just as we have already done for portsf. While all the
programs presented in this chapter can be built using the directory structure copied from the
DVD, we need to consider how we may make those examples the basis for a permanent and
expanding repertoire of tools, and thus to look beyond that directory structure to one of our
own devising.
As we move into serious audio processing, issues that so far have been almost peripheral to
the language topics introduced in each section now are presented to us head-on—issues of
efﬁciency, robustness, and generality. These issues are so important that they cannot possibly be encompassed even in a full chapter of text, and questions may be raised that do not
have straightforward right/wrong answers. Such questions are not merely philosophical or
conceptual—they have direct and immediate effects on the code we write. It becomes even
more important, therefore, that you study and seek to follow through the exercises at the
end of each section. Some are in the form of revision questions, but others enter more deeply
into these issues and demand that you think, form opinions, and make decisions, though
neither the opinions nor the decisions are likely to be conclusive.
2.3.2

Reﬁnements to the Template Code

In section 2.2, the program sfgain was presented as a simple general-purpose or template program, which can be used as the basis for a large number of audio programs operating on
soundﬁles. In the DVD’s examples directory you will ﬁnd a ﬁle called main.c that consolidates this approach, including an implementation of the more efﬁcient buffer processing
described in subsection 2.2.2.
The code in main.c incorporates ‘‘wizard’’-like comments, using the text ‘‘TODO: . . .’’ to
indicate where you may have to add new code speciﬁc to your program. For example:
if(ifd < 0){
printf("Error: unable to open infile
%s\n",argv[ARG_INFILE]);
error++;

221

Audio Programming in C

goto exit;
}
/* TODO: verify infile format for this application */
This example reminds you to add code to check, for example, that the ﬁle has the expected
number of channels.
Finally, the code documents the program structure described in the last section in the context of the program sfnorm:
printf("processing....\n");

/* STAGE 4 */

However, in main.c this structure is expanded to a seven-stage plan by augmenting the original stage 4:
Stage 3: Allocate memory, open inﬁle.
Stage 4a: Perform any special data pre-processing, opening of extra data ﬁles, etc.
Stage 4b: Open outﬁle, once all required resources are obtained.
Stage 5: Perform main processing loop.
Stage 6: Report to the user.
Stage 7: Close ﬁles, free memory.
Note that errors can in principle arise at any of these stages (except, one hopes, stage 1):
main.c routes any detected errors to the ﬁnal ‘‘cleanup’’ stage, using the goto keyword.
2.3.3

A Simple Formula for Stereo Panning

We need a function that, given a position parameter (in the range 1 . . . þ1), returns two
values, representing the amplitude scaling factors (range 0 . . . 1) for the left and right output
channels. Ordinarily, a function can return only one object, but, as was demonstrated in
chapter 1 (subsection 1.7.5), we know that ANSI C permits functions to return a structure.
We can exploit this by deﬁning a simple structure with two ﬁelds:
typedef struct panpos
double left;
double right;
} PANPOS;
and we can then deﬁne a panning function that returns a PANPOS object:
PANPOS simplepan(double position);
Intuitively, stereo panning is a simple procedure—a variable proportion of the signal is fed
to each channel, such that for a pan from full left to full right, and, assuming maximum
amplitude ¼ 1.0, the level in the left channel fades from maximum to zero, while that of
the right channel increases from zero to maximum. This could then be implemented using
a plain linear fade (see ﬁgure 2.3). The arithmetic for a linear fade is simplicity itself, made

222

Chapter 2

Figure 2.3
Linear panning.

only marginally more complicated by the input range between 1.0 and þ1.0, which must
be mapped to the required amplitude range for each channel:
PANPOS simplepan(double position)
{
PANPOS pos;
position *= 0.5;
pos.left = position - 0.5;
pos.right = position + 0.5;
return pos;
}
2.3.4

Multiple Conditional Tests—The Logical || and && Operators

Having deﬁned a panning function and a type, we need somewhere to put them. We are
ready to embark on the creation of the ﬁrst version of the panning program, which will be
called sfpan. Again, rather than simply copying the ﬁle from the DVD (which represents
where we ﬁnish, not where we start), follow the procedures here to create it from scratch.
Our program will progress through a preliminary version to a ﬁnal version; along the way,
some important new C idioms will be introduced. Copy the template ﬁle main.c as a new
source ﬁle, sfpan.c. Add the deﬁnition of PANPOS, and add the function prototype and deﬁnition of simplepan to main.c, above the main function. Later, if we decide this code is generally useful, we may transfer it to dedicated source and header ﬁles, as we have previously
done with the BREAKPOINT code.

223

Audio Programming in C

To convert the new ﬁle into a pan program, two basic processing steps are required: one to
deal with the change of channels and one to create storage for the new stereo samples that
will be written to the outﬁle. We will also have to deﬁne any required variables, to deﬁne the
command line, and to check arguments from the user.
Although the plan is to support time-varying panning using a breakpoint ﬁle, we will keep
things simple at this early stage by deﬁning a numeric argument to contain a ﬁxed pan position inside the deﬁned range. This will enable us to verify the correctness of the program,
running it with different panpos values, before adding breakpoint-ﬁle support, which we
can reasonably expect to involve greater complexity. This system of incremental development
will become increasingly important as projects increase in ambition and complexity. To
begin with, the command line will be
sfpan infile outfile panpos
Change the usage message accordingly, adding a description of the correct range for
panpos. Add a variable called panpos (type double) to the end of the variables list at the
top of main.
It will be necessary to modify the enum list for arguments by adding a symbol for the new
argument:
enum
{ARG_PROGNAME,ARG_INFILE,ARG_OUTFILE,ARG_PANPOS,ARG_NARGS};
Before the call to psf_sndOpen, we need to add code to read and check the panpos argument for correctness. The interesting aspect of this is that we need to check that the value
lies within the legal range, so we need to compare it to two values:
pos = atof(argv[ARG_PANPOS]);
if(pos < -1.0) {
printf("Error: panpos value out of range -1 to +1\n");
errror++;
goto exit;
}
if(pos > 1.0){
printf("Error: panpos value out of range -1 to +1\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
This seems an unnecessary duplication of code. Indeed it is, and C offers a means to avoid
it by means of a pair of ‘‘logical’’ operators that enable the programmer to combine any
number of conditional tests into a single expression. In English, we want to say ‘‘If panpos
is less than 1 OR is greater than 1.0, report an error.’’

224

Chapter 2

The || operator is the C operator for the word OR, called ‘‘logical OR’’:
if( (pos < 1.0) || (pos > 1.0) ){
printf("Error: panpos value out of range -1 to +1\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
Here parentheses enclosing each conditional expression have been added to make the structure clear; in fact they are not needed, as the logical-OR operator has a lower precedence than
the conditional expressions on either side of it, so the form below will work as intended:
if( pos < 1.0 || pos > 1.0 )
C also includes a complementary ‘‘logical-AND’’ operator, notated as two adjacent ampersands, which might be used as follows:
if(panpos >= -1 && panpos <= 1.0)
printf("position is between the speakers");
One much-exploited feature of the use of logical operators is the fact that the ﬁrst ‘false’
result is taken as the result of the whole expression, so that subsequent tests (listed from left
to right) are not computed. This is often used to combine a pointer check with an operation
using it:
int i = 1;
while( argv[i] != NULL && (argv[i++][0] == '-') ){
argv++; /* skip over any optional flag arguments */
}
As soon as argv[i] evaluates to NULL, the loop is broken, so that second test, which would
now cause an access violation, is not executed.
2.3.5

Changing Format from Input to Output—Mono to Stereo

As was noted above, main.c is channel-agnostic—it simply copies the infile properties to
the outfile. For a pan program we require the infile to be mono, so we must add the
test to sfpan.c accordingly, after the ﬁle is opened:
if(inprops.chans != 1){
printf("Error: infile must be mono.\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}

225

Audio Programming in C

Further down, just before creating the outﬁle, the copy is made:
outprops = inprops;
Remember, this is a copy of a struct—each member of the structure is copied. All we have
to do to create a stereo outﬁle is to change one ﬁeld:
outprops.chans = 2;
As the output data will be twice the size of the input, we will need to create an output
frame buffer that is also twice the size of the input buffer. Add the new variable after all the
others:
float*outframe = NULL;

/* STAGE 1 */

Allocate the memory for it immediately before opening the outﬁle:
/* create stereo output buffer */
outframe = (float *) malloc(nframes *
outprops.chans * sizeof(float));
if(outframe == NULL){
puts("No memory!\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
Don’t forget to release the resource at the end:
exit:
if(outframe) free (outframe);
We can now add the processing code itself, to the main loop. As the function simplepan
returns a PANPOS, we need a variable to receive it:
PANPOS thispos;

/*STAGE 1 */

Just before the main processing loop, we call simplepan() with the position received
from the user, and use the left and right ﬁelds of thispos inside the loop to generate
the output samples. For each input sample we will be calculating two output samples (i.e.
the samples are interleaved), so we need a new counter out_i for the latter. The whole block
is shown in listing 2.3.1, with the required changes in boldface.
Listing 2.3.1: A Processing Loop to Do Linear Panning:
thispos = simplepan(position);
while ((framesread =
psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd,inframe,nframes)) > 0)
{

226

Chapter 2

int i, out_i;
for(i=0, out_i = 0; i < framesread; i++){
outframe[out_i++] =
(float)(inframe[i]*thispos.left);
outframe[out_i++] =
(float)(inframe[i]*thispos.right);
}
if(psf_sndWriteFloatFrames(ofd,outframe,framesread)
!= framesread){
printf("Error writing to outfile\n");
error++;
break;
}
}
Note that here it is possible to initialize more than one variable in the for statement.11
The initial version of sfpan is now ﬁnished, and it is time to build and test it. To build it,
we must write the rules for sfpan into the makeﬁle (see the guide document for full details).
Each rule comprises a pair of lines (the second indented with a tab, not a space). The ﬁrst line
gives the target (here the program name) and its dependencies; the second gives the instruction (that is, calls the compiler):
sfpan: sfpan.c ./lib/libportsf.a
$(CC) -o sfpan sfpan.c $(INCLUDES) $(LIBS)
For each program maintained by this makeﬁle, a similar rule will be written.
To test this program, ﬁrst check the three fundamental values for panpos: 1 for full left,
0 for center (mono: equal level in both channels), and þ1.0 for full right. You can use any
mono soundﬁle as input, but as well as a musical source, consider using a test signal such as
a full-amplitude sine wave (we saw how to create such a signal in the previous chapter) that
will enable you to observe the levels in the output ﬁle precisely and to conﬁrm that they are
as expected. For example, when panpos is set to zero, the level in each channel should be
exactly half that of the source.
These basic tests of correct behavior are important, but performing critical listening tests on
a program that can only place a sound in a ﬁxed position is difﬁcult. To be able to evaluate
this pan algorithm properly, we need to be able to hear how the sound moves across the
stereo ﬁeld. For this, we must use a breakpoint ﬁle.
2.3.6

Extending sfpan with Breakpoint-File Support

Thanks to the work we did in chapter 1, we already have a complete function to read a textﬁle containing time/value breakpoints. Rather than simply import that function into sfpan.c,
we can anticipate that we may develop several functions handling such ﬁles (and the

227

Audio Programming in C

BREAKPOINT type), so that it would be much better to create a source ﬁle dedicated to them.
Looking ahead, we can expect these functions will probably become a library in their own
right. The main point to appreciate is that while each specialization of main.c belongs to
the particular application, and must therefore exist in the application project directory,
breakpoint functions are general, suitable for use by any program that needs them. Though
we are not yet quite ready to create a library, we can make a start by creating a new ﬁle breakpoints.c , to begin with in our project directory. Later we may move it to a new dedicated
directory, along with other general-purpose source ﬁles. (This will require a change to the
makeﬁle.) Similarly, we need to create a header ﬁle breakpoints.h. We can place this in the
include directory that also contains portsf.h.
Before we can start writing new code, we must copy to these ﬁles everything we already
have relating to the BREAKPOINT type. Add an #include directive for breakpoints.h at the
top of breakpoints.c, using angle brackets (as this is a public header ﬁle):
#include <breakpoints.h>
The header ﬁle will contain the deﬁnition of the BREAKPOINT type and prototypes for
the BREAKPOINT-related functions get_breakpoints and maxpoint. As one of the arguments to get_breakpoints uses the FILE type, add #include <stdio.h> to the top
of breakpoints.h. Similarly, copy the code of the two BREAKPOINT-related functions from
breakdur.c (see chapter 1) into breakpoints.c.
Note that get_breakpoints uses several C library functions (malloc, realloc, and
free), so that breakpoints.c also needs #include <stdlib.h>. Finally, add breakpoints.c to
the makeﬁle. The ﬁle becomes a new dependency for sfpan:
sfpan: sfpan.c breakpoints.c ./lib/libportsf.a
$(CC) -o sfpan sfpan.c breakpoints.c $(INCLUDES) $(LIBS)
We are now ready to design the program. This entails identifying what may be needed at
each stage of the program. Some materials we already have; others will have to be implemented from scratch.
In stage 1 (deﬁne variables), some elements are obvious. We are reading a text ﬁle opened
with fopen, so we need a FILE* variable, and we need other variables to hold the size of the
breakpoint ﬁle, and also a pointer to the breakpoint data itself (see breakdur.c in chapter 1):
FILE* fp = NULL;
unsigned long size;
BREAKPOINT* points = NULL;
We can expect to return to this stage as other stages get developed. We also need to update
the usage message to reﬂect the new facility:
if(argc < ARG_NARGS){
printf("insufficient arguments.\n"

228

Chapter 2

"usage:\n\t"
"sfgain infile outfile posfile.brk\n"
"\tposfile.brk is breakpoint file"
"with values in range -1.0 <= pos <= 1.0\n"
"where -1.0 = full Left, 0 = Centre, +1.0 = full Right"
);
return 1;
}
In stage 2 (obtain and validate arguments from user), there are two tasks. The ﬁrst is simply
to open the named breakpoint ﬁle. We already have code do this from chapter 1 (subsection
1.1.7). It includes some important basic error checking on the ﬁle:
/* read breakpoint file and verify it */
fp = fopen(argv[ARG_BRKFILE],"r");
if(fp == NULL){
printf("Error: unable to open"
"breakpoint file %s\n",argv[ARG_BRKFILE]);
error++;
goto exit;
}
points = get_breakpoints(fp, &size);
if(points==NULL){
printf("No breakpoints read.\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
if(size < 2){
printf("Error: at least two breakpoints required\n");
free(points);
fclose(fp);
return 1;
}
/* we require breakpoints to start from 0 */
if(points[0].time != 0.0){
printf("Error in breakpoint data: "
"first time must be 0.0\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
We also need to check that the breakpoints in the ﬁle are all within the allowed range. The
function get_maxpoint employed in breakdur does half the job, and we could create a

229

Audio Programming in C

matching function get_minpoint to do the other half, but using both functions would
mean scanning the data twice. This would be trivial for a short handwritten breakpoint ﬁle,
but if it has been extracted from a soundﬁle (as we will be doing later in this chapter), and
contains potentially thousands of points, this is an overhead that is worth avoiding. Instead,
we can modify the code demonstrated in subsection 2.3.4 above into a general-purpose function that is given the desired range and scans the array of breakpoints, returning 0 if an outof-range value is found and returning 1 if all is well:
int inrange(const BREAKPOINT* points,
double minval,
double maxval,
unsigned long npoints)
{
unsigned long i;
int range_OK = 1;
for(i=0; i < npoints; i++){
if(points[i].value < minval || points[i].value > maxval){
range_OK = 0;
break;
}
}
return range_OK;
}
Add the declaration of this new function to breakpoints.h, and copy the whole function
body into breakpoints.c. You can then call this function after the other validation tests shown
above:
if(!inrange(points,-1,1.0,size)){
printf("Error in breakpoint file: "
"values out of range -1 to +1 \n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
Note that this uses the operator ! (logical-NOT or ‘‘negation’’), so that the test asks
"if breakpoint data NOT in range, report error"
The NOT operator will return ‘true’ if applied to the value zero, and ‘false’ otherwise, which
is why inrange returns 0 if an out-of-range value is found. If we have an acceptable breakpoint ﬁle, all we need do is apply it to the soundﬁle, in the main processing loop. It is at this
stage that we need to be able to describe exactly what we are trying to do.

230

Chapter 2

Figure 2.4
Linear interpolation of breakpoint data.

2.3.7

Basic Breakpoint Processing—Using Linear Interpolation

The task at hand is, given a series of time/value breakpoints at arbitrary (non-decreasing)
times, to ﬁnd a value at a time between adjacent points. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.4 for
the case of a breakpoint ﬁle containing the data
0.0 0.0
2.0 1.0
4.5 0.0
where we want to know the value at time ¼ 2.25. It is useful in following this procedure to
consider not an individual breakpoint, but a pair of adjacent points, which we will call a
span. In the above ﬁle there are two such spans, the ﬁrst 2 seconds long and the second 2.5
seconds long. We want to know the value at time ¼ 2.25, indicated by the upward arrow
under the horizontal axis.
Given that the target time cannot be negative, that the time of the ﬁrst point must be zero,
and that successive times cannot decrease, it is a simple matter to step along the array until
we ﬁnd a breakpoint whose right-hand time is above or equal to the target time—in this
case, the second span. We need to know how far along this span the requested time is,
expressed as a simple fraction of the whole span—that is, the ratio between the distance

231

Audio Programming in C

from the left time to the target time (marked a in ﬁgure 2.4) and the width of the whole span
(marked b in ﬁgure 2.4):
a ¼ time  timeleft ¼ 0.25
b ¼ timeright  timeleft ¼ 2.5
fraction ¼

a
¼ 0.1.
b

As the breakpoint ﬁle deﬁnes a simple line connecting the values of a span, we can apply this
fraction to the span values to ﬁnd the required value:
c ¼ valueright  valueleft ¼ 1.0,
target_distance ¼ c  fraction ¼ 0.1,
target_value ¼ valueleft þ target_distance ¼ 1.0  0.1 ¼ 0.9.
There are two special cases to consider:
(1) Two spans happen to have the same time. In this case, b will be zero, and we would
encounter a division-by-zero error, when calculating fraction. There can be situations in
which an instant jump from one value to another is reasonable, and in any case decisions
on whether this is acceptable should not be left to a low-level function, so the general solution is to return the right-hand span value in this situation.
(2) The requested time is after the ﬁnal breakpoint time, as may easily be the case if, say, a
5-second breakpoint ﬁle is applied to a 10-second soundﬁle. We return the ﬁnal value, which
thus becomes a constant value applied ad ﬁnitum.
Listing 2.3.2 shows a complete function for ﬁnding values for a given time in a supplied
BREAKPOINT array. Copy this into breakpoints.c and add the declaration to breakpoints.h.
Note how the comments identify each of the tasks described: scanning the ﬁle, dealing
with a time beyond the end of the data, avoiding the division by zero, and ﬁnally calculating
the required value.
Listing 2.3.2: Function val_at_brktime
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

double val_at_brktime(const BREAKPOINT* points,
unsigned long npoints, double time)
{
unsigned long i;
BREAKPOINT left,right;
double frac, val, width;
/* scan until we find a span containing our time */
for(i=1; i < npoints; i++){

232

Chapter 2

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29 }

if(time <= points[i].time)
break;
}
/* maintain final value if time beyond end of data */
if(i == npoints){
return points[i-1].value;
}
left = points[i-1];
right = points[i];
/* check for instant jump - two points with same time */
width = right.time - left.time;
if(width==0.0)
return right.value;
/* get value from this span using linear interpolation */
frac = (time - left.time) / width;
val = left.value + (( right.value - left.value) * frac);
return val;

For some important questions relating to this function, see the exercises at the end of this
section.
2.3.8

Completing and Testing the New sfpan

There remains just one task to do in order to add the new panning function to sfpan: obtain
the time values to supply to the function. In the pursuit of ultimate quality, we want to do
this per sample. Thus, we need to calculate the time of each sample. This is not as costly as it
might sound. The distance between samples is constant, and it is equal to the reciprocal of
the sample rate:
double timeincr = 1.0 / inprops.srate;
Thus, all we need do is initialize a time variable to zero outside the processing loop:
double sampletime = 0.0;
and increment this by timeincr for each sample. The variables must be declared at the top
of main (stage 1), but perhaps they are best initialized immediately above the start of the
processing loop (and of course timeincr cannot be initialized until the soundﬁle is
opened), to make it clear to anyone reading the code that the initializations are closely associated with that loop. Finally, our original call to simplepan before the loop must be moved
inside the loop, receiving the incrementing sampletime value. This leads to the ﬁnal code
for the processing loop:

233

Audio Programming in C

/* init time position counter for reading envelope */
timeincr = 1.0 / inprops.srate;
sampletime = 0.0;
while ((framesread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd,inframe,nframes)) > 0)
{
int i, out_i;
double stereopos;
for(i=0, out_i = 0; i < framesread; i++){
sstereopos = val_at_brktime(points, size,sampletime);
pos = simplepan(stereopos);
outframe[out_i++] = (float)(inframe[i]*pos.left);
outframe[out_i++] = (float)(inframe[i]*pos.right);
sampletime += timeincr;
}
if(psf_sndWriteFloatFrames(ofd,outframe,framesread)
!= framesread){
printf("Error writing to outfile\n");
error++;
break;
}
}
It is now time to build and test the complete program. If you get compilation errors,
remember to study the ﬁrst message especially carefully; most errors at this stage will be
simple typing mistakes.
Testing involves selecting a suitable input ﬁle and creating a breakpoint ﬁle containing a
panning trajectory that ﬁts the duration of the ﬁle (or is perhaps shorter—test the ﬁnal-value
behavior here). Don’t try to do anything ‘‘imaginative’’ yet. A simple three-point breakpoint
ﬁle is all you need to check performance in both directions:
0.0
2.0
4.0

-1.0
1.0
-1.0

This pans the sound steadily from full left to full right and back again slowly enough that the
motion can be heard clearly. Remember that, as an audio/music programmer, you are evaluating not only whether a program works without crashing, but also the sonic and musical
quality of the results. So use test sources that enable that evaluation to be conducted easily.
For evaluating a panning function, a sound that is reasonably constant in level is required.
You can use a sine wave (especially useful for testing graphically with Audacity), but it is
generally thought that impulsive sounds are easier to locate in the stereo ﬁeld, so a plain
drum loop can also be effective. You need a reasonably good audio setup in a space without

234

Chapter 2

disruptive reﬂections. Headphones are often useful, but only as an adjunct—for evaluating a
panning process, you need to listen over properly spaced stereo loudspeakers.12
Don’t forget to test the program’s basic functionality. Check that it correctly opens a mono
ﬁle while rejecting others, and that it generates a stereo output ﬁle without crashing or printing inappropriate error messages. Conversely, also test that the correct messages are displayed if, for example, you pass the name of a non-existent ﬁle.
It is also important to deﬁne in advance (whenever you can) what you are expecting to
hear. If you have a program (perhaps a DAW) that can also pan sounds dynamically using
automation, use that to create a sound to compare against the output of sfpan. Sometimes it
can be very difﬁcult to evaluate a new effect without precedent, and it helps to have something to relate it to. Sufﬁce it to say that the normative requirement for a stereo panner is for
the sound to be heard to move smoothly across the stereo ﬁeld, maintaining a sense of constant distance from the listener, and therefore a constant sound level.13
2.3.9

A Better Panner—The Constant-Power Function

If you have followed all the procedures described above, and have listened to the output
from sfpan, you may have formed one or more of the following impressions:
The sound tends to be pulled into the left or the right speaker.
The sound seems to recede (move away from the listener) when the input ﬁle is panned
centrally.
n
The level seems to fall slightly when the sound is panned centrally.
n
n

The reason for this is that the amplitude and the perceived intensity (or loudness) of a sound
are not equivalent. The ear is more sensitive to intensity than to amplitude (which is why
the decibel scale is so important to audio engineers), and intensity (which relates to the
power of the signal) is measured by reading not the amplitude but the square of the amplitude. If we want to ﬁnd the overall intensity of a pair of sound sources, we need to square
the amplitude of each signal to get the power, add these values together, then take the
square root of the result to get back to an amplitude:
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
(3)
P ¼ amp 1 2 þ amp 2 2 .
If we apply this formula to the signal level in each speaker when simplepan is used to place
a sound centrally, we discover that the result does not sum to 1:
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
(4)
P ¼ 0.52 þ 0.52 ¼ 0.5 ¼ 0.707.
This is equal to a decrease in level of 3 dB. Intuitively we can grasp this if we note that two
equally loud singers are not twice as loud as one (which is just as well; otherwise an averagesize choir would exceed the threshold of pain). Therefore, instead of the simple linear function, we need a function that, when subjected to the above formula, evaluates to 1 over the

235

Audio Programming in C

Figure 2.5
Constant-power panning.

required range. Such a function will ensure constant power wherever the sound is placed
within the stereo ﬁeld. Mathematicians can devise any number of functions that meet this
requirement. The functions most widely used for a constant-power panner are those cornerstones of ‘‘audible mathematics,’’ the sine and cosine functions (ﬁgure 2.5).
The formulae for a constant-power pan function are
pﬃﬃﬃ
2
[cos(y) þ sin(y)]
(5)
Aleft ¼
2

236

Chapter 2

and
Aright ¼

pﬃﬃﬃ
2
[cos(y)  sin(y)],
2

(6)

where y is the angle of the panned signal. All trigonometric calculations are performed on
angles measured in radians, rather than degrees, so a single cycle of a sinusoid has a range
of 2p radians. Thus a quarter-sector has a length of p/2. As the panning range we are using
(between 1 and þ 1) has a width of 2, we have to scale the pan function by the inverse of 2
to arrive at the required amplitude value for each channel. The full constant-power function,
shown in listing 2.3.3, is a direct replacement for simplepan.
Listing 2.3.3: A Constant-Power Panning Function
1
PANPOS constpower(double position)
2
{
3
PANPOS pos;
4
/* pi/2: 1/4 cycle of a sinusoid */
5
const double piovr2 = 4.0 * atan(1.0) * 0.5;
6
const double root2ovr2 = sqrt(2.0) * 0.5;
7
/* scale position to fit the pi/2 range */
8
double thispos = position * piovr2;
9
/* each channel uses a 1/4 of a cycle */
10
double angle = thispos * 0.5;
11
12
pos.left
= root2ovr2 * (cos(angle) - sin(angle));
13
pos.right
= root2ovr2 * (cos(angle) + sin(angle));
14
return pos;
15 }
Several things are worth noting about this function.
Lines 5 and 6: Constant values are declared using the const keyword. This is both ‘‘defensive programming’’ and good documentation, and often it leads to extra efﬁciency in the
code generated by the compiler.
Line 5: To obtain the numeric value of PI, we can write out the number explicitly, as we did
in the ﬁnal examples of chapter 1:
#define PI = 3.1592654
As we saw in chapter 1, UNIX-based compilers offer a more precise deﬁnition, providing the
symbol M_PI. A popular alternative is to get the compiler to compute it for us:
double PI = 4.0 * atan(1.0);
The function atan is the standard arctan function, and like cos and sin it is deﬁned in
<math.h>.

237

Audio Programming in C

Lines 5–10: The calculations are written out step by step, following the description of the formula, with each calculation commented accordingly. An obvious optimization is to condense the code by merging all calculations involving constants; for example, piovr2 can
be deﬁned directly as 2 * atan(1.0). The full optimization procedure is left as an exercise.
Add constpower to the top of main.c as a complete replacement for simplepan. Then
recompile and repeat the listening tests using the same test breakpoint ﬁle. You should hear
that the pan is much more even in level as the sound traverses the stereo ﬁeld.
2.3.10

Objections to sfpan

We have done quite a lot in this chapter. We have written a program to do constant-power
panning that includes support for dynamic panning using a breakpoint ﬁle. In the process,
we have learned the principles of linear interpolation. The program has been tested, and
it works. Satisfying as that is, there is a major criticism that can be made of sfpan: it is
extremely inefﬁcient.
The primary culprit is the function val_at_brktime. This is called every sample (itself
something we want to avoid, as every function call incurs some code overhead), and each
time it is called it scans the breakpoint array from the beginning. And much of the time it
will be scanning to the same breakpoint span. For an array of just a few elements, one can
argue that this does not matter. However, it is not only possible but likely that some breakpoint ﬁles will be much larger, running to 1,000 points or more (for example, an envelope
extracted from a large soundﬁle, with 100 points per second stored in the ﬁle).
The problem is that val_at_brktime ‘‘does not scale well.’’ An algorithm that may be
acceptable for a small data set may be very unacceptable for a large one. The larger the breakpoint ﬁle, the slower the program will run—and the program will run progressively slower
as it approaches the end of the breakpoint data. Much of the time, val_at_brktime does
redundant processing. Once the required span has been found, it is absurd, as well as wasteful, to go all the way back to the beginning just to ﬁnd that same span all over again. Users
also dislike software that runs faster or slower depending on the input. Our ideal solution is a
method that runs at a single efﬁcient speed, regardless of the size of the data.
There are many possible solutions, all, perhaps inevitably, more complicated than the
simple approach presented here. A few require knowledge of aspects of C yet to be described,
but many can be written without further knowledge of the language, by thoughtful design
that analyzes the problem, perhaps engaging in a little lateral thinking in the process. (One
solution is presented in the next chapter, where amplitude envelopes take center stage, and
where the issue of large breakpoint ﬁles has to be addressed at the outset.)
A second objection to val_at_brktime is that it is not robust, in that it doesn’t check the
validity of input arguments. There is much to check—the pointer to the array of breakpoints
must not be NULL, npoints must be at least 2, breakpoint times must not go backward, and

238

Chapter 2

the time value itself cannot be negative. All these checks could be added, and the format of
the function could be revised so that it returns an error value. The required breakpoint value
could then be returned via a pointer supplied from the calling function, which also must not
be NULL.
However, all these procedures take time, an audio programmer’s most precious resource.
Instead, when the function is implemented, we trust that it will be used correctly—the
breakpoint data is validated for reasonableness when it is loaded, for example. Again for reasons of efﬁciency, it is very undesirable to have to check a return value every sample, and all
those validation checks add to the overhead of the function. In the chapters that follow, we
will meet both alternative implementation strategies and further C language idioms, all of
which will help to increase both the efﬁciency and the robustness of our code.
2.3.11

Exercises

Exercise 2.3.1
The function val_at_brktime has this code in lines 14–15:
if(i == npoints){
return points[i-1].value;
Explain why the array index is i-1 rather than i. What assumption about the array is being
relied on here?
Exercise 2.3.2
(a) Optimize the function constpower: reduce all calculations involving constant values to
one, and eliminate the double calls to cos and sin on the same argument.
(b) Write documentation for the program sfpan (using constpower) for a musically literate
but non-mathematical reader.
Exercise 2.3.3
(a) In the text it is suggested that a function minpoint could be written, to complement the
existing function maxpoint. Write this function. Test it using a variety of handwritten
breakpoint ﬁles. For example, test it with ﬁles containing values that are all positive or all
negative.
(b) Suggest at least two alternative ways of deﬁning a single function that can ﬁnd and
return both the minimum and maximum values in a breakpoint ﬁle (scanning the array
only once), together with the line(s) containing each. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each method, and implement and test your preferred solution. Assume that the
function will be called with legal arguments.

239

Audio Programming in C

Exercise 2.3.4
(a) Write a test program for the simplepan and constpower functions (not involving any
soundﬁles) that checks the calculated overall intensity of a sound (amplitude 1) when
panned from full left to full right over 128 steps. Use this program to conﬁrm that the two
pan functions behave as described.
(b) (optional) Adapt the program to create a textﬁle of breakpoints that can be displayed
graphically, e.g. using Gnuplot. Modify the program to generate a ﬁle that demonstrates the
change in intensity in one channel. (This will, in effect, display the pan function under test.)
Exercise 2.3.5 (advanced)
As was noted in the text, the function val_at_brktime is very inefﬁcient. Modify sfpan to
solve this problem, by implementing the method of val_at_brktime directly in the main
function, so that the code steps through the breakpoint ﬁle only once, as the soundﬁle is
processed. Preserve the sample-by-sample behavior, e.g. by ensuring that successive breakpoints at identical times are handled correctly.
2.4

Envelopes as Signals—Amplitude Processing
2.4.1

Introduction

The previous section introduced breakpoint-ﬁle processing as an enhancement to a basic pan
program. From this it became clear that breakpoint ﬁles correspond pretty closely to what
is often termed ‘‘automation data,’’ in audio workstations, or even simply as ‘‘envelopes’’
(ﬁgure 2.6). In this chapter we will embrace breakpoint-ﬁle handling from the outset. Here
the term ‘‘envelope’’ will be particularly appropriate, as we implement two complementary
tasks—extracting an amplitude envelope from a soundﬁle, and applying an amplitude envelope to a soundﬁle.
We will develop two programs: envx and sfenv. Both will follow the structure of the main.c
template. At the end of chapter 1 we explored the distinctive nature of the two kinds of data:
the soundﬁle and the breakpoint ﬁle. The former is a regularly timed stream of audio samples, whereas the latter is an arbitrary time-ordered list of time/value points, which may be
irregularly sampled—the breakpoints maybe unevenly spaced in time. In exploring the exponential decay, we saw how the breakpoint ﬁle can ultimately become as regularly and
densely sampled as the sound data, culminating in the generation of a decaying sine wave.
In this instance, the envelope’s shape was computed every sample.
In envx, our task is to extract the amplitude envelope from an existing soundﬁle, to
become a breakpoint ﬁle. As we shall see, this leads to a fairly simple program. For sfenv, we
have to process a regular stream of samples while reading from a source that is possibly
sampled irregularly. We may be presented with a few breakpoints widely separated in time,

Figure 2.6
Enveloping an audio signal.

241

Audio Programming in C

or, at the other extreme, we may even been given two points with the same time. The underlying task is, in effect, to convert the breakpoint data into a regular sample stream, which is
then applied to the input sound. The method we will use is called linear interpolation. In
chapter 1 we saw how a plotting program such as Gnuplot can be used to draw breakpoint
data—the lines connecting the points are themselves created using linear interpolation.
We saw an example of linear interpolation in the previous section, where it was noted that
the process employed is very inefﬁcient and wasteful. In this section, a solution is presented
that addresses that issue. While sfenv is a little more complicated than either envx or sfpan,
the programming principle employed is the simple and fundamental one of counting.
The evolution of these programs demonstrates a principle that is easily overlooked by programmers. In the majority of cases (and almost invariably for code of any complexity) the
required approach is to implement the same program several times. The ﬁrst version must
work (it may be called the ‘‘proof of concept’’ version); later versions seek to improve the
overall design (i.e. by learning from the mistakes or other defects of the original version)
and the details of the code so as to meet as many of these other objectives as is possible.
The extent to which this is so can be seen from the fact that later chapters will demonstrate
yet more alternative methods for generating and processing audio streams, as further criteria
arise from musical and/or technical requirements. Indeed, we are already conscious of the
need to approach the current task thinking of future needs; what works here, with this
method, may yet not be ideal for use with that task. Conversely, if the method developed
here does seem to be general enough, and broad enough in scope, we are also conscious of
the need to package or generalize the method to make its use elsewhere as straightforward as
is possible.
By deﬁnition, a soundﬁle represents a digital audio signal. The numbers we generate from
a breakpoint ﬁle using linear interpolation are not an audio signal in the same way (no negative values, for example), yet they still represent a signal of a special kind, complete with a
sample rate. Our task in this section is therefore to perform signal processing where one signal,
the breakpoint stream, is, in effect, being synthesized and applied to the other. With envx we
are extracting a signal from an existing one. Our preoccupation with the digital processing
and generation of signals will only increase as we continue the journey.
2.4.2

The envx Program—Describing the Task

An envelope describes some relatively slowly time-varying property of a sound. The amplitude envelope is probably the most familiar example, as the creation and control of amplitude envelopes is an essential synthesis tool.
To extract the envelope from a soundﬁle such as an instrument sample, we must perform
the reverse process—we must track the overall amplitude trend of the signal, which by deﬁnition changes far more slowly than the oscillations of the underlying waveform. Although

242

Chapter 2

Figure 2.7
Extracting an amplitude envelope.

this description does suggest that the process is a form of low-pass ﬁltering, we do not want
to discard or ignore audio information; rather, we want to ﬁnd the maximum absolute
sample over successive small blocks of samples (ﬁgure 2.7). The extracted envelope data lies
within the positive ‘‘normalized’’ range from 0 to 1.0. It can be applied to some other soundﬁle (e.g. one containing some simple synthetic waveform) to reproduce the dynamic character of the source. We use linear interpolation to generate a stream of amplitude values, which
are multiplied with the audio samples, thus ‘‘enveloping’’ the source. In the context of realtime audio processing, the combination of these two procedures is usually termed envelope
following.

243

Audio Programming in C

2.4.3

Extracting Envelope Data from a Soundﬁle

We begin, as before, by copying main.c to a new ﬁle envx.c. As should now be routine, we
make some preliminary changes to the template code. We already know that the output
will not be a soundﬁle, but a textﬁle, so all the code that deals with an output soundﬁle
(including the code to report PEAK information) must be removed. In its place, we will be
adding code to write to an output textﬁle. The enum list of argv symbols can remain
unchanged (it already covers a basic infile and outfile command line), as can the code
that checks for optional ﬂag arguments (at this stage, we may or may not know whether we
need this code).
One aspect we want to change early on is the comment string at the very top of the ﬁle
that describes the program (stage 2):
/* envx.c :
extract amplitude envelope from mono soundfile*/
Similarly, we can change the announcement string near the top of main:
/*STAGE 2 */
printf("ENVX: extract amplitude envelope"
"from mono soundfile\n");
We can also complete an initial version of the usage message:
/* check rest of commandline */
if(argc < ARG_NARGS){
printf("insufficient arguments.\n"
/* TODO: add required usage message */
"usage: envx insndfile outfile.brk\n"
);
return 1;
}
We must also look at the code for opening the input soundﬁle (stage 3), and consider what
changes we may need. In this case a very pertinent instruction in the template code is
/* TODO: verify infile format for this application */
It is only practical to extract an envelope (at the level of precision we are interested in)
from a mono soundﬁle, so we must ensure that we reject any multi-channel ﬁles:
/* verify infile format is acceptable */
if(inprops.chans > 1){
printf("Soundfile contains %d channels: "
"must be mono.\n",inprops.chans);

244

Chapter 2

error++;
goto exit;
}
The other change we need to add to the template code is to add code to open the output
text ﬁle (stage 4). (We have encountered this task before, at the end of chapter 1.) We use the
function fopen with the mode for writing, "w":
/* create output breakpoint file */
fp = fopen(argv[ARG_OUTFILE],"w");
if(fp == NULL){
printf("envx: unable to create breakpoint file %s\n",
argv[ARG_OUTFILE]);
error++;
goto exit;
}
Accordingly, we add the declaration for the FILE *fp variable to the list at the top of main,
initializing it to NULL at the same time. Having added code to open a ﬁle, this is also a good
time to add code to close it again, at the bottom of main, after the exit label (stage 7):
/*TODO: cleanup any other resources */
if(fp)
if(fclose(fp))
printf("envx: failed to close output file %s\n",
argv[ARG_OUTFILE]);
2.4.4

Implementation of Envelope Extraction

For extracting amplitude envelopes, we can re-use the function maxsamp introduced in section 2.2 for the program sfnorm to ﬁnd the largest absolute sample value of successive short
blocks (we will call them ‘‘windows’’) of samples. The window must be short enough to capture transient information, such as a percussive attack, but not so short that it ends up reproducing the waveform itself. A secondary possibly conﬂicting consideration is to minimize
the amount of data produced. Add this function unchanged to the top of the source ﬁle,
not forgetting to add its declaration too.
As a rule of thumb, a 15-millisecond window is sufﬁcient to capture the envelope of most
sounds—this gives around 66 envelope points per second. Nevertheless, as there will always
be a reason to set either a shorter or a longer window, we will want to provide the user with
the means to do so. From the description above, it is clear that the best approach is to implement 15 msec as a ‘‘default’’ setting—this simply means that in the absence of instructions
from the user, that is what the program will use. Therefore, rather than add a new required
command-line argument, we can add an optional ﬂag argument (e.g. iscale, used in chapter

245

Audio Programming in C

1). As the object being modiﬁed is a ‘‘window,’’ the ﬂag character can appropriately be ‘w’,
and this has to be followed by a number representing milliseconds. This will lead us to
extend the usage message (stage 2):
printf("insufficient arguments.\n"
"usage: envx [-wN] insndfile outfile.brk\n"
"
-wN: set extraction window size to N msecs\n"
"
(default: 15)\n"
);
This requires a variable to hold the value received from the user, such as
double windur;

/* duration of the window in msecs */

Additionally, we need to set up a default value for windur (expressed in milliseconds). Add
this line under the #include statements at the top of the ﬁle:
#define DEFAULT_WINDOW_MSECS (15)
We can then incorporate this into the declaration of windur:
double windur = DEFAULT_WINDOW_MSECS;
Having deﬁned windur, we can insert the required code to detect and read any commandline ﬂags (stage 2). This simply involves adding a new case statement to the switch block
included in the template code. The complete block is shown in listing 2.4.1, with the added
code shown in boldface.
Listing 2.4.1: Implementation of the -wN Flag
if(argc > 1){
char flag;
while(argv[1][0] == '-'){
flag = argv[1][1];
switch(flag){
/*TODO: handle any flag arguments here */
case('\0'):
printf("Error: missing flag name\n");
return 1;
case('w'):
windur = atof(&argv[1][2]);
if(windur<=0.0){
printf("bad value for Window Duration."
"Must be positive.\n");
return 1;
}
break;

246

Chapter 2

default:
break;
}
argc--;
argv++;
}
}
We can now turn our attention to the code that implements the processing task of this
program (stage 5). A simple procedure for envelope extraction uses the window size (in samples) as the size of each block read from the disk:
unsigned long winsize;
This value is calculated from windur (converted to seconds) using the sample rate of the
inﬁle. This is therefore a stage 3 task:
/* set buffersize to the required envelope window size */
windur /= 1000.0;
/* convert to secs */
winsize = (unsigned long)(windur * inprops.srate);
inframe = (float*) malloc(winsize * sizeof(float));
if(inframe==NULL){
puts("No memory!\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
In this way, inside the main processing loop, we can use the function maxsamp unmodiﬁed,
passing it the sample block just read:
while ((framesread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd, inframe,
winsize)) > 0){
double amp;
amp = maxsamp(inframe, framesread);
...
}
We want to write each new amplitude value, together with its time, to the output text ﬁle
in the standard time/value format. We therefore require a counter to track the time of each
block as it is read:
double brktime; /* holds the time for the current breakpoint time */
Having already converted windur to seconds, all we need do is increment the counter with
this value, inside the loop. (See listing 2.4.2.)

247

Audio Programming in C

Listing 2.4.2
brktime = 0.0;
while ((framesread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd, inframe,
winsize)) > 0){
double amp;
amp = maxsamp(inframe, framesread);
/* store brktime and amp as a breakpoint */
...
brktime += windur;
}
Note that the order of the statements ensures that the ﬁrst breakpoint time written to the ﬁle
is always zero, as we require. To this end, brktime is initialized immediately before the processing loop. It is equally reasonable to initialize such variables in the declaration; doing it
here helps to document the code by placing initializations as close as is possible to the code
that depends on them.
The ﬁnal task is to write each breakpoint line to the text ﬁle as it is calculated, as indicated
by the comment line in listing 4.2. For this, we can use fprintf, not forgetting to check for
any errors:
if(fprintf(fp,"%f\t%f\n",brktime,amp) < 2){
printf("Failed to write to breakpoint file
%s\n",argv[ARG_OUTFILE]);
error++;
break;
}
Note the use of the TAB control character \t in the fprintf format string to ensure that the
numbers are nicely aligned in columns in the text ﬁle. As a help to the user, we can add a
further counter variable to count the number of breakpoints generated:
unsigned long npoints;
This is used in the same way as brktime, except that it can simply be updated using the þþ
increment operator. This counter can be used in a simple information message at the end of
processing (stage 6), replacing the PEAK code in the template ﬁle:
if(framesread < 0)
{
printf("Error reading infile. Outfile is incomplete.\n");
error++;
}
else
printf("Done: %d errors\n",error);
printf("%d breakpoints written to %s\n",
npoints,argv[ARGV_OUTFILE]);

248

Chapter 2

The complete processing loop is shown in listing 2.4.3. All the work we have done so far
we have done to prepare for and support these 14 lines of code.
Listing 2.4.3
npoints = 0;
brktime = 0.0;
while ((framesread =
psf_sndReadFloatFrames(ifd,inframe,winsize)) > 0){
double amp;
/* find peak sample of this block */
amp = maxsamp(inframe,framesread);
if(fprintf(fp,"%f\t%f\n",brktime,amp) < 2){
printf("Failed to write to breakpoint file %s\n",
argv[ARG_OUTFILE]);
error++;
break;
}
npoints++;
brktime += windur;
}
You are now ready to build the program (remembering to update the makeﬁle) and to test
it on a range of input soundﬁles. If you get compilation errors, the recommendation is, as
usual, to refer to the example included on the DVD only as a last resort. Explore in particular
the effect of different window sizes, not just on the amount of data generated but also on the
shape of the extracted envelope as displayed in Gnuplot. See the exercises at the end of this
section for further suggestions.
2.4.5

Efﬁcient Envelope Processing—The Program sfenv

This program has a format very similar to that of sfpan; it takes a soundﬁle and a breakpoint
ﬁle as inputs, and it produces a soundﬁle as output. Thus, although you can create a project
from scratch, it is also reasonable to copy ‘‘sfpan’’ itself to a new ﬁle, sfenv.c, making the
usual initial changes reﬂecting the new name and purpose. Note that this program requires
the ﬁle breakpoints.c as well as the portsf library. Change the primary source ﬁlename to
sfenv.c and make the usual initial code changes. Update the makeﬁle too.
As was indicated in the introduction to this chapter, this program will be a little more
complex than envx. The stated goal is to apply an amplitude envelope deﬁned in a breakpoint ﬁle to a source soundﬁle, avoiding the inefﬁciencies identiﬁed in the previous section
with respect to sfpan. This therefore demands an initial code analysis stage, to identify
the code responsible for the inefﬁciency, while retaining any code that we may be able to

249

Audio Programming in C

keep for the improved version. As was noted, the troublesome code is in the function
val_at_brktime—in breakpoints.c, the function is given a pointer to what is presumed to
be the beginning of the breakpoint array.
The code can be broken down into four steps, using the idea of the ‘‘span’’ between adjacent breakpoints (‘‘left’’ and ‘‘right’’), where the ‘‘required span’’ is one spanning the target
time, inclusive of the end points:
1. Step through the array from the beginning until the required breakpoint span is found.
2. If the target time is after last available span, return the ﬁnal value of the ﬁnal span.
3. If the span times are the same (in other words, we have a vertical jump in value), use the
right-hand value.
4. If the span times are not the same, calculate the required value using linear interpolation.
The inefﬁciency clearly lies in the ﬁrst of these stages. Recall that this function is called every
sample, so that in the vast majority of cases step 1 (which amounts to a crude ‘‘search algorithm’’) will repeatedly ﬁnd the same span. To avoid this unnecessary overhead, we need
code that is able to keep track of where we are in the array, moving from one position to
the next only when it is time to do so. In other words, whereas the function as implemented
supports the use of arbitrary time values (and is thus a form of random access), we want to
optimize the process for the important special case of non-random, forward sequential access
by eliminating the costly search stage. It should not come as any surprise that to achieve this
the top-level code must employ counter variables to keep track of the current breakpoint
span inside the processing loop. The counting process must ensure that, within the process
loop, the required span is available without the need for a search—including moving to the
next span when required. Because breakpoint times are arbitrary (though guaranteed not to
be decreasing), the process of moving from one span to the next may occur at any sample
(spans may be smaller, larger or even exactly the same size as the sample block size) and is
independent of the process loop.
In val_at_brktime, the counting process is revealed in the code that accesses a span:
left = points[i-1];
right = points[i];
From this we can determine that two counters are needed (representing the left and right
indexes into the array), and that two BREAKPOINT variables are required:
BREAKPOINT leftpoint, rightpoint;
unsigned long ileft, iright;
We also need the curpos and incr variables as used in envx. The span index counters
ileft and iright must be initialized to 0 and 1 respectively. When the time comes to
move to the next span, both counters will be incremented, and the variables required for
the interpolation will have to be recalculated. In val_at_brktime one variable is used:

250

Chapter 2

width (frac is of course able to be a local variable inside the processing loop, as in envx). We
can identify a complementary variable ‘‘height’’ represented by the expression
(right.value - left.value)
In val_at_brktime this expression is reasonable enough, but in the context of repeated
processing it will evidently have the same value for any given span, so calculating it for each
sample is wasteful. Here are the variables we will use to hold these values:
double frac, height, width;
We now have a complete initialization stage (beginning of stage 5), shown in listing 2.4.4.
Whereas frac can, as before, be a variable local to the processing loop, width and height
must be declared at top level, as they need to be initialized outside the loop.
Listing 2.4.4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

/* init time position counter for reading envelope */
incr = 1.0 / inprops.srate;
/* setup counters to track through the breakpoint data */
curpos = 0.0;
ileft = 0;
iright = 1;
/* setup first span */
leftpoint = points[ileft];
rightpoint = points[iright];
width = rightpoint.time - leftpoint.time;
height = rightpoint.value - leftpoint.value;

The span code will be repeated inside the loop when the time comes to move to the next
span. The ﬁrst part of the complete processing loop can be taken almost verbatim from the
code of val_at_brktime; this covers the check for a vertical jump and the interpolation
inside a span. The second part deals with the check for end of span. This check can arise on
any sample. If it ﬁnds a new span, it can simply repeat lines 8–11 of listing 2.4.4. Note that it
does this by checking for the end of the available breakpoint data—see listing 2.4.5.
Listing 2.4.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

for(i=0; i < framesread;i++){
if(width == 0.0)
thisamp = rightpoint.value;
else {
/* not vertical: get interp value from this span */
frac = (curpos - leftpoint.time) / width;
thisamp = leftpoint.value + (height * frac);
}

251

Audio Programming in C

9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23 }

/* move up ready for next sample */
curpos += incr;
/* if end of this span, step to next one if available*/
if(curpos > rightpoint.time){
ileft++; iright++;
if(iright < npoints){/*we have another span, move up */
leftpoint = points[ileft];
rightpoint = points[iright];
width = rightpoint.time - leftpoint.time;
height = rightpoint.value - leftpoint.value;
}
/* otherwise, we have reached the end of the data */
}
inframe[i] = (float)(inframe[i] * thisamp);

Before compiling and running the program, it is a good idea to check the completed code
mentally for the various speciﬁc situations it has to be able to deal with by following the
instructions step by step, assuming a particular input. It is especially important to check all
the conditional tests that are used—for example, to check that the code will produce a valid
value for thisamp in each of the cases listed below:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

the ﬁrst audio sample
inside a span (the interpolation code)
the end of the current span, moving to the next
when a vertical span is detected
after the end of the breakpoint data—beyond the ﬁnal span.

If you tried the last test in this list, you found that even after the end of the breakpoint data
all the code as far as line 14 is still executed, which clearly is unnecessary and wasteful and
which clearly requires optimization. The clue to the problem is in the comment in line 20.
(Of course a comment is not executable code.) We could do with a variable that registered
the fact that the end of the data has been reached, which we could then test within the
loop. Such a variable would have only two values, corresponding to the two possible situations, and is often termed a ‘‘ﬂag’’ variable. The usual choice for these variables would be 0
and 1, where 0 is, as we know, equivalent to the ‘false’ result of a conditional test.14 The
choice of name is also important. Apart from the general requirement of readability, it helps
if the name makes it clear that it is a ﬂag variable and not a counter:
int more_points;
This must be initialized to 1 (¼ ‘‘true’’) before the processing loop, and it is set to 0 if the test
in line 14 evaluates to ‘false’. We can then wrap all the calculation code inside the loop in a
test for the new variable. The ﬁnal version of the processing loop is shown in listing 2.4.6.

252

Chapter 2

Listing 2.4.6
1
for(i=0; i < framesread;i++){
2
if(more_points){
3
if(width == 0.0)
4
thisamp = rightpoint.value;
5
else {
6
/* not vertical: get interp value from this span */
7
frac = (curpos - leftpoint.time) / width;
8
thisamp = leftpoint.value + ( height * frac);
9
}
10
/* move up ready for next sample */
11
curpos += incr;
12
if(curpos > rightpoint.time){/*go to next span? */
13
ileft++; iright++;
14
if(iright < npoints){/* have another span, go */
15
leftpoint = points[ileft];
16
rightpoint = points[iright];
17
width = rightpoint.time - leftpoint.time;
18
height = rightpoint.value - leftpoint.value;
19
}
20
else
21
more_points = 0;
22
}
23
}
24
inframe[i] = (float)(inframe[i] * thisamp);
25 }
You should now be ready to compile and test the program. Use the program with a variety
of breakpoint ﬁles—ones longer or shorter than the source (make sure the last value of the
shorter one persists through the remainder of the output ﬁle), and ones with vertical jumps.
(For a simple example of the latter, see table 2.2.)
Table 2.2
An envelope with a vertical jump.
x

y

0.0

0.0

2.0

0.5

2.0

1.0

3.5

0.85

3.5
4.5

0.25
0.1

253

Audio Programming in C

You can then move onto more musical explorations, using envx and sfenv in combination.
Create an envelope from a soundﬁle using envx, and apply that breakpoint ﬁle to another
soundﬁle (or even to the original one—that often gives interesting results). The program
sfenv can now be regarded not only as a musical tool in its own right, but also as a way to
test envx. Suitable test soundﬁles for applying envelopes include basic constant-amplitude
waveforms such as sine waves and triangle waves—by loading the output ﬁles in a soundﬁle
viewer such as Audacity, you can see immediately if the envelope has been applied as
required. Similarly, Gnuplot is your workhorse tool for viewing breakpoint ﬁles.
2.4.6

Exercises

Exercise 2.4.1
By studying the code (including breakpoints.c), discover how it deals with the following
breakpoint-ﬁle input:
(a) Only two breakpoints are supplied, but with the same time.
(b) Three or more breakpoints have the same time.
Adjacent breakpoints are not vertical, but are extremely close together, i.e. closer than two
successive samples at the source sample rate. In each case, identify solutions that do not
require processing to be aborted. Where appropriate, advise the user.
Exercise 2.4.2
Add an optional facility to sfenv to normalize the breakpoint amplitude data before processing.
Exercise 2.4.3
When a soundﬁle is enveloped twice (or more) by the same envelope, what would you
expect the result to be? Test your prediction using a simple Attack, Decay, Sustain, Release
(ADSR) envelope on a constant-amplitude source ﬁle. What is the special signiﬁcance of
this experiment with respect to amplitude envelopes? Make suitable modiﬁcations to sfenv
to enable you to explore this further.
Exercise 2.4.4
(a) Test the error handling of both programs by attempting to write to insufﬁcient disk space
(e.g. to a ﬂoppy disk or a ﬂash disk).
(b) The C library function remove deﬁned in <stdio.h> can be used to delete a ﬁle from
the disk (which must not be open):
int remove( const char *path );

254

Chapter 2

Modify envx to delete the breakpoint ﬁle in the event of an error during processing, which
would cause the ﬁle to be either empty or incomplete. Include a message to inform the user
that the ﬁle has been deleted. Do the same to sfenv with respect to the output soundﬁle.
Exercise 2.4.5
(a) Modify envx to trap the case in which the -w ﬂag is used to deﬁne a window size smaller
than the distance between two samples in the source soundﬁle. Decide on a smallest reasonable size, implement your decision, and augment the usage message accordingly.
(b) Is there a largest reasonable size for the window size in envx? If there is, modify the program accordingly.
Exercise 2.4.6 (advanced)
Modify envx to normalize all the breakpoint data (i.e. scaled so that the peak amplitude value
is 1) before it is written to the ﬁle. Add an optional ﬂag to the command line to control this.
(Hint: It is possible to calculate exactly how many breakpoints a given source ﬁle will require,
given the window size.)
2.5

Waveform Synthesis
So far, we have used only existing soundﬁles in our programs. The time has come to create
our own sounds. In a way, this is the culminating task of all the programming studies so
far. The primary interest for many readers will doubtless be the synthesis of complex, beautiful, arresting, surprising, powerful, original sounds, and there are many techniques for making such sounds—techniques that often match the sounds themselves in complexity.
However, we have also discovered, most recently in the last section, that there is a need to
use soundﬁles consisting of simple waveforms for testing other programs and processes. We
found that, to verify the correct operation of a program that applies an amplitude envelope
to a soundﬁle, it helps if we have a soundﬁle containing a simple and pure signal such as
a sine wave with constant amplitude throughout. In fact, audio and electronic engineers
use a variety of dedicated test equipment, such as signal or ‘‘function’’ generators, to provide
test signals with well-deﬁned properties. Often such tools are designed and built by the
engineers themselves to meet some speciﬁc requirement. That is to say, they are designed to
enable the user to perform a particular task, such as generating a sine wave, as easily as possible. As an audio programmer, you will not only be designing synthesis and processing
tools, you will also be designing the tools with which to design and test them.
For the programmer building a set of tools, an important consideration is to make their use
as seamless as possible. You want to be able to select the tool, ‘‘plug it in,’’ and use it. Even if
working code models are available, you do not want to have to write them out from scratch

255

Audio Programming in C

each time. Thus an important aspect of designing synthesis tools is encapsulation—creating
self-contained objects (functions, data types, etc.) that can be simply plugged into the framework code. This was the reason for the original function to convert breakpoint data into
a sample stream, val_at_brktime. This function ‘‘hid’’ all the low-level code to scan
through the breakpoint data; all the programmer had to do was call the function. However,
this came at a price: the function was very inefﬁcient and wasteful for this particular task.
This inefﬁciency was overcome at the cost of re-exposing all the low-level code inside main.
For a single program using one such object, this doesn’t matter very much. However, it does
not demand a great leap of the imagination to realize that we may want to use many of these
objects, and for that reason adding large amounts of low-level code directly into main is not
an attractive prospect. The classic demonstration of this is seen in additive synthesis, which
uses a bank of oscillators (generating sine waves), each controlled by an amplitude envelope.
Such an oscillator bank may require several hundred oscillators, and therefore may also
require several hundred amplitude envelopes. Many other techniques can be expected to
demand the use of several such objects. The programmer wants to create an oscillator with,
ideally, one line of code, and to extract the signal from it with another line of code.
In this section, this requirement for encapsulation is tackled at the outset, as a program to
generate some standard waveforms is developed. This approach is then applied to the envelope streaming code of the previous section, to realize the combined virtues of efﬁciency and
encapsulation. This will enable the synthesis program to offer breakpoint-ﬁle control of both
amplitude and frequency, without requiring main to be overﬁlled with low-level code. The
result will be a set of basic synthesis and envelope-generation tools that can be expected to
ﬁnd wide use in future projects.
Some words of caution are required here. Space precludes more than an overview of the
fundamental principles and techniques of sound synthesis. The focus here is not so much
on learning about these as on learning how to use C (and later Cþþ) to implement them.
The variety of approaches to sound synthesis is matched by a similar variety in the ways of
implementing them. In this section and in the following sections, this issue takes center
stage. Far from demonstrating the way to implement something, the message emerges that
there are many ways of implementing it, depending not only on the character of the target
synthesis technique but also on the present and future requirements of the programmer.
Sometimes efﬁciency of design may defer to convenience of coding, or to the requirements
of greater ﬂexibility in usage. Design decisions may derive not only from technical issues but
also from musical and artistic requirements. Therefore, despite all the discussions about generality of design and modularity of the code, it is very much a moot point just how possible
it is to achieve ‘‘complete’’ generality, given the composer’s aptitude for both using and misusing the tools provided. A tool is designed for a use and cannot be expected automatically
to be appropriate for hitherto unimagined uses.

256

Chapter 2

2.5.1

Periodicity, Phase Increments, and the Trigonometric Functions

The sin function was ﬁrst introduced in chapter 1 (as a virtual tuning fork) and subsequently in section 2.3 (in the context of the constant-power panning process). But despite
the occasional hint, we have yet to consider the theory behind the sine wave in general and
the sin and cos functions in particular. In taking on the task of sound synthesis, this exercise cannot be postponed any longer. In this subsection we engage with the theory head-on
and discover something of why the sin and cos functions are so important to audio programmers and to musicians.
The full prototype of the sin function is
double sin(double angle);
The challenge in this subsection is to somehow convert this into an oscillator function
such as
double oscil(double frequency);
where successive calls to oscil generate the required stream of samples forming a sine-wave
signal. To do this, we need to understand a little more about sine waves and a great deal
more about ‘‘angle.’’
2.5.1.1 Sine and Cosine—Going Round in Circles
In ﬁgure 2.5, sine and cosine waves are shown superimposed. To the casual eye, these two
signals appear to be just two instances of the same signal, one shifted in time (i.e. horizontally). That understanding is correct—they are both examples of what mathematicians call a
sinusoid. The difference between the two signals truly is the temporal distance between them.
In the case of the sine and the cosine, this difference is both exact and fundamental. It arises
from the two-dimensional view of a circle, and speciﬁcally of an object rotating at constant
speed on the circumference of this circle, such as the second hand of a clock. Imagine that
this represents an object in a two-dimensional world in which one cannot view a clock face
directly, but only on edge, e.g. from below or from the side (ﬁgure 2.8). The problem here is
that, viewed from any one point, the position of the hand is ambiguous. Viewed from below,
10 seconds is indistinguishable from 20, and 0 is indistinguishable from 30. Unless one
already knows both the starting point and the direction of rotation, this ambiguity cannot
be resolved. To provide this essential information, a second viewpoint must be introduced,
at 90 to the ﬁrst—e.g. a view from the right side15 (ﬁgure 2.9). This will immediately show
if the seconds hand stands at 0 or 30. Recording the positions from both viewpoints, as the
hand rotates, leads to a sine wave (viewed from the left or right) and a cosine wave (viewed
from above or below). As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the difference between sine and cosine
is that the sine wave starts from a value of 0, whereas the cosine wave starts from 1.

257

Audio Programming in C

Figure 2.8
Reading a clock in the plane.

258

Chapter 2

Figure 2.9
Resolving the ambiguity—sine and cosine views of a revolving point.

Hence, to represent the position of the minute hand completely, two numbers are
needed—either the direct horizontal and vertical coordinates, or a reference position and an
angle. Indeed, where the reference position is deﬁned in advance, just the angle value is
required. We can now see that the sine and cosine functions deﬁne the reference position,
and the required angle is the argument passed to the function. To complete the picture, we
also need to know the direction of rotation, in order to know the position given by the
angle. As it happens, the sine and cosine functions presume counterclockwise rotation, and
the starting point is at ‘‘15 seconds’’ in terms of a clock, or at 1.0 on the horizontal axis,
where cos(angle) ¼ 1 and sin(angle) ¼ 0. We can now see that this is exactly what is shown
in ﬁgure 2.5.
2.5.1.2 Moving in Steps—The Sampled Phase Increment
To create a sine-wave oscillator in the computer, all we have to do is store, in successive samples, either the horizontal (cos) or vertical (sin) viewpoint as the angle changes in equal-

259

Audio Programming in C

Figure 2.10
A sampled clock.

size steps around the circle. The speed of these steps is the sample rate, and the size of the
step is the phase increment. For example, if we divide the circle into clock seconds, record
one complete revolution second by second, and read the view of the second hand from
the x axis, we will create a single-cycle sine wave comprising 60 samples (ﬁgure 2.10).
So the sample rate is 1 sample per second, and the phase increment is 1/60 of the complete
circle. If we continue with further revolutions, we obtain further cycles of this sine wave, ad
inﬁnitum—a ‘‘periodic signal,’’ an oscillator. ‘‘Periodic’’ thus refers to any signal that can be
described in terms of going around in a circle. To raise the frequency by an octave, we simply
double the increment, so that in 60 samples we go around the circle twice. However, we still
have to produce some speciﬁc numbers: a number representing amplitude (which corresponds to the radius of the rotating point), a number representing the size of a complete
revolution, and then a number representing each angle increment. The amplitude is easy—
we deﬁne it to be 1. The solution to the angle question draws not on clocks, longitude or
latitude, but on the pure mathematics of circles.
2.5.1.3 p and the Radian
The number p is so famous that whole books have been devoted to it. It signiﬁes the ratio of
the circumference C of a circle to its diameter D (ﬁgure 2.11). In practice, as previous ﬁgures
have shown, the radius R of the circle is more important to our purposes, so p is more conveniently expressed in terms of the radius. Among the many striking properties of this ratio,
arguably the most extraordinary is that it cannot be represented exactly by a fraction (a ratio

260

Chapter 2

Figure 2.11
Geometry of the circle.

261

Audio Programming in C

of integers) (and thus it is ‘‘irrational’’) or even by a ﬁnite series of fractional expressions
(thus it is also ‘‘transcendental’’). The digits of p go on forever. Therefore, any computerbased numerical representation inevitably involves approximations,16 and the use of p is
itself essential for a vast range of calculations. In short, for audio programmers p is the foundation of everything. Common C deﬁnitions for p and 2p are shown (with a little more precision than was used in chapter 1) in listing 2.5.1. We will be needing both p and 2p very
frequently from now on.
Listing 2.5.1: C Deﬁnitions of p and 2p
#ifndef M_PI
#define M_PI (3.1415926535897932)
#endif
#define TWOPI (2.0 * M_PI)
In our terms, the circumference is equivalent to one full cycle of a sinusoid, so we can say
that this same ‘‘unit cycle’’ has a length of 2pR. The trick now is to recognize that an angle is
equivalent to the length of the arc it subtends (relative to the circumference), so that, as well
as signifying the radius, R can also signify the angle created by an arc the same length as the
radius (ﬁgure 2.12). This ‘‘unit angle’’ is the radian, and the complete rotation around the
circle can now be described, following the formula above, as a rotation by ‘‘two p radians.’’
This is the basis both of formal mathematical computations involving circles and angles and
of the C library trigonometric functions, including, of course, sin and cos. From table 2.3
we can see clearly that the values of cos repeat those of sin offset by one quadrant (quarter
of a circle), or p/2. This offset constitutes the phase difference between the two sinusoids. Consider any start position in this circle—a starting phase. Each quarter-step around the circle is
equivalent to the addition of p/2 to this position, that is, a phase increment of p/2 each time.
2.5.1.4 The Aliasing Problem
We can see from the ﬁgures and from table 2.3 what is meant by aliasing in a digitally
sampled system. It is the result of trying to represent a frequency that is above half the sample rate (the Nyquist limit). In terms of the ‘‘unit cycle,’’ this means any angle increment
that is equal to or greater than p (exactly half the circle). In table 2.3 we see that both sin
and cos can ﬁnd within the circle two points equal to zero. These points are thus ambiguous. Given the fact that we are seeing only snapshots of the rotating phase, we have in
this case no idea in which direction the phase is rotating—either direction would give the
same answer. This is a graphical representation of the Nyquist limit. Given a sinusoid exactly
at that frequency, and depending on the exact sampling times, we may ‘‘see’’ either opposite
peaks of the cycle or the two zero crossings. So in this case we see either a DC signal (0 Hz) or
a signal at the Nyquist limit of some amplitude.

262

Chapter 2

Figure 2.12
The radian.

Table 2.3
Values of sin( ) and cos( ) for fractions of p.
sin

cos

sinð0Þ ¼ sinð2pÞ ¼ 0:0

cosð0Þ ¼ cosð2pÞ ¼ 1:0

sinðp=2Þ ¼ 1:0

cosðp=2Þ ¼ 0

sinðpÞ ¼ 0

cosðpÞ ¼ 1

sinð3p=2Þ ¼ 1

cosð3p=2Þ ¼ 0

Similarly, if the angle increment is larger than p radians (for example, three quarters of the
circle, or 3p/2), the snapshots will look identical to a rotation of p/2 in the opposite direction. (This is why in ﬁlms rotating wagon wheels or airplane propellers can appear to be
turning backward.) The consequence is that any attempt to generate a frequency above the
Nyquist limit will in fact generate a frequency symmetrically below it, in opposite phase.
Seen in terms of the stream of digital samples, we need a minimum of two samples (of opposite sign) to deﬁne a sinusoid, and that minimum itself is the Nyquist limit. We really need
to keep frequencies just below the Nyquist limit to be sure not to incur aliasing.

263

Audio Programming in C

2.5.2

A Sine-Wave Oscillator in C—Calculating Sample Increments

We know that the C library function sin takes an argument in radians, and we know that a
full cycle of a sinusoid covers an angle (which we can also consider as a length) of 2p radians.
The one arithmetic task we must perform in order to write a sine-wave oscillator is to reconcile these values with an audio sample rate. For a given sample rate SR, we have
incr = 2 * M_PI / SR ;
Rendered as a sample stream, stepping around the circle by this value of incr, will generate
one cycle in 44,100 samples—a 1-hertz signal. It is now a simple matter to deﬁne an increment for any frequency:
incr = freq * 2 * M_PI / SR ;
To complete our sinusoid oscillator, therefore, given a sample rate and a required frequency,
we merely have to deﬁne a starting phase and convert the frequency into a phase increment,
passing the accumulating phase to the sin function for as many samples as we require. Prototype code starting at zero phase, and writing to a hypothetical array of ﬂoats, is shown in
listing 2.5.2.
Listing 2.5.2: A Basic Sine-Wave Oscillator
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

double
double
double
double
double

startphase
srate
freq
curphase
incr

=
=
=
=
=

0.0;
44100.0;
440.0;
0.0; /* use M_PI/2 for cosine */
freq * TWOPI / srate;

for(i=0; i < outsamps; i++) {
output[i] = (float) sin(curphase);
curphase += incr;
if(curphase >= TWOPI)
curphase -= TWOPI;
}

Note the code (lines 10 and 11) to ‘‘wrap’’ the increasing phase by 2p. It is quite common
for programmers to omit this step, relying on the ability of the sin function (as deﬁned by
the ANSI standard) to accept a phase of any size (typically up to e263 before loss of accuracy), and perform the required wrapping internally. The code as shown is clearly more selfdocumenting, which is arguably more important at this stage; and, as will be seen later, there
are waveforms not involving sin or cos that do require direct wrapping in this way, so adding this code is a good habit to get into. It has also to be said that not all compilers are the
same, and some have been found to degrade very quickly when large ‘‘unwrapped’’ values
are given to the sin and cos functions.

264

Chapter 2

We can also see from this code what the meaning of a negative frequency is: it will lead to
a negative value for incr, which therefore rotates the phase around the circle in the opposite direction, or, so to speak, backward through the wave cycle. For plain synthesis of a
signal, we have no need for a negative frequency, and we can argue the case for not supporting it. However, should we want to implement FM (frequency modulation) synthesis, negative frequency values are not only possible but likely, so we will have to add code to wrap
curphase upward:
if(curphase < 0.0)
curphase += TWOPI;
There is scope for a subtle error here, an error that all audio programmers should watch for.
If both the maximum test and the minimum test use a plain < or > operator, neither the
maximum phase value nor the minimum phase value is included, posing the danger of a
slight numerical error (and in even worse cases, an inﬁnite loop). In the above example, the
maximum value TWOPI is compared to using >= (line 10), while the minimum value is
checked with >.
2.5.3

Creation of Oscillator Objects—Code Encapsulation

At the most fundamental level, an object is deﬁned by two things: (1) it has internal ‘‘state,’’
and (2) it has associated functions, or ‘‘methods,’’ which depend on or modify that state, and
which may receive inputs and generate outputs. In the case of the oscillator, the variables
associated with internal state are plain to see—the phase itself and the phase increment.
The sample rate and frequency (where we will want the latter to be time-variable) are inputs,
and the generated sample stream is the output.
We have already seen an example of an object with internal state: the original version
of the breakpoint stream object, epitomized by the now much discussed function
val_at_brktime. The problem with this function, as we saw in section 2.4, was that the
state was in effect re-computed each time the function was called, and similarly that state
was destroyed each time the function returned.
To avoid this repeated creation and destruction of internal state, we need to deﬁne a data
structure to contain it, together with functions that use it. To do this, we need a struct containing the variables declared in listing 2.5.2. To emphasize the fact that we are trying to
deﬁne an object, and to make it as easy to use as is possible, we can declare this struct an
abstract type using typedef. Note that this is a deﬁnition of a type and not the declaration
of a variable. This code belongs in a header ﬁle, which you are now ready to create—call it
wave.h (listing 2.5.3). We will add more material to this header ﬁle as we proceed, not least
the prototypes of functions that use the new type. Start by adding the deﬁnitions for M_PI
and TWOPI in listing 5.1. Similarly, create the implementation ﬁle wave.c (which will of
course #include "wave.h") to contain the deﬁnition of the functions that apply to this
structure. Through all the following descriptions, keep in mind the principle that is at work:

265

Audio Programming in C

a fully worked ‘‘object’’ comprises a tightly coupled combination of structure and functions.
In a very real sense, the functions belong to the structure.
Listing 2.5.3 Deﬁnition of the OSCIL Abstract Type
/* wave.h ; definition of OSCIL type */
typedef struct t_oscil
{
double twopiovrsr; /* to hold a constant value 2PI/sr */
double curfreq;
double curphase;
double incr;
} OSCIL;
Note that OSCIL includes a variable, twopiovrsr, to contain the value of a frequently
required constant (which is dependent on the input parameter srate). Always conscious of
the need to avoid unnecessary duplication or recalculation of code, we will want to look for
any opportunity to use such variables (which are really constants for a given sample rate)
when implementing code that must run very frequently. This enables us to use variables of
the new type just as we do any standard C type:
OSCIL sine_oscil;
Now we need to turn our attention to the implementation ﬁle wave.c. We require, as a
minimum, two functions that take a pointer to an OSCIL object as an argument: an initialization function (which will have to deﬁne the required sample rate) and a function that generates samples. Pointer arguments are required, as we need to be able to modify the internal
state contained within the oscillator. Listing 2.5.4 shows a simple initialization function,
with the frequency-related variables initialized to zero. Note the use of the pointer indirection
notation -> to access the variables inside the OSCIL structure. The code uses the deﬁned
symbol TWOPI we previously added to wave.h.
Listing 2.5.4 Simple Initialization Function for an OSCIL Object
void oscil_init(OSCIL* osc, unsigned long srate)
{
osc->twopiovrsr = TWOPI / (double) srate;
osc->curfreq = 0.0;
osc->curphase = 0.0;
osc->incr = 0.0;
}
This requires that a complete object of type OSCIL has been declared, and that the pointer to
it has been passed to oscil_init. We may, for example, use a simple creation function that
does nothing more than allocate storage and return the pointer:

266

Chapter 2

OSCIL* oscil(void)
{
OSCIL* osc = (OSCIL*) malloc(sizeof(OSCIL));
if(osc == NULL)
return NULL;
return osc;
}
This separation of creation and initialization is often necessary in interactive real-time applications (including audio plug-ins) where the sample rate may not be available at the time the
object is created. This also makes it possible to re-initialize an object—for example, to restart
an envelope, or to set a new sample rate. However, this dual-function approach is not always
ideal for self-contained programs, being more vulnerable to errors, especially by those still at
the early stages of learning programming. For example, if by mistake only a pointer to OSCIL
is declared and passed to the function, or if the pointer is NULL, oscil_init will crash with
an access violation error. To prevent that, and to encapsulate the object even further, it is
possible to design a function that will both create and initialize the object at once (listing
2.5.5). Add that function to wave.c. Instead of void, the function returns either NULL (in
the event of a memory failure) or a pointer to a fully created and initialized object.
The main aspect of this approach is the use of malloc to create external storage for an
OSCIL, which will persist after the function returns.17 The documentation for this function
should tell the user to free this object when it is no longer required.
Note that it is entirely reasonable to deﬁne alternative creation or initialization functions
for a particular object type. The only requirement imposed by the C language is that the
names of functions must be unique.
When we come to explore Cþþ, we will discover a valuable new facility known as ‘‘function overloading,’’ which allows multiple functions of the same name to be deﬁned so long
as the argument lists and/or the return types are different. For now, however, we can manage
very well with our compact all-in-one approach.
Listing 2.5.5: A Combined OSCIL Creation and Initialization Function
OSCIL* new_oscil(unsigned long srate)
{
OSCIL* p_osc;
p_osc = (OSCIL*) malloc(sizeof(OSCIL));
if(p_osc == NULL)
return NULL;
p_osc->twopiovrsr = TWOPI / (double) srate;
p_osc->curfreq = 0.0;
p_osc->curphase = 0.0;
p_osc->incr = 0.0;

267

Audio Programming in C

return p_osc;
}
/* used like this: */
OSCIL *osc = new_oscil(44100);
We can now deﬁne the sample-generation function18 (listing 2.5.6), which is modeled
on the example in listing 2.5.2. It must be called for each required sample. It incorporates
the required support for a changing value for frequency, and for negative frequencies. It is
important to check its behavior on the ﬁrst call. The ﬁrst thing this function does after generating the initial sample (dependent only on curphase) is check for a change of freq,
which updates the value of incr if necessary—a standard ‘‘read and update’’ approach.
Note that incr is recalculated only when curfreq changes, so that in the case of an
unchanging frequency redundant processing is kept to a minimum. Note also that no error
checking is performed on the input pointer—this is for reasons of efﬁciency, as this function
will be called very frequently.
Listing 2.5.6 Sample Generation Function for the OSCIL Type
double sinetick(OSCIL* p_osc, double freq)
{
double val;
val = sin(p_osc->curphase);
if(p_osc->curfreq != freq){
p_osc->curfreq = freq;
p_osc->incr = p_osc->twopiovrsr * freq;
}
p_osc->curphase += p_osc->incr;
if(p_osc->curphase >= TWOPI)
p_osc->curphase -= TWOPI;
if(p_osc->curphase < 0.0)
p_osc->curphase += TWOPI;
return val;
}
/* used like this: */
for(i=0;i < nframes;i++)
outframe[i] = sinetick(osc,freq); /* modify freq ad lib.*/
With this, we have succeeded almost completely in creating the function we sought at the
beginning of subsection 2.5.1, the difference being the added need to pass a pointer to an
OSCIL variable used to preserve the internal state of the oscillator between calls. This is a
highly idiomatic approach in C. We will be making much use of it.

268

Chapter 2

2.5.4

Create a Plain Test Program

Before moving on to more elaborate features, it is reasonable to implement the code developed so far in an initial ‘‘proof of concept’’ program that simply produces, as a mono soundﬁle, a sine wave at a requested duration, amplitude, and frequency. You have indeed done
this before, back in chapter 1; the differences here are the design of the code and the use of
the portsf library. You now have two possibilities: copy main.c to a new ﬁle and develop the
new program from that, or copy and adapt one of the programs previously presented. As this
is a synthesis program, there is no infile. Call the program siggen (for ‘‘signal generation’’),
and call the main source ﬁle siggen.c. As usual, the program requires linking with portsf; and
of course we are also using the new source ﬁle wave.c. This also is a program that will become
more complex—the version of siggen.c on the DVD represents the ﬁnal version, not this preliminary stage. It is most important that you follow through all the details of writing this
program from ﬁrst principles.
The ﬁrst task is to complete the source ﬁles implementing the oscillator code itself. The
header ﬁle wave.h should now contain the deﬁnition of OSCIL, together with the deﬁnitions
of M_PI and TWOPI, and the prototypes of the functions new_oscil and sinetick as
deﬁned in listings 2.5.4 and 2.5.5. For synthesis we need a command line with, at least, arguments for duration, amplitude, and frequency as inputs; but a sample-rate argument will be
useful too:
sinetest outfile dur srate amp freq
This leads to a revised enumeration:
enum {ARG_PROGNAME,ARG_OUTFILE,ARG_DUR,ARG_SRATE,
ARG_AMP,ARG_FREQ,ARG_NARGS};
You will have to deﬁne corresponding variables srate, dur, amp, and freq for each of these
parameters in the usual way and write the code to obtain them from the command line, with
the required error checking. Reject values at or below zero for each argument.
The most obvious difference from previous programs is that, as this is a synthesis program,
there is no infile. This requires not only that all template code associated with the infile
be removed, but also that the processing loop itself be adapted, since it will only be writing
to an outﬁle, not reading from an inﬁle. Here it is important to initialize the outprops data
for psf_sndCreate. In the absence of an inﬁle deﬁning these properties, we have to set
them directly:
/* define outfile format - this sets mono 16bit format */
srate = atof[ARG_SRATE];
...
outprops.srate = srate;
outprops.chans = 1;

269

Audio Programming in C

outprops.samptype = PSF_SAMP_16; /* or whatever is required */
outprops.chformat = STDWAVE;
(In a fully developed program, all these settings might be obtained from the command line.)
From srate and dur we can derive the number of samples required (rounded to the nearest sample); this can then be used to ﬁnd the required number of blocks of size NFRAMES,
plus a remainder if there is one (here we use integer division and the number of whole blocks
may be zero for a very small value of outframes):
unsigned long nbufs, outframes, remainder;
. . .
dur = atof(argv[ARG_DUR]);
. . .
outframes = (unsigned long) (dur * outprops.srate + 0.5);
nbufs = outframes / nframes;
remainder = outframes - nbufs * nframes;
if(remainder > 0)
nbufs++;
Note that this uses integer division, and nbufs could be zero. The ﬁnal conditional increment for nbufs ensure that the processing loop will run at least once. The preceding code
will need to ensure that a zero value for dur is rejected.
Listing 2.5.7 shows the required modiﬁcations to the standard processing loop. Note that
two index counters are now required, one for nbufs and one for nframes; the latter is set to
the value of remainder for the ﬁnal block.
Listing 2.5.7: Processing Loop for Synthesis
for(i=0; i < nbufs; i++){
if(i == nbufs-1)
nframes = remainder;
for(j=0; j < nframes; j++)
outframe[j] = (float) (amp * sinetick(p_osc, freq));
if(psf_sndWriteFloatFrames(ofd,
outframe, nframes)!=nframes){
printf("Error writing to outfile\n");
error++;
break;
}
}
This completes the requirements for a basic monophonic test program for the sine-wave
oscillator. Build the program, and generate some sine waves at various frequencies. Don’t forget that the fact that the program runs to completion is not a sufﬁcient guarantee that the
program is working properly. The PEAK information is a ﬁrst conﬁrmation—the reported

270

Chapter 2

amplitude should match the requested value given to the program. Audio programmers soon
discover that it is wise to inspect the output of such programs with a soundﬁle editor, for a
visual conﬁrmation that the results are as expected, before risking direct playback. Errors in
soundﬁles (such as heavy clipping or noise) may be decidedly nasty to listen to, and at worst
may damage your speakers or your ears if auditioned at high levels.
With the program working correctly, you now have a means of generating source ﬁles with
which to test programs such as sfenv. A sine-wave source offers the cleanest signal with
which to audition amplitude envelopes. But this is just the beginning.
2.5.5

Generating Other Standard Waveforms

Anyone who has used a traditional analog synthesizer is aware that, in addition to the sinusoids, there are several other important geometric waveforms: the triangle, square, and sawtooth waves, which in idealized form contain an inﬁnite number of harmonics in precisely
deﬁned amounts (ﬁgure 2.13). These waveforms are the primary building blocks of synthesizers employing subtractive synthesis, partly because they are easily generated by analog
circuitry. Unfortunately, they present substantial challenges for a high-quality digital implementation, as such ideal ‘‘straight-line’’ waveforms are not band-limited—the sharp corners
in the waveform introduce substantial amounts of aliasing, which are easily audible for even
middle-range fundamental frequencies, and which no amount of ﬁltering will properly
remove. However, such signals still have a role to play—they are useful for control signals,
such as low-frequency oscillators, and as test signals. Therefore, it is appropriate to add support for them to our ‘‘function generator’’ program, not least because these simple shapes are
very easy to generate, and we can make use of much of the code already developed for
OSCIL. Just how easy it is to generate these shapes can been seen in listing 2.5.8. The phase
calculations already worked out for OSCIL will serve us equally well for these other waveforms, and all that is required is a custom ‘‘tick’’ function for each one, using the sample
OSCIL structure. Note just how much code is duplicated in each function.19 Also note
the frequent use of the constant numeric expression 1.0/TWOPI. It would be reasonable
to simplify this to avoid the division, perhaps by deﬁning yet another symbol such as
ONEOVERTWOPI. This is indeed possible, but it should not be necessary for optimization. As
was noted earlier, a good compiler will calculate the value of such a constant expression
at compile time, so that no code optimization is required; here, as it contributes to the selfdocumenting of the code, we may make the choice to preserve the formal expression of the
calculation.
Listing 2.5.8: Tick Functions for Triangle, Square, and Sawtooth Waveforms
(a) square
double sqtick(OSCIL* p_osc, double freq)
{

Figure 2.13
Standard geometric waveforms.

272

Chapter 2

double val;
if(p_osc->curfreq != freq){
p_osc->curfreq = freq;
p_osc->incr = p_osc->twopiovrsr * freq;
}
if(p_osc->curphase <= M_PI)
val = 1.0;
else
val = -1;
p_osc->curphase += p_osc->incr;
if(p_osc->curphase >= TWOPI)
p_osc->curphase -= TWOPI;
if(p_osc->curphase < 0.0)
p_osc->curphase += TWOPI;
return val;
}
(b) downward sawtooth
double sawdtick(OSCIL* p_osc, double freq)
{
double val;
if(p_osc->curfreq != freq){
p_osc->curfreq = freq;
p_osc->incr = p_osc->twopiovrsr * freq;
}
val = 1.0 - 2.0 * (p_osc->curphase * (1.0 / TWOPI) );
p_osc->curphase += p_osc->incr;
if(p_osc->curphase >= TWOPI)
p_osc->curphase -= TWOPI;
if(p_osc->curphase < 0.0)
p_osc->curphase += TWOPI;
return val;
}
(c) upward sawtooth
double sawutick(OSCIL* p_osc, double freq)
{
double val;
if(p_osc->curfreq != freq){
p_osc->curfreq = freq;
p_osc->incr = p_osc->twopiovrsr * freq;
}

273

Audio Programming in C

val = (2.0 * (p_osc->curphase * (1.0 / TWOPI) )) - 1.0;
p_osc->curphase += p_osc->incr;
if(p_osc->curphase >= TWOPI)
p_osc->curphase -= TWOPI;
if(p_osc->curphase < 0.0)
p_osc->curphase += TWOPI;
return val;
}
(d) triangle
double tritick(OSCIL* p_osc, double freq)
{
double val;
if(p_osc->curfreq != freq){
p_osc->curfreq = freq;
p_osc->incr = p_osc->twopiovrsr * freq;
}
/* rectified sawtooth */
val = (2.0 * (p_osc->curphase * (1.0 / TWOPI) )) - 1.0;
if(val < 0.0)
val = -val;
val = 2.0 * (val - 0.5);
p_osc->curphase += p_osc->incr;
if(p_osc->curphase >= TWOPI)
p_osc->curphase -= TWOPI;
if(p_osc->curphase < 0.0)
p_osc->curphase += TWOPI;
return val;
}
Add these function deﬁnitions to wave.c, and their prototypes to wave.h. To enable the user
to select any one of the available wave types, together with arguments for amplitude and frequency, you will have to add new command-line arguments to the list. The use of the enum
list enables you to add these in any position without having to rewrite the existing code:
enum{ARG_PROGNAME,ARG_OUTFILE,ARG_TYPE,
ARG_DUR,ARG_SRATE,ARG_AMP,ARG_FREQ,
ARG_NARGS};
We also need an enum list for the waveform types themselves, not least because we may
anticipate adding further choices to the list later:
enum {WAVE_SINE,WAVE_TRIANGLE,WAVE_SQUARE,
WAVE_SAWUP,WAVE_SAWDOWN, WAVE_NTYPES};

274

Chapter 2

This leads to an extended usage message:
printf(
"usage: siggen outfile wavetype dur srate nchans amp freq\n"
"where wavetype =:\n"
"0 = sine\n"
"1 = triangle\n"
"2 = square\n"
"3 = sawtooth up\n"
"4 = sawtooth down\n"
"dur = duration of outfile (seconds)\n"
"srate = required sample rate of outfile\n"
"amp = amplitude (0 < amp <= 1.0)\n"
"freq = frequency (freq > 0)\n"
);
We can receive the new information into a variable:
int wavetype;
. . .
wavetype = atoi(argv[ARG_TYPE]);
if(wavetype < WAVE_SINE || wavetype > WAVE_NTYPES){
printf("Error: bad value for wave type\n");
return 1;
}
To select the required oscillator function, the natural C idiom to use is the switch. . .
case statement. However, we now have reached the tricky part—where in the code do we
use it?
2.5.6

Pointers to Functions

The least efﬁcient place to select the oscillator function is inside the inner processing loop:
for(j=0; j < nframes; j++){
switch(wavetype){
case WAVE_SINE:
outframe[j] = amp * sinetick(p_osc, freq);
break;
...
This would run the switch statement on each sample, and consume needless CPU cycles—
we know that the same function will be selected each time. A less expensive solution,
though at the cost of increased code size, is to apply the switch statement at top level and
duplicate the complete processing loop code for each alternative:

275

Audio Programming in C

switch(wavetype){
case(WAVE_SINE):
for(i=0; i < nbufs;i++){
if(i == nbufs-1)
nframes = remainder;
for(j=0; j < nframes; j++){
outframe[j] = (float) (amp * sinetick(p_osc, freq));
...
}
In many cases, this would prove a reasonable solution. There is, however, an even more powerful way to solve the problem. It exploits the important fact that all the tick functions are of
exactly the same form:
double tickfunc(OSCIL* p_psc, double freq);
Inside the computer, functions are not so different from variables, structures, or other
data—they exist in some position in memory, and therefore have a memory address associated with them. We can understand the function name as a pointer to where the function is
represented in memory. Just as it is possible in C to deﬁne a pointer to any type (i.e. a variable that is a pointer—‘‘a variable is an instance of a type’’), it is also possible to deﬁne a
type, and thus a variable, that is a pointer to a function. Just as the function has to be fully
deﬁned, so the pointer to it is speciﬁc to a given prototype. It is a somewhat convoluted
notation, thanks to the fact that, whereas C has names for all built-in types (float, int,
double, char, etc.), it does not have a general name for ‘‘a function’’ (not least because
there is an inﬁnite number of ways of deﬁning functions, whereas a float is just a float).
Instead, the function pointer is indicated by a special use of parentheses:
double (*tickfunc)(OSCIL* osc, double);
This declares a variable called tickfunc that is a pointer to a function returning a double
and taking the two arguments enclosed in parentheses. There are two parts to this declaration: the type deﬁnition and the name. The type of the object is a ‘‘pointer to function,’’
indicated by the asterisk enclosed in parentheses followed by another pair of parentheses
containing any function arguments:
double (*)(OSCIL*, double)
while tickfunc, placed immediately following the lone asterisk, is the name of a variable of
that type.
The parentheses around *tickfunc are vital. Without them, the asterisk would, following
C’s associativity rules, associate to the keyword double, and the deﬁnition would become
that of a concrete function that returns a pointer to a double, which is not what we want
(we could not assign the name of another function to it). The ﬁnal trick in achieving our
goal is to use typedef to create a name for the speciﬁc function-pointer type we want:

276

Chapter 2

typedef double (*tickfunc)(OSCIL* osc, double);
This is the line we want to put somewhere in ‘‘wave.h,’’ after the deﬁnition of OSCIL itself.
Given the typedef, instead of writing the long-winded deﬁnition above to declare a function-pointer variable, we can simply write
tickfunc tick;
We can then freely assign to this variable the name of any function sharing the same prototype:
tick = sinetick;
tick = tritick;
/* and so on */
This solves our problem in siggen.c with no code bloat and no loss of efﬁciency: we can run
our switch statement as soon as we have read the command-line argument into wavetype,
assigning the required function name to the variable tick, and inside the processing loop
we can call tick rather than a speciﬁc function. (See listing 2.5.9.)
Listing 2.5.9: Using a Function Pointer to Select a Tick Function
(a) switch statement
switch(wavetype){
case(WAVE_SINE):
tick = sinetick;
break;
case(WAVE_TRIANGLE):
tick = tritick;
break;
case(WAVE_SQUARE):
tick = sqtick;
break;
case(WAVE_SAWUP):
tick = sawutick;
break;
case(WAVE_SAWDOWN):
tick = sawdtick;
}
(b) processing loop: inner loop
for(j=0; j < nframes; j++)
outframe[j] = amp * tick(p_osc, freq);
The ability to deﬁne pointers to functions is one of the most important features of C. They
can be used anywhere any other type of pointer can be—for example, as a member of a

277

Audio Programming in C

struct, as an element of an array, or passed as arguments to other functions, or returned
from functions. When the time comes to explore the fundamentals of Cþþ, it will become
evident that much of the language depends on the use of function pointers.
The example presented here depends on the fact that all the tick functions share the same
prototype. As soon as we ﬁnd we have to deﬁne a tick function with, say, two arguments,
this simple system starts to break down. Thus the programmer must be constantly on the
lookout not only for solutions to problems but also for the problems caused by the solutions.
The function pointer is far from being a solution to every problem that may arise, but it is
useful enough that it can strongly inﬂuence the design of functions and of whole applications.
This is a good time to rebuild siggen.c with the new waveform facilities and test it to ﬁnd
out how the new waveform shapes sound at high frequencies, where aliasing can be
expected to be the most easily apparent. However, to hear aliasing in its full glory we need
to be able to move the frequency around. Therefore, before considering the program complete, we should add support for at least breakpoint control of frequency. We will do this by
emulating the efﬁciency and encapsulation of the oscillator code. We not only want to retain
the efﬁciency developed in section 2.4, but also the encapsulation achieved in the oscillator
code. In short, we will create a ‘‘breakpoint streaming engine’’ that performs the task
described at the outset of section 2.4, to convert a breakpoint ﬁle into a stream of values at
the required sample rate.
2.5.7

An Encapsulated and Efﬁcient Breakpoint Stream Object

It will be useful here to review the elements of our oscillator design:
a structure, containing variables that represent the internal ‘‘state,’’ and deﬁned as an
abstract type
n
a creation function—deﬁned with arguments required for construction, such as the sample
rate—that allocates a new object using malloc, initializes it, and returns a pointer to the
new object
n
a signal-generation function that returns values for successive sample ‘‘ticks,’’ taking as an
argument at least a pointer to an object of the deﬁned type that preserves the running state
of the object.
n

In implementing a streaming object for breakpoint data, we already have some resources
available, deﬁned in breakpoints.h and breakpoints.c, for instance the core BREAKPOINT type,
and the function get_breakpoints, which reads the data from a ﬁle, applies some basic
validation tests, and ﬁlls an array of BREAKPOINTs.
Using the example of the processing code presented in section 2.4, the structure that
deﬁnes our new object requires counters to give giving the current position in the array,
variables holding some information about the breakpoint data as a whole, and variables

278

Chapter 2

holding information about the current span. These variables should be recalculated only at
the point of moving to the next span. All these ideas lead to a possible structure as shown
in listing 2.5.10. You may ﬁnd it useful to check these ﬁelds against the code presented in
listing 2.4.6. The code will of course have to be added to breakpoints.h, together with the prototypes for the functions deﬁned below.
Listing 2.5.10: Deﬁnition of the BRKSTREAM Type
typedef struct breakpoint_stream {
BREAKPOINT* points;
BREAKPOINT leftpoint,rightpoint;
unsigned long npoints;
double curpos;
double incr;
double width;
double height;
unsigned long ileft,iright;
int more_points;
} BRKSTREAM;
We can now proceed to deﬁne the creation and initialization function for the new type. We
will want to control the opening and closing of the source ﬁle externally, so the appropriate
variable to pass to the creation function is an open FILE*. Note that once the breakpoint
data has been copied into the array, the FILE pointer is of no more interest—there is no
need to store it in the BRKSTREAM structure. As with the oscillators, the function will also
require the sample rate. As a ﬁnal convenience for the user, we can use a third pointer argument to receive, optionally, the size of the breakpoint data. This leads to a creation function
as shown in listing 2.5.11. Note that the initialization code completely prepares the ﬁrst span
(as done in listing 2.4.4), and that, where errors are detected, any allocated memory is freed
before the function returns.
Listing 2.5.11: The Function bps_newstream
BRKSTREAM* bps_newstream(FILE *fp, unsigned long srate, unsigned long
*size)
{
BRKSTREAM* stream;
BREAKPOINT *points;
unsigned long npoints;
if(srate == 0){
printf("Error creating stream - srate cannot be zero\n");
return NULL;
}

279

Audio Programming in C

stream = (BRKSTREAM*) malloc(sizeof(BRKSTREAM));
if(stream == NULL)
return NULL;
/* load breakpoint file and setup stream info */
points = get_breakpoints(fp, &npoints);
if(points == NULL){
free(stream);
return NULL;
}
if(stream->npoints < 2){
printf("breakpoint file is too small - "
"at least two points required\n");
free(stream);
return NULL;
}
/* init the stream object */
stream->points = points;
stream->npoints = npoints;
/* counters */
stream->curpos = 0.0;
stream->ileft = 0;
stream->iright = 1;
stream->incr = 1.0 / srate;
/* first span */
stream->leftpoint = stream->points[stream->ileft];
stream->rightpoint
= stream->points[stream->iright];
stream->width = stream->rightpoint.time
- stream->leftpoint.time;
stream->height = stream->rightpoint.value
- stream->leftpoint.value;
stream->more_points = 1;
if(size)
*size = stream->npoints;
return stream;
}
There is one very important point to note about this function. As well as allocating the main
BRKSTREAM object itself, which the user will know to free after use, the function also calls
get_breakpoints, which itself allocates memory. This will also have to be freed if there is
not to be a memory leak. As the contents of the BRKSTREAM structure are visible in the
header ﬁle, and thus are public, it is of course possible for the user to do this at top level:
free(stream->points);

280

Chapter 2

However, one principle of encapsulation (a principle that has special importance for Cþþ
programmers) is that the user should not have to deal with the internal management of an
object, but instead should perform all processing of BRKSTREAM objects via a library of functions supplied for the purpose (an API, in other words)—functions that serve to hide the
internals of the object from the user. Therefore, to complement bps_newstream, we deﬁne
a simple function bps_freepoints that frees any internal memory (listing 2.5.12). The
function must of course verify both the supplied stream pointer and the presence of data
(in case the function is called by mistake multiple times on the same object), but it is harmless enough here to fail silently in those cases, so that no return value is needed. The following should be noted:
A non-NULL pointer evaluates to logical ‘‘true,’’ so it is sufﬁcient to write if(stream)
rather than if(stream != NULL).
n
The if test uses the fact that evaluation of a logical expression stops on the ﬁrst ‘‘false’’
result (see subsection 2.3.4).
n
The code sets stream->npoints to NULL after calling free. This ensures that should the
function be called repeatedly by mistake, it will not crash.
n

Listing 2.5.12: The Function bps_freepoints
void bps_freepoints(BRKSTREAM* stream)
{
if(stream && stream->points){
free(stream->points);
stream->points = NULL;
}
}
The tick function itself is shown in listing 2.5.13. There is nothing new in this except for
minor reordering. The fact that this is a self-contained function enables us to return as soon
as more_points is set to 0.
Listing 2.5.13: The Function bps_tick
double bps_tick(BRKSTREAM* stream)
{
double thisval,frac;
/* beyond end of brkdata? */
if(stream->more_points == 0)
return stream->rightpoint.value;
if(stream->width == 0.0)
thisval = stream->rightpoint.value;
else {

281

Audio Programming in C

/* get value from this span using linear interpolation */
frac=(stream->curpos-stream->leftpoint.time)/stream->width;
hisval=stream->leftpoint.value+(stream->height*frac);
}
/* move up ready for next sample */
stream->curpos += stream->incr;
if(stream->curpos > stream->rightpoint.time){
/* need to go to next span? */
stream->ileft++; stream->iright++;
if(stream->iright < stream->npoints) {
stream->leftpoint = stream->points[stream->ileft];
stream->rightpoint = stream->points[stream->iright];
stream->width = stream->rightpoint.time
- stream->leftpoint.time;
stream->height = stream->rightpoint.value
- stream->leftpoint.value;
}
else
stream->more_points = 0;
}
return thisval;
}
2.5.8

Putting It All Together

If you have not already done so, check that you have put the new breakpoint function deﬁnitions into breakpoints.c and the function prototypes and the BRKSTREAM structure deﬁnition into breakpoints.h.
With the streaming breakpoint functions presented above, adding support for breakpoint ﬁles is a straightforward ﬁve-stage process. For example, to support an amplitude
breakpoint ﬁle, do the following.
1. Declare some variables:
BRKSTREAM* ampstream = NULL;
FILE *fpamp = NULL;
unsigned long brkampSize = 0;
double minval,maxval;
2. Open the breakpoint ﬁle:
fpamp = fopen(argv[ARG_AMP],"r");
/* after error-checking fpamp: */
ampstream = bps_newstream(fpamp,outprops.srate,& brkampSize);

282

Chapter 2

3. Check breakpoint data for reasonableness:
if(bps_getminmax(ampstream,&minval,&maxval)){
printf("Error reading range of breakpoint file%s\n",
argv[ARG_AMP]);
error++;
goto exit;
}
if(minval < 0.0 || minval > 1.0
|| maxval < 0.0 || maxval > 1.0){
printf("Error: amplitude values out of range in file %s: "
"0.0 < amp <= 1.0\n",
argv[ARG_AMP]);
error++;
goto exit;
}
4. Provide an inner processing loop:
for(j=0;j < nframes; j++){
amp = bps_tick(ampstream);
outframe[j] = (float) (amp * tick(osc,freq));
}
5. Clean-ups:
if(ampstream){
bps_freepoints(ampstream);
free(ampstream);
}
if(fpamp)
if(fclose(fpamp))
printf("Error closing breakpoint file %s\n",
argv[ARG_AMP]);
However, there is one outstanding issue having to do with the processing loop. Hitherto,
our programs have supported either a value or a ﬁlename, but not the choice to use either.
Such a choice, to supply either a number or a breakpoint ﬁle name for amp, would be very
convenient for users—indeed, it seems essential if the program is to offer sufﬁcient functionality to be generally useful. There are several ways of doing this, of varying degrees of complexity, and whichever solution is found will have to be documented. A complex solution
would involve some special sign in the command line to indicate ‘‘this is a ﬁle name’’ (curiously, modern operating systems allow the use of numbers as ﬁle names), but this would
introduce some extra complexity for the user.
A simple solution that requires no special notation in the command line, and little extra
code, is to start by assuming the string is a ﬁlename and attempting to open the ﬁle. If that

283

Audio Programming in C

fails (one presumes because the ﬁle doesn’t exist), the string is read as a plain number. Thus
step 2 will become
/* open breakpoint file, or set constant */
fpamp = fopen(argv[ARG_AMP],"r");
if(fpamp == NULL){
amp = atof(argv[ARG_AMP]);
if(amp <= 0.0 || amp > 1.0){
printf("Error: amplitude value out of range: "
"0.0 < amp <= 1.0\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
}
else {
ampstream =
bps_newstream(fpamp,outprops.srate,&brkampSize);
...
}
The inner processing loop then becomes (with both breakpoint options supported)
for(j=0;j < nframes; j++){
if(ampstream)
amp = bps_tick(ampstream);
if(freqstream)
freq = bps_tick(freqstream);
outframe[j] =(float) (amp * tick(osc,freq));
}
Finally, modify the usage message to add the breakpoint information:
"amp = amplitude value or breakpoint file (0 < amp <= 1.0\n"
"freq = frequency value (freq > 0) or breakpoint file.\n"
The basic waveform generation has not been altered, so this should behave as previously.
This completes our siggen.c program, which features all the elements discussed in section
2.5. When you test it, be sure to test everything.
2.5.9

Exercises

Exercise 2.5.1
Modify the program sfenv to use the new breakpoint functions. Verify that the output is
identical to that of the original version.

284

Chapter 2

Exercise 2.5.2
Create a frequency breakpoint ﬁle that generates a sequence of pitches ﬁtting a standard A
major arpeggio (i.e. notes A, C#, E, A, . . .), ascending and descending over three octaves,
starting on A ¼ 220 Hz (C# is a major third above A, with the ratio 5/4; E is a perfect ﬁfth
above A with the ratio 3/2). Each note should last one second before changing instantly to
the next. Test the ﬁle with the square, sawtooth, and triangle waveform types, using siggen.
At which notes does the aliasing become easily audible for each waveform type?
Exercise 2.5.3
Extend siggen to support multi-channel outputs, adding a chans argument to the command
line.
Exercise 2.5.4
Extend siggen to enable the user to select the format of the output ﬁle (16-bit, 24-bit, or 32bit ﬂoat), using an optional ﬂag argument -sN in the command line, where N ¼ 1, 2, or 3
respectively. The default should be 16-bit.
2.5.10

More Advanced Exercises

Exercise 2.5.5
Rewrite the following code as a code macro:
if(p_osc->curfreq != freq){
p_osc->curfreq = freq;
p_osc->incr = p_osc->twopiovrsr * freq;
}
The macro should require termination with a semicolon:
UPDATE_FREQ;
(Hints: See the description of the ? operator in exercise 2.2.5, and see note 11 about the
comma operator.)
Exercise 2.5.6
The method for deciding if a string is a number or a ﬁle name is not ideal, in that if an incorrect ﬁle name is given (i.e. a ﬁle that does not exist), it will be read as a number using the
function atof, and the program will proceed with that assumption, possibly giving a misleading error message. Demonstrate this problem using a random non-numeric ﬁle name
(that does not exist as a real ﬁle) for the amp argument to siggen.

285

Audio Programming in C

Exercise 2.5.7
(a) Using the C library function strtod to replace atof, modify the code for reading amp
and freq, where fopen has returned NULL, to determine whether the argument string is
numeric. If it is not numeric (and thus must be an incorrect ﬁle name or some other incorrect string), give an error message indicating that the ﬁle name is invalid.
(b) Encapsulate the solution to (a) as a utility function. Use this prototype:
int isnum(const char* arg, double* val);
where arg is the string to be tested, and val is a pointer to the double returned from
strtod, if successful. The function will return 0 for ‘‘false’’ and 1 for ‘‘true.’’ Typical usage
would be
char* arg = "1000.1";
double val = 0.0;
if(isnum(arg, &val))
printf("arg = %f\n", val);
else
printf("%s is not a valid number\n", arg);
Change the code written in (a) to use the new function.
(c) Decide in which source ﬁle to store the new function.
Exercise 2.5.8
(a) Create a new oscillator for siggen that adds dynamic pulse-width modulation to the basic
square wave, with a modulation range between 1% and 99%, where the normal square
wave ¼ 50%. Retain the use of function pointers for the existing oscillators. Any modulation
values outside the allowed range should be clipped to the minimum or maximum, as appropriate. The new oscillator’s tick function should have the following prototype:
double pwmtick(OSCIL* p_osc, double freq, double pwmod);
(b) Add support for breakpoint-ﬁle control for the pwm waveform. Pay careful attention to
the permitted range. What command-line issues are raised by this exercise?
Exercise 2.5.9
Create a second sine-wave oscillator in siggen to apply tremolo (amplitude modulation) to
the main oscillator. Use an optional command-line ﬂag -tF to set the frequency, where the
default value of F is 0 (i.e. no modulation). Decide on a reasonable modulation depth, and
ﬁx it internally. Aim to make the code as efﬁcient as possible, especially in the default case.

286

Chapter 2

Exercise 2.5.10
(a) Revise the oscillator creation function new_oscil to add a second argument setting the
initial phase of all oscillators, controlled from the command line via an optional ﬂag argument. Deﬁne phase here as a fraction between 0 and 1, where giving a phase of 0.25 to the
sine-wave oscillator will result in a cosine wave.
(b) Modify the starting phase of the triangle and sawtooth oscillators so that by default they
match the direction of the sine wave (i.e. starting at zero, going positive) before any modiﬁcations by the user are applied.
2.6

Additive Synthesis and the Table Lookup Oscillator
2.6.1

Introduction

If you have fully explored the program developed in the previous section, especially with the
sawtooth and square waveforms, it will have become almost painfully clear that the degree
of alias distortion is unacceptable, except at low frequencies. The problem, in a nutshell, is
that the implementation considers only the literal shape of the waveform, whereas for a
usable digital implementation we need to consider the spectrum of the sound. Ideally, we
want to avoid generating any frequency components outside the available range for a given
sampling rate, i.e. at or above the Nyquist limit. This is a further problem added to those
with which we have already become preoccupied, as this section also demonstrates: problems of robustness, ﬂexibility of use, and efﬁciency. Solutions to these problems are often in
conﬂict, especially where functions may be of use beyond a particular program and may
eventually be included in a general library. This section develops the principle of ‘‘public’’
and ‘‘private’’ functions, introducing the important C keyword static.
This section discusses two major topics, each leading to the creation of a program. Both
programs generate the ‘‘classic’’ square, triangle, and sawtooth waveforms, using additive
synthesis in order to obtain band-limited (i.e. alias-free) tones. The ﬁrst topic introduces the
concept of the spectrum by means of a further exploration of the analog waveforms, and
develops the program oscgen, which implements a sinusoidal oscillator bank. We will discover more of the properties of sine and cosine waves; and we will also ﬁnd, perhaps
counter-intuitively, that the choice of one over the other has a very obvious impact on the
results. In the process, the issue of efﬁciency will arise so prominently that we will need to
provide a means to compare the cost of alternative methods, by measuring program execution time. The second topic introduces a classic technique for generating multi-harmonic
periodic waveforms using just one oscillator, based on the principle of table lookup. We will
demonstrate the two principal methods of table lookup, truncation and, yet again, linear interpolation. The program developed at the end of section 2.6, tabgen, is intended primarily as a
test bed for comparing the performance (in terms of both speed and audio quality) of these

287

Audio Programming in C

two methods. Both programs are also intended as starting points for free exploration and
experimentation by the reader, who is now asked to implement programs based only on
an outline design, rather then on a presentation of a complete program listing. Instead, the
emphasis moves more and more toward the development of a library of functions (everexpanding) that can serve as building blocks for a wide range of applications, according to
the interests of the programmer.
2.6.2

The Spectrum of the Classic Geometric Waveforms

A periodic waveform has at least one sinusoidal frequency component. By adding further
components with frequencies that are integer multiples of the lowest or fundamental frequency, a wide range of periodic waveforms can be created. Thanks to their simple and geometric shape, it is possible to calculate the spectrum of the square, triangle, and sawtooth
waveforms exactly. The spectrum is usually expressed as a sum of sinusoids, each at a given
amplitude. The spectra of the three principal waveforms are illustrated in ﬁgure 2.14, together
with the underlying formulae describing the relative strengths of each harmonic component.
2.6.3

A Basic Oscillator Bank for Additive Synthesis

The program developed in this section, oscgen, is structurally very similar to siggen of the previous section, which may itself be considered a convenient alternative to main.c as a template for synthesis programs. As usual, you can either create a new project from scratch or
copy the siggen project into a new directory and make the usual changes—use the name
oscgen.c for the main program source ﬁle. We require only the function sinetick, so the
switch block code, which selects alternative function pointers, can be removed. The command line and usage message will need modifying—apart from the new name, we need
a new argument that sets the number of oscillators to use. Where only one oscillator is
requested, the output will be a sine wave, so that the old sine option 0 can itself be removed
and the remainder renumbered:
"usage: oscgen outfile dur srate nchans amp freq wavetype noscs\n"
" wavetype:
0 = square\n"
"
1 = triangle\n"
"
2 = saw up\n"
"
3 = saw down\n"
From ﬁgure 2.14 we can see that synthesizing these waveforms requires an array of oscillators (an oscillator bank), one for each successive harmonic, where the output of each is scaled
by the required amplitude factor. As usual, we will provide for modulation of both fundamental frequency and overall amplitude via breakpoint ﬁles. This requires three arrays—one
for the oscillators themselves (or, rather, to contain pointers to each oscillator, as returned

288

Chapter 2

Figure 2.14
Spectra of square, triangle, and sawtooth waveforms.

289

Audio Programming in C

from the function new_oscil introduced in section 2.5); one to contain the relative amplitude values; and another to contain the relative frequencies. As some waveforms require
all harmonics, and others require only odd-numbered harmonics, and we want to avoid
repeated identical conditional tests inside the processing loop, the contents of the frequency
array must vary according to the selected waveform.
The original osc pointer (here renamed oscs) is now required to be the name of the array
of oscillator pointers, and is therefore declared a ‘‘pointer to a pointer.’’ (We have to use a
pair of asterisks, rather than OSCIL* oscs[], as the latter form requires an explicit array
size to be deﬁned in the declaration.) Also note here the use of a comma-separated list of
variable declarations for the two double pointers. When code is written in this form, an
asterisk must be put adjacent to each variable name.
OSCIL **oscs = NULL; /* will be an array of OSCIL pointers */
double *oscamps = NULL, *oscfreqs = NULL; /* for oscbank amp
and freq data */
unsigned long noscs; /* from argv[ARG_NOSCS] using atoi() */
Allocation of these arrays takes the value of noscs as the required size (see listing 2.6.1).
Note that no upper limit is set on the size of noscs—the program is deliberately casual here.
Listing 2.6.1: Constructing an Oscillator Bank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

/* create amp and freq arrays */
oscamps = (double*) malloc(noscs * sizeof(double));
if(oscamps==NULL){
puts("no memory!\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
oscfreqs = (double*) malloc(noscs * sizeof(double));
if(oscfreqs==NULL){
puts("no memory!\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
/* create array of pointers to OSCILs */
oscs = (OSCIL**) malloc(noscs * sizeof(OSCIL *));
if(oscs== NULL){
puts("no memory!\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
/*** initialize arrays. . . */

290

Chapter 2

22 /* and then create each OSCIL */
23 for(i=0;i < noscs;i++){
24
oscs[i] = new_oscil(outprops.srate);
25
if(oscs[i] == NULL){
26
puts("no memory for oscillators\n");
27
error++;
28
goto exit;
29
}
30 }
When creating the program, don’t forget to free these arrays at the end. In the processing
loop, we will iterate over noscs, producing each sample, so we need a further local counter
variable. The loop uses the method of the accumulating sum (using the += operator) to add
each harmonic to the table. An accumulating sum works by adding the new value to the current value. This requires that, before the loop starts, the value be initialized to zero (we
should never rely on the compiler to do this for us).
for(j=0; j < nframes; j++){
long k;
if(freqstream)
freq = bps_tick(freqstream);
if(ampstream)
amp = bps_tick(ampstream);
val = 0.0;
for(k = 0; k < noscs; k++) {
val += oscamps[k] *
sinetick(oscs[k],freq * oscfreqs[k]);
}
outframe[j] = (float)(val * amp);
}
We are not quite ready to compile yet. First we must ﬁll the arrays with the required values
according to the required waveform type, as indicated in the comment in line 21 of listing
2.6.1. We are also conscious of the fact that when signals are added together, amplitudes
simply add, so that, for example, when ten signals at amplitude 1 are added together, the
total amplitude will be 10. In such a case, the adjustment is easy to see—we simply scale
the ﬁnal amplitude by 1/10 to obtain the nominal e1.0 amplitude. This will be further
scaled by the requested amplitude value from the user, which may be time-varying. However,
in using the formulas shown in ﬁgure 2.14 we are not adding signals of equal amplitude. For
example, the ﬁrst four harmonics (frequencies 1, 3, 5, and 7 times the fundamental) of a triangle wave require the sum
totalamp ¼ 1 þ

1
1
1
þ
þ
¼ 1.172.
9 25 49

(7)

291

Audio Programming in C

The general rule is thus
totalamp ¼

N
X

1

n¼0

(2n  1)2

,

(8)

where N ¼ number of oscillators.
Because we cannot know in advance how many oscillators the user requires, we cannot use
an explicit constant rescale factor in the code. We have to calculate it cumulatively. We can
do this as a variant of the familiar maxamp function, as we enter each amplitude value into
the array. This requires some new variables:
double ampfac,freqfac,ampadjust;
/* fill arrays for triangle wave */
ampfac = 1.0; /* values for fundamental always the same */
freqfac = 1.0;
ampadjust = 0.0;
for(i=0;i< noscs;i++){
ampfac = 1.0 /(freqfac*freqfac);
oscamps[i] = ampfac;
oscfreqs[i] = freqfac;
freqfac += 2.0;
/* odd harmonics only */
ampadjust += ampfac;
}
/* rescale amplitudes so they add to 1.0 */
for(i=0; i < noscs;i++)
oscamps[i] /= ampadjust;
The code for the four basic waveforms is shown in listing 2.6.2. It uses the
switch. . .case statement to select appropriate code for each waveform type. It also illustrates the use of the ‘‘fall-through’’ technique, in which two or more options can use the
same code. In this example, the code exploits the fact that the downward sawtooth is merely
an inversion of the upward sawtooth, which is achieved simply by multiplying all amplitudes by 1. Because there is no break statement associated with the WAVE_SAWUP option,
execution falls through to the next option, so that the same code is used in both cases. A
simple two-line test for WAVE_SAWUP can then be used to set the sign of ampadjust. This
exploits the mathematical rule that if either the numerator or the denominator of a fraction
is negative, the overall value is also negative.
Listing 2.6.2: Amplitudes and Frequencies for Four Principal Waveforms
freqfac = 1.0;
ampadjust = 0.0;
switch(wavetype){

292

Chapter 2

case(WAVE_SQUARE):
for(i=0;i< noscs;i++){
ampfac = 1.0 /freqfac;
oscamps[i] = ampfac;
oscfreqs[i] = freqfac;
freqfac += 2.0;
ampadjust += ampfac;
}
break;
case(WAVE_TRIANGLE):
for(i=0;i< noscs;i++){
ampfac = 1.0 /(freqfac*freqfac);
oscamps[i] = ampfac;
oscfreqs[i] = freqfac;
freqfac += 2.0;
ampadjust += ampfac;
}
break;
case(WAVE_SAWUP):
case(WAVE_SAWDOWN):
for(i=0; i< noscs; i++){
ampfac = 1.0 /(freqfac);
oscamps[i] = ampfac;
oscfreqs[i] = freqfac;
freqfac += 1.0;
ampadjust += ampfac;
}
if(wavetype == WAVE_SAWUP)
ampadjust = -ampadjust; /* inverts the waveform */
break;
}
for(i=0; i < noscs;i++)
oscamps[i] /= ampadjust;
Build and test oscgen in the usual way: try each of the possible waveforms, with varying
numbers of oscillators, and listen to the results. In particular, use frequency breakpoint ﬁles
deﬁning pitch sweeps—these will prove the most vivid means to hear the effects of aliasing,
since the alias frequencies will seem to have a life of their own, typically moving in the
opposite direction to the requested pitch. As can be expected from the shape of its spectrum,
the triangle wave is the least afﬂicted by aliasing, as the upper harmonics are so much weaker
compared to those of the other waveforms. Nevertheless, when the pitch is swept continuously, even low-level aliasing can be heard, especially once you have become used to the

293

Audio Programming in C

sound of it. Programs such as oscgen thus become valuable tools for training the ear, whose
attention is much more easily attracted by moving sounds than by static sounds.
2.6.4

Sines, Cosines, and the Amplitude vs. Shape Problem

While testing oscgen you may have observed that in every case the reported output amplitude was signiﬁcantly below what you asked for. Moreover, as the number of oscillators
increases the ﬁnal amplitude decreases. When we ask for the amplitude of 0.5, say, we expect
the program to deliver exactly that, but clearly it failed to do so here. It would be very reasonable to suspect that there is something wrong with the code, an incorrect piece of arithmetic somewhere. In fact the problem lies in the difference between adding sine harmonics
and adding cosine harmonics. This difference is demonstrated graphically in ﬁgure 2.15. We
can see clearly where the problem lies. When sines are being added, the cycles all start from
zero, and the peaks of the waveforms rarely coincide. This has the overall effect of lowering
the amplitude, as signals cancel each other out to varying degrees. When adding cosines are
being added, the cycles all start from the peak value of 1.0, ensuring that the sum achieves
the expected peak amplitude. To the listener, however, there is no perceptible difference
except, cumulatively, the slight drop in amplitude.
And there is a further problem. It will not be revealed by listening, but it will be immediately apparent when one is viewing the output in a soundﬁle editor: whereas the square
wave at least looks like a square wave, albeit at reduced amplitude, the triangle wave looks
nothing like a triangle. Figure 2.16 compares the resulting shapes when summing the ﬁrst
four harmonics of each waveform, using either sines or cosines. In the case of sines, the
expected amplitudes are all below the theoretical ones. However, a square wave generated
with cosines looks nothing like a square wave (though it will still sound like one). Clearly,
using such an oscillator to provide a control signal for a low-frequency oscillator will not produce the expected behavior. To solve this problem, we need to be able to tell oscillators to
start with either sine or cosine phase. For audio-rate signals, arguably the priority is to ensure
delivery of the required amplitude, and the exact shape of the waveform is a secondary concern. The solution suggested in exercise 9 of section 2.5 was to modify new_oscil with the
addition of a phase argument:
OSCIL* new_oscil(unsigned long srate, double phase)
{
OSCIL* p_osc;
. . .
p_osc->curphase = TWOPI * phase;
. . .
}

294

Chapter 2

Figure 2.15
Addition of sines and cosines.

Modifying functions in this way is a natural feature of project development, but if the function happens to be contained in a library ﬁle (and is therefore used by other programs) it
may be essential to preserve the original deﬁnition and behavior. An alternative solution
relies on the fact that the object is still an OSCIL—so long as we use a different name, there
is nothing to stop us from deﬁning alternative creation functions for the same object, retaining the original new_oscil unchanged:
OSCIL* new_oscilp(unsigned long srate, double phase);
At this stage of development, it is appropriate to add this function, together with its prototype, to the main program ﬁle oscgen.c. Later you may decide that it is useful enough to
transfer to the library ﬁle wave.c. All that is now required in oscgen.c is a variable to contain

295

Audio Programming in C

Figure 2.16
Additive waveform generation using sines or cosines.

296

Chapter 2

the phase value. Where a cosine phase is required, as in the case of the triangle wave, it is
initialized to 0.25:
double phase = 0.0; /* default to sine phase */
...
switch(wavetype){
...
case(WAVE_TRIANGLE):
for(i=0;i< noscs;i++){
...
}
...
phase = 0.25; /* set cos phase for true triangle shape */
break;
...
Finally, we must modify line 24 of listing 2.6.1 to use the new creation function:
oscs[i] = new_oscilp(outprops.srate,phase);
On building and running the revised program, you should ﬁnd that the triangle wave
looks as it should and has the exact amplitude requested. However, the fact remains that we
cannot obtain both the required waveform shape and the required amplitude using this
method. The underlying problem is that we cannot rescale the amplitude of the output in
real time—until the whole signal is generated, we cannot know the ﬁnal amplitude, which
we require in order to ﬁnd the correct adjustment factor. Ideally, we would like one technique that can serve for both audio-rate and low-frequency oscillators, and guarantee exact
amplitude and shape in both cases, without any requirement for post-processing. The trick,
as we will shortly discover, is to adjust the amplitude when the oscillator is created, rather
than during or after synthesis. But before we get to that stage we must address the important
matter of measuring processing time.
2.6.5

Measuring Processing Time—The clock Library Function

As soon as we run the program introduced in the previous subsections using more than a few
oscillators, we discover the problem: to obtain harmonic-rich tones (e.g. for low-pitched
tones), many oscillators are required, which considerably increases processing time. The
question of efﬁciency has arisen very frequently already, but so far little attention has been
given to detailed comparisons. The program oscgen is the ﬁrst so far in this book to pose any
signiﬁcant demands on the CPU, such that ﬁnding ways to generate tones more efﬁciently is
a very real priority. To judge our success, we need to be able to measure the processing time
of a program—speciﬁcally, the difference between the end time and the start time of the
main processing loop. However, we will need something more reliable (and more automatic)
than just starting the program and using a stopwatch.

297

Audio Programming in C

While each operating system may offer its own non-portable timing facilities, the ANSI C
standard library also deﬁnes a simple timing function, clock, that can be expected to be
available on all systems. It is deﬁned in the library header ﬁle <time.h>:
clock_t clock(void);
Here clock_t is an integer type internally deﬁned by the compiler for each platform (typically as a long). The function returns the time elapsed since the start of a process (here ‘process’ can be understood as synonymous with ‘‘‘program’), counted in ‘‘ticks.’’ In theory
(though certainly not on any systems of interest to the audio programmer), timing functions
may not be available, in which case clock returns the value 1. Associated with the library
timing functions is the compiler-deﬁned symbol CLOCKS_PER_SEC, which is typically
deﬁned as 1,000, so that the nominal timer resolution is 1 millisecond.20 It is now easy to
add timing to each program that runs a processing loop:
clock_t starttime, endtime;
...
printf("processing....\n");
starttime = clock();
for(i=0; i < nbufs; i++) {
...
}
endtime = clock();
printf("Elapsed time = %f secs\n",
(endtime-starttime)/(double)CLOCKS_PER_SEC);
With this code added to oscgen, you will be able to measure with reasonable accuracy the cost
of, say, 40 oscillators compared to 20, or to 1. This can, among other things, enable you to
determine the proportion of CPU time devoted to ﬁle read/write processing. More importantly, as we will ﬁnd in the next section, we can use clock to compare the differences in
efﬁciency between competing implementations of the same technique.
2.6.6

The ‘‘Classic’’ Table Lookup Oscillator—Guard Point

It may come as a surprise to many readers that the method of generating sinusoids by using
the C library sin and cos functions has only fairly recently become at all reasonable. This is
thanks to the fact that most modern CPUs incorporate fast ﬂoating-point units in which
these functions are implemented in hardware. Until that crucial development, these functions had to be implemented in software, using mathematical techniques such as the Taylor
series. Before that, even the core ﬂoating-point arithmetic operations themselves depended
on emulation using CPUs that natively supported only integer operations. CPU register sizes
were also too small to contain the larger types, such as the double, so high-precision
ﬂoating-point manipulation also involved use of off-chip memory, which in itself can

298

Chapter 2

Figure 2.17
Table lookup oscillator.

increase processing time. On such machines, the calculation of any of the trigonometric or
higher-level mathematical functions was extremely expensive, and unacceptable given the
thousands of repeated calculations per second required for synthesis. This issue persists
even today in the era of GHz clock speeds and multi-core processors.
The solution that became the most important technique in computer music was to precalculate one cycle of a periodic waveform such as the sine wave, stored in an array, which
could then be shared by multiple oscillators (see ﬁgure 2.17). The phase increment that we
give to the sin function becomes an index increment through the table—the value required
for each successive audio sample is obtained by reading the value stored at the required position (index) in the table, then updating the index with the required increment. Every time
this reaches the end of the table, or beyond, the index value is ‘‘wrapped around’’ to the

299

Audio Programming in C

equivalent within the table, reﬂecting the periodic (repeating) nature of the waveform. The
great power of this technique becomes apparent with the realization that, when used for an
oscillator, this table can contain any periodic waveform—for example, containing the sum of
several harmonics.
The general principle of the lookup table is that it represents a single cycle of some periodic waveform—a waveform comprising a number of harmonics, following the established
principles of additive synthesis. By cycling through the table at different speeds, a steady signal of a particular pitch is generated. One aspect of the table lookup method that has to be
born in mind when creating multi-harmonic waveforms of this kind is that, in contrast to
the freedom we allowed ourselves in oscgen, we must now accept a hard limit on the highest
frequency that can be represented. As a lookup table is, of itself, undeﬁned with respect to
sample rate, we can only think in terms of relative frequency, and here the deﬁnition of the
Nyquist limit as that frequency represented by the minimum of two samples comes into
play. In a table lookup oscillator, the relative frequency value corresponds directly to the
phase increment used to step through the table. The increment that would ﬁnd just two
samples per cycle would have a size of half the length of the table. Thus we can deﬁne the
Nyquist limit for a table of size N as being a table increment of size N/2. As it would be all too
easy for the user to get this wrong (e.g. simply through a typing error, or incorrect ordering
of function arguments, itself an everyday hazard for programmers), it is important that this
limit be tested for in any table generation function. Even this limit is a little generous—only
when using the cos function will we get non-zero values for the Nyquist frequency (ﬁgure
2.18).
Of course, should you try to create a wavetable with the maximum possible number of
harmonics, any oscillator that tries to generate a pitch higher than the ‘‘root’’ pitch of the
table (in which each sample is used) will generate aliasing. Practical considerations therefore
dictate that wavetables be created that offer a useful amount of headroom for high pitches. It
will sufﬁce to say at this stage that to cover the whole continuous frequency range with a
complex waveform and avoid aliasing is a non-trivial task, e.g. involving the carefully controlled mixing of a large number of wavetables, ranging from a harmonic-rich table for low
notes, to a plain sinusoid for very high frequencies close to the Nyquist limit. At least for
‘‘conventional’’ musical purposes, the scale of this task is mediated a little by the fact that
the highest reasonable musical pitch, such as the top note of the piano, is around 4,000 Hz,
which still offers scope for up to four harmonics, at the 44,100-Hz sampling rate.
The processing time is simply that required to scan the table, and is therefore independent
of its contents (see ﬁgure 2.17).
Listing 2.6.3(a) shows typical code to create a table containing one cycle of a sine wave.
The tricky aspect is how to obtain the required sample value. The input to this procedure is
a required frequency and, of course, the sample rate. Referring to our original oscillator
implemented in wave.c, the calculation of the phase increment for a given frequency is
stated as

300

Chapter 2

Figure 2.18
A 32-point table containing (a) a single-cycle cosine and (b) the Nyquist frequency.

301

Audio Programming in C

phaseincr = TWOPI * freq / srate
With the use of table lookup, the table length (‘‘TABLEN’’) is equivalent to the ‘‘unit cycle’’
length of TWOPI. The required increment relative to a given table size is then
phaseincr = TABLEN * freq / srate
As usual, we will want to store the constant value TABLEN/srate so that it is not recalculated each time. The name used in OSCIL was twopiovrsr, but for the sake of better selfdocumenting things it is helpful to choose a more accurate name21:
double sizeovrsr = (double) TABLEN / srate;
The next step is to generate the incrementing phase for each sample, with the required
wrap-around. Again, we can see how this relates to the wrap-around illustrated for our original oscillator—everything that was expressed in terms of TWOPI is now expressed in terms of
table length. For example, to avoid aliasing, the phase increment must be less than half the
table size. The basic code for this is shown in listing 2.6.3(b). This implements a ‘‘truncated
lookup’’ in which the nearest lower table value is used. (Recall that the int cast discards the
fractional part of any ﬂoating-point value, and the value is thus ‘‘truncated.’’) The wraparound code in lines 9–12 uses while tests rather than the slightly cheaper if test—this
ensures that even extreme phase increments (i.e. larger than the table size) are safely
wrapped within the table.
Listing 2.6.3: Table Lookup
(a) sine-wave table of 1,024 points
#define TABLEN (1024)
/* or some other default size. . . */
unsigned long i, len = TABLEN;
double step;
double table[TABLEN];
step = TWOPI / len;
/* fill table: contains one cycle,
length is equivalent to TWOPI */
for(i=0; i < len; i++) {
table[i] = sin(step * i);
}
(b) basic truncating lookup
1
2
3
4
5

/*init: */
double curphase = 0.0;
double tablen = (double) TABLEN;
/* generate samples */
for(i=0;i < nsamps;i++){

302

Chapter 2

6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13 }
2.6.7

int index = (int) curphase; /* truncated phase index */
outframe[i] = (float) table[index]; /* read the table */
curphase += incr; /* update phase */
while(curphase >= tablen)
/* wrap around phase w*/
curphase -= tablen;
while(curphase < tablen
/* support negative freqs */
curphase += tablen;

Table Lookup by Linear Interpolation

The truncating lookup is about as fast as a table lookup oscillator can be, but with anything
but large table lengths the sound quality is very poor (see ﬁgure 2.19). The difference between
the required value and the truncated value can be considerable, leading to signiﬁcant distortion of the sound, referred to as truncation noise. To obtain acceptable quality, a table size of
8,192 points or greater is usually required, depending on the sampling rate. Though memory
is plentiful on modern systems, it can still be advantageous (and can lead to faster processing) to keep memory requirements as small as possible. The standard and widely used alternative is linear interpolation, which we have already encountered in the context of processing
breakpoint ﬁles.22 A typical interpolating lookup oscillator is illustrated in listing 2.6.4. With
this technique, table sizes as small as 128 points can still give acceptable sound quality, and a
table size of 1,024 points is sufﬁcient for all but the most stringent quality-critical requirements. Note that the upper integer index inext must be wrapped around (lines 7 and 8) as
well as the underlying ﬂoating-point phase (in lines 15–18) from which the ibase index is
derived via a cast to int (line 4). This is because of the situation that can and will arise when
ibase is at the ﬁnal point of the table and inext then needs to be at the beginning of it.
The interpolation itself is performed in lines 9–12.
Listing 2.6.4: Standard Interpolating Table Lookup
/* generate samples */
1
for(i=0;i < nsamps; i++){
2
int ibase, inext;
3
double frac,val,slope;
4
ibase = (int)phase;
5
inext = ibase + 1;
6
/* adjacent samples may cross table boundaries */
7
if(inext >= tablen)
8
inext -= tablen;
9
frac = phase - ibase;
10
val = p_osc->table[ibase];
11
slope = p_osc->table[inext] - val;

Figure 2.19
Comparison of truncated and interpolated lookup.

304

Chapter 2

Figure 2.20
Table with guard point.

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19 }

val += (frac * slope);
outframe[i] = (float)val;
phase += incr;
while(phase >= tablen)
phase -= tablen;
while(phase < 0.0)
phase += tablen;

This example demonstrates the extent to which the code dealing with phase wrap-around
dominates the process. If we are to achieve any economies, this is the ﬁrst area to look at.
The overall phase wraparound cannot be avoided, but the code in lines 7 and 8 is very irritating. However, by exercising a little lateral thinking we can easily eliminate it. The trick is to
use what is referred to in Csound as a guard point. The table is extended to the right by one
element, in which is stored a copy of the ﬁrst point (see ﬁgure 2.20). This then enables the
upper integer index to remain always one above the lower one, which we know will always
be within the table. Lines 7 and 8 can now be removed, saving a conditional test. Although
this saves only two lines, all conditional tests incur some CPU load. Not only is this block of
code run for every sample; it may be used for 100 oscillators or more. Thus, two saved
instructions amount to several hundred saved instructions per sample. The revised skeleton
code to create the table is shown in listing 2.6.5.

305

Audio Programming in C

Listing 2.6.5: Table Creation with Guard Point
#define TABLEN (1024)
/* or some other default size. . . */
unsigned long i, len = TABLEN;
double step;
double table[TABLEN + 1]; /* provide a guard point at end of table */
step = TWOPI / len ;
/* fill table: contains one cycle, length is equivalent to TWOPI */
for(i=0; i < len; i++) {
table[i] = sin(step * i);
}
table[i] = table[0];
/* guard point is copy of first */
2.6.8

Developments of OSCIL—A Practical Table Lookup Oscillator

In this subsection we develop tabgen, a new synthesis program that will generate the same
signals as oscgen using a single table lookup oscillator. It will also enable us to train the ear
to recognize the particular sonic character of truncation noise, and, more generally, to compare the quality of both truncating and interpolating oscillators for a given table size. The
new project can, as usual, be created from scratch or copied from oscgen. In addition to the
main source ﬁle tabgen.c, we will need a new pair of source ﬁles, gtable.h and gtable.c, to contain the code for everything to do with table lookup oscillators.
To implement a practical table lookup oscillator, we will want to apply the principles of
object creation and encapsulation introduced in the previous section. We could do this
from ﬁrst principles, by deﬁning a structure for the new oscillator and then a creation function that allocates an instance of the object and initializes it. However, we must be careful
here—we know we may want to use possibly a large number of oscillators, and we neither
need nor want to allocate memory for an identical lookup table inside each oscillator. As
this table is only read from, never written to, we can create just one table, and have all the
oscillators share it. Also, the whole point of this approach is to be able to deﬁne alternative
tables, containing custom waveforms.
We can also take the view that the guard-point lookup table is more than simply an array
—it shows all the hallmarks of an object. Its public size is different from its private, internal
size. The guard-point table is a special case of a lookup table—it is considered to have a length
of N, but internally, known only to itself, so to speak, it has a length of N þ 1, because of the
guard point. Similarly, functions that use lookup tables need to know that this table has a
special character (the guard point) that makes it different from that table that has no guard
point. This difference between the public and private views of the table, coupled with the requirement for functions that know about its special properties, is sufﬁcient to justify deﬁning
a structure for the table as a new type, here called GTABLE.
To implement a table lookup oscillator, therefore, we need to both deﬁne GTABLE and
the oscillator object that will use it. A complete example deﬁnition of GTABLE, with a self-

306

Chapter 2

contained creation function for a sine wave, is shown in listing 2.6.6. Note that GTABLE contains a pointer to allocated memory. This means that it will not be sufﬁcient to simply call
free on the GTABLE object itself; we will also have to free the internal memory. This is
made much more convenient (especially when dealing with a large number of tables) by
deﬁning a destruction function. A suitable destruction function is shown in listing 2.6.7. It
enables the whole object to be destroyed using one function call.
GTABLE* table = new_sine(1024);
/* . . .use it. . . */
gtable_free(&table); /* and destroy it when finished */
/* table now = NULL */
This admittedly somewhat contrived function demonstrates the sort of pointer manipulation for which C programmers are famous or notorious. However, if you have to write code
to free 100 oscillators or more, each with a unique table (yes, it is possible), you will be grateful to be able to use one function call to do it.
Listing 2.6.6: Deﬁnition of Lookup Table Type GTABLE with Guard Point
(a) type deﬁnition ( gtable.h)
typedef struct t_gtable
{
double* table; /* ptr to array containing the waveform */
unsigned long length;
/* excluding guard point */
} GTABLE;
(b) GTABLE creation function for sine wave ( gtable.c)
1
GTABLE* new_sine(unsigned long length)
2
{
3
unsigned long i;
4
double step;
5
GTABLE* gtable = NULL;
6
7
if(len == 0)
8
return NULL;
9
gtable = (GTABLE* ) malloc(sizeof(GTABLE));
10
if(gtable == NULL)
11
return NULL;
12
gtable->table = (double*) malloc((length + 1) *
sizeof(double));
13
if(gtable->table== NULL){
14
free(gtable);
15
return NULL;
16
}

307

Audio Programming in C

17
18
19
20
21
22
23 }

gtable->length = length;
step = TWOPI / length ; /* make sine wave */
for(i=0; i < length; i++)
gtable->table[i] = sin(step * i);
gtable->table[i] = gtable->table[0];/* guard point */
return gtable;

Listing 2.6.7: The GTABLE Destruction Function
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

void gtable_free(GTABLE** gtable)
{
if(gtable && *gtable && (*gtable)->table){
free((*gtable)->table);
free(*gtable);
*gtable = NULL;
}
}

This somewhat complicated-looking function receives the address of a ‘‘pointer to GTABLE,’’
or equivalently ‘‘a pointer to a pointer to a GTABLE.’’ It frees the internal table memory,
then the memory for the object itself, and ﬁnally sets the GTABLE pointer itself to NULL.
The parentheses around (*gtable) are required because of C’s precedence rules (-> has
higher precedence than *). You may want to try removing them and observe the error messages from the compiler. Note the use of the logical AND operator && to check all the
pointers, in order from left to right, from the supplied pointer gtable through to the internal table pointer. Only if all three pointers are valid will the function do anything. This is
probably as convoluted as many C programmers want to get with pointers. Unfortunately
perhaps, it is all too easy to write even more convoluted code than this.
In a similar way, we can consider the table lookup oscillator to be a special case of the
‘‘plain’’ oscillator implemented in OSCIL. Indeed, from inspection of listing 2.6.4 we can
see that many of the elements of OSCIL appear there, such as curphase and incr. As we
will want to support modulation of frequency, we will also need a curfreq element. Add
to this the fact that we can deﬁne two types of table lookup oscillator—the truncating type
and the interpolating type—and we have a clear picture of a family of oscillators, all based
on OSCIL. In the terminology of object-oriented programming, we can say that the table
lookup oscillator derives from OSCIL, and even that, following the metaphor of a family,
they inherit certain aspects of behavior (such as the all-important tick function) from it. In
practice, this means that the structure that deﬁnes the new oscillator will incorporate the
OSCIL structure internally (listing 2.6.8). This requires that the header ﬁle gtable.h must
include wave.h, to bring in the deﬁnition of OSCIL. In addition to the all-important pointer
to a GTABLE, a variable is provided to contain the table length as a double, to avoid contin-

308

Chapter 2

ual casting in the tick function. And, as was suggested in subsection 2.6.3, a helpfully named
alternative to the twopiovrsr of OSCIL is provided.
Listing 2.6.8: Deﬁnition of OSCILT Type, Derived from OSCIL (gtable.h)
#include <wave.h>
typedef struct t_tab_oscil
{
OSCIL osc;
const GTABLE* gtable;
double dtablen;
double sizeovrsr;
} OSCILT;
The corresponding creation function is shown in listing 2.6.9. This is given the name of a
GTABLE object containing some waveform. As a basic precaution against errors, such as supplying a GTABLE that has not been properly created or initialized, the input gtable is tested
to make sure it is legitimate. Note the use of both forms of structure element access required
here:
p_osc->osc.curfreq = 0.0;
The variable p_osc is a pointer to a GTABLE, so to access the elements of the structure the
indirection operator -> is required: p_osc->osc. One of those elements, osc, is itself a complete structure (but not itself a pointer), and to access the elements of that—osc.curfreq—
the plain dot operator is used.
The tick functions for both truncating and interpolating forms are shown in listing 2.6.10.
Note that to be able to select between tick functions we must deﬁne a function pointer,
using a different name from that deﬁned for the OSCIL:
typedef double (*oscilt_tickfunc)(OSCILT* osc,double freq);
Listing 2.6.9: Creation Function for OSCILT (gtable.c)
OSCILT* new_oscilt(double srate, const GTABLE* gtable, double phase)
{
OSCILT* p_osc;
/* do we have a good GTABLE?*/
if(gtable == NULL || gtable->table == NULL || gtable->length == 0)
return NULL;
p_osc = (OSCILT *) malloc(sizeof(OSCILT));
if(p_osc == NULL)
return NULL;
/* init the osc: */
p_osc->osc.curfreq = 0.0;

309

Audio Programming in C

p_osc->osc.curphase = gtable->length * phase;
p_osc->osc.incr = 0.0;
/* then the GTABLE-specific things */
p_osc->gtable = gtable;
p_osc->dtablen = (double) gtable->length;
p_osc->sizeovrsr = p_osc->dtablen / (double) srate;
return p_osc;
}
Listing 2.6.10: Truncating and Interpolating GTABLE Tick Functions
double tabtick(OSCILT* p_osc, double freq)
{
int index = (int) (p_osc->osc.curphase);
double val;
double dtablen = p_osc->dtablen, curphase = p_osc->osc.curphase;
double* table = p_osc->gtable->table;
if(p_osc->osc.curfreq != freq){
p_osc->osc.curfreq = freq;
p_osc->osc.incr = p_osc->sizeovrsr * p_osc->osc.curfreq;
}
curphase += p_osc->osc.incr;
while(curphase >= dtablen)
curphase -= dtablen;
while(curphase < 0.0)
curphase += dtablen;
p_osc->osc.curphase = curphase;
return table[index];
}
double tabitick(OSCILT* p_osc, double freq)
{
int base_index = (int) p_osc->osc.curphase;
unsigned long next_index = base_index + 1;
double frac,slope,val;
double dtablen = p_osc->dtablen, curphase = p_osc->osc.curphase;
double* table = p_osc->gtable->table;
if(p_osc->osc.curfreq != freq){
p_osc->osc.curfreq = freq;
p_osc->osc.incr = p_osc->sizeovrsr *
p_osc->osc.curfreq;
}
frac = curphase - base_index;
val = table[base_index];

310

Chapter 2

slope = table[next_index] - val;
val += (frac * slope);
curphase += p_osc->osc.incr;
while(curphase >= dtablen)
curphase -= dtablen;
while(curphase < 0.0)
curphase += dtablen;
p_osc->osc.curphase = curphase;
return val;
}
2.6.9

Making Waves

To complete the code required for our synthesis program based on table lookup, we need
some tables containing waveforms. The procedures for the basic square, sawtooth, and triangle waveforms necessarily have much in common with those shown in listing 2.6.2, as far as
creating the correct mix of harmonics is concerned. The primary difference lies in the amplitude calculation, which will use the same technique of normalization demonstrated in section 2.2, in the program sfnorm, to rescale the data in the table to a maximum amplitude of
1.0. This is the means by which we can then guarantee that all signals will have the exact
amplitude requested by the user, while also having the expected shape.
Based on the earlier example of new_sine, we require a set of functions, one for each
waveform type, incorporating new code to implement normalization (of course, new_sine
itself does not need this stage as it generates a single sine wave already at full amplitude).
Listing 2.6.11 illustrates such a function for the triangle wave, incorporating all necessary
tests for the input arguments length and nharms (line 9). The loop in lines 19 and 20 is
required to ensure that the array is initialized to all zeroes. This is because the generation
loop accumulates sample values (i.e. adds to what is already there) as each harmonic is calculated, using the += operator. Clearly, with this method it is essential that the table contain
random values.
Listing 2.6.11: A Self-Contained Generation Function for the Triangle Wave
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

GTABLE* new_triangle(unsigned long length, unsigned longnharms)
{
unsigned long i,j;
double step,amp,maxamp;
double* table;
unsigned long harmonic = 1;
GTABLE* gtable = NULL;
if(length == 0 || nharms == 0 || nharms >= length/2)

311

Audio Programming in C

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42 }

return NULL;
gtable = (GTABLE* ) malloc(sizeof(GTABLE));
if(gtable == NULL)
return NULL;
table = (double*) malloc((length + 1) * sizeof(double));
if(table == NULL){
free(gtable);
return NULL;
}
for(i=0; i < length; i++)
table[i] = 0.0;
step = TWOPI / length;
/* generate triangle wave */
for(i=0;i < nharms; i++){
amp = 1.0 / (harmonic*harmonic);
for(j=0; j < length; j++)
table[j] += amp * cos(step * harmonic * j);
harmonic += 2;
}
/* normalize table */
for(i=0; i < length; i++){
amp = fabs(table[i]);
if(maxamp < amp)
maxamp = amp;
}
maxamp = 1.0 / maxamp;
for(i=0; i < length; i++)
table[i] *= maxamp;
table[i] = table[0]; /* guard point*/
gtable->length = length;
gtable->table = table;
return gtable;

This function is robust (e.g. it checks that both length and nharms arguments are valid),
self-contained, and easy to use. If successful, it delivers from one function call a valid
GTABLE containing a triangle wave at full amplitude. However, we can see that the code
that allocates memory for the GTABLE is entirely generic and will be common to all waveform functions we write. Similarly, the normalization process is also common code, adding
up to a signiﬁcant proportion of the whole. It may not seem such an issue for just three or
four waveforms, but we can easily imagine creating dozens, even hundreds, of waveforms,
for one reason or another. On this sort of scale, economy of code becomes a major concern.
We have seen the use of functions to encapsulate a task. Here we have a task that in fact
comprises distinct subtasks—and writing multiple functions that perform the same task is a

312

Chapter 2

sure and easy way to generate ‘‘code bloat.’’ To avoid this, we need to split the process up,
using a function for each of the common elements. As demonstrated by new_triangle,
we can identify three tasks:
(1) generic GTABLE creation (lines 11–20)
(2) waveform generation, unique for each waveform (lines 21–28)
(3) generic table normalization (lines 30–37), which also sets guard point (line 38).
Of course we are most interested in the second of these. So our ﬁnal implementation will be
a compact version of new_triangle that will use the other two internally. This leads to the
following prototypes for the functions we will need:
/* creates a fully allocate but empty table */
GTABLE* new_gtable(unsigned long length);
/* fills table with triangle wave */
GTABLE* new_triangle(unsigned long length, unsigned long nharms);
/* normalizes the table, and sets guard point */
void norm_gtable(GTABLE* gtable);
Example implementations of new_gtable and norm_gtable are shown in listing 2.6.12.
Listing 2.6.12: Waveform Generation—Common Functions (gtable.c)
(a) The GTABLE creation function. It creates storage for a table of size length plus a guard
point. The array is cleared to zero. Note that this includes the guard point (the ﬁnal loop uses
<= rather than <- the guard point at the position table[length]).
GTABLE* new_gtable(unsigned long length)
{
unsigned long i;
GTABLE* gtable = NULL;
if(length == 0)
return NULL;
gtable = (GTABLE* ) malloc(sizeof(GTABLE));
if(gtable == NULL)
return NULL;
gtable->table = (double*) malloc((length + 1 * sizeof(double));
if(gtable->table == NULL){
free(gtable);
return NULL;
}
gtable->length = length;
for(i=0; i <= length; i++)
gtable->table[i] = 0.0;
return gtable;
}

313

Audio Programming in C

(b) The GTABLE amplitude normalization. It sets the guard point. The input argument must
be a pointer to a fully created GTABLE.
void norm_gtable(GTABLE* gtable)
{
unsigned long i;
double val, maxamp = 0.0;
for(i=0; i < gtable->length; i++){
val = fabs(table[i]);
if(maxamp < val)
maxamp = val;
}
maxamp = 1.0 / maxamp;
for(i=0; i < gtable->length; i++)
gtable->table[i] *= maxamp;
gtable->table[i] = gtable->table[0];
}
Note that new_gtable is safe, though not very useful, if accidentally passed straight to a tick
function—the output will merely be silent. These functions represent only the ﬁrst stage in
what could become a substantial library of functions to create and (perhaps more important),
modify tables.
2.6.10

Public vs. Private Functions—The static Keyword

The function new_gtable is very straightforward, returning NULL if any aspect of the
creation process (including a bad value for length) fails, but the function norm_gtable
presents us with a problem. As shown, it performs no error checking at all (indicated also
by the fact that it returns void)—it depends on the input argument gtable being a valid
pointer to a fully created GTABLE. If it were to be included in a public library, it would be a
somewhat risky function without error checking. At the very least, it would have to be documented thoroughly. However, much depends on how it is intended to be used. In this context, it is really a private helper function for new_triangle and its kin. To emphasize its
private nature, and enforce it in code, we can use the important C keyword static, which
effectively hides the function from other source ﬁles (technically speaking, the function is
not identiﬁed by the linker, which links together compiled code from each source ﬁle to
create the ﬁnal executable—only other functions in the same source ﬁle will know about it):
static void norm_gtable(GTABLE* gtable);
Note that the static keyword is placed ﬁrst in the declaration, which we can now refer to
as a static function. In contrast to the declaration of public functions, static functions are
declared and deﬁned together directly in the implementation ﬁle, and not in a public or

314

Chapter 2

shared header ﬁle. Thus we put the declaration above at the top of gtable.c, with the function
deﬁnition itself elsewhere in the same ﬁle. With this degree of control, we merely have to
make sure that we are using the function safely, in gtable.c, without worrying about how it
may be used or misused in other situations.
We can now deﬁne our complete set of compact waveform generation functions, including new_triangle (listing 2.6.12). Each of these functions receives a pointer to a fully
created GTABLE and an argument that sets the number of partials. As usual, the sawtooth
function supports both upward and downward forms.
Listing 2.6.12: Waveform Generation Functions (gtable.c)
GTABLE* new_triangle(unsigned long length, unsigned long nharms)
{
unsigned long i,j;
double step,amp;
GTABLE* gtable;
int harmonic = 1;
if(length == 0 || nharms == 0 || nharms >= length/2)
return NULL;
gtable = new_gtable(length);
if(gtable == NULL)
return NULL;
step = TWOPI / length ;
for(i=0;i < nharms; i++){
amp = 1.0 / (harmonic*harmonic);
for(j=0;j < length;j++)
gtable->table[j] += amp * cos(step*harmonic * j);
harmonic += 2;
}
norm_gtable(gtable);
return gtable;
}
GTABLE* new_square(unsigned long length,unsigned long nharms)
{
unsigned long i,j;
double step,amp;
GTABLE* gtable;
int harmonic = 1;
if(length == 0 || nharms == 0 || nharms >= length/2)
return NULL;
gtable = new_gtable(length);

315

Audio Programming in C

if(gtable == NULL)
return NULL;
step = TWOPI / length ;
for(i=0; i < nharms; i++){
amp = 1.0 / harmonic;
for(j=0;j < gtable->length;j++)
gtable->table[j] += amp * sin(step*harmonic * j);
harmonic+=2;
}
norm_gtable(gtable);
return gtable;
}
GTABLE* new_saw(unsigned long length,unsigned long nharms, int up)
{
unsigned long i,j;
double step,val,amp = 1.0;
GTABLE* gtable;
int harmonic = 1;
if(length == 0 || nharms == 0 || nharms >= length/2)
return NULL;
gtable = new_gtable(length);
if(gtable == NULL)
return NULL;
step = TWOPI / length ;
if(up)
amp = -1;
for(i=0; i < nharms; i++){
val = amp / harmonic;
for(j=0;j < gtable->length;j++)
gtable->table[j] += val * sin(step*harmonic * j);
harmonic++;
}
norm_gtable(gtable);
return gtable;
}
Note that the sawtooth function uses an extra argument to set the direction. This inevitably takes the appearance of a Boolean variable, but the requirements of the command line
are such that in any case an enum is required (placed in gtable.h, it is speciﬁc to the new_saw
function). This enum happens to act as a mimic of Boolean true and false:
enum { SAW_DOWN,SAW_UP };

316

Chapter 2

Table 2.4
Objects required for tabgen.

GTABLE

OSCILT

Functions

Purpose

new_triangle

Creates GTABLE containing triangle wave

new_square

Creates GTABLE containing square wave

new_saw

Creates GTABLE containing sawtooth wave (up/down)

free_gtable

Destroys a GTABLE by freeing all memory

new_oscilt
tabtick

Creates an OSCILT object; requires a GTABLE
OSCILT tick function performing truncated lookup

tabitick

OSCILT tick function performing interpolated lookup

These constants enable us to call new_saw in a very self-documenting way:
case(WAVE_SAWDOWN):
gtable = new_saw(tabsize, nharms, SAW_DOWN);
break;
case(WAVE_SAWUP):
gtable = new_saw(tabsize, nharms, SAW_UP);
break;
Were the raw numbers 0 and 1 used instead, on reading the code one would always have a
slight question in one’s mind about which value means what.
2.6.11

Putting It All Together

It is now time to complete the design of the program tabgen. It is important, as always, not to
leap into coding, but to start by forming a clear design that reﬂects the purpose of the program and is, in turn, reﬂected in the structure of the command line that the program will
present to the user.
The preceding subsections of section 2.6 presented several families of functions, associated
with a number of custom objects. Some of the functions are private or internal to others. The
tabgen program will be concerned with only the public functions. Table 2.4 lists the main
objects required, together with the functions associated with them. We will need two groups
of these:
(1) Wavetable object GTABLE: lookup table using a guard point. Has internal memory. Any
non-zero table size is supported.
(2) Table lookup object OSCILT: uses a GTABLE. No internal memory.
The program is required to support comparisons of both lookup methods, with respect to
speed and table size. Like oscgen, tabgen should support the use of amplitude and frequency
breakpoint ﬁles.

317

Audio Programming in C

For a program such as this, rather than require a lengthy command line (and especially
where so many of the arguments are numeric), a common practice is to deﬁne a default conﬁguration, which can be changed by means of ‘‘ﬂag’’ options. The main argument list can
then be identical to that of oscgen, which is appropriate, since tabgen is required to produce
the same output. It is reasonable to rename the ﬁnal noscs argument of oscgen to nharms
(for number of harmonics), which more accurately reﬂects the different implementation.
This leads to the following command line:
tabgen [-wN][-t] outfile dur srate nchans amp freq type nharms
-wN : set width of lookup table to N points (default: 1024)
-t : use truncating lookup (default: interpolating lookup)
You are now ready to study tabgen, run and test it, and compare the output with that of
oscgen, not only to conﬁrm the considerable increase in speed but also to conﬁrm that the
outputs are the same, save for the now consistent and precise amplitude control. A version
of tabgen is presented on the DVD; refer to it only if you are having difﬁculties.
Some suggestions for testing are given in the exercises at the end of this section. Note that
testing a program is not quite the same as ‘‘trying it out.’’ Testing often requires making a
prediction and conﬁrming that the output accords with that prediction. Therefore, be systematic, for example by varying one setting at a time. Of particular interest here is the difference between the quality and performance of the truncating and interpolating lookup
algorithms.
You should now feel conﬁdent enough to design and implement your own variations
on the additive theme. Possible avenues for exploration include, but are not limited to, the
following:
Adapt oscgen to use OSCILT, to make an oscillator bank using table lookup oscillators. This
could then include the use of different waveforms that are added in various ways under user
control.
n
Modify oscgen to support an ‘‘inharmonicity’’ or stretch factor for the frequencies of the
harmonics. For example, in listing 2.6.2, the freqfac variable is either 1.0 or 2.0, according
to the waveform. When this is changed to a fractional value, such as 1.4 or 2.23, the partials
become relatively inharmonic (the distances between them are shrunk or stretched). By combining these harmonics with a suitable amplitude envelope, you can easily create metallic
and bell-like timbres.
n
Devise a program that accepts a list of harmonic amplitude data from the user to create
arbitrary timbres.
n

Explore frequency modulation techniques, for example by applying vibrato to the output
signal. The vibrato signal is simply an oscillator whose output is scaled to a discreet amount,
such as 0.05 (so the output swings between 0.05 and þ0.05 at the vibrato frequency). To
apply the vibrato to the main oscillator, you scale the frequency using the vibrato signal,
and then add the result to the original frequency value:

318

Chapter 2

output = tick(osc, freq + (freq * vibsig));
This will ensure that the pitch deviation up and down is balanced (e.g. one semitone above
and below the nominal pitch). Both sine and triangle waves are suitable for use as vibrato
signals. Of course, using table lookup, you can also invent your own vibrato shapes. For the
full ‘‘Pavarotti effect,’’ the vibrato modulation may have to be increased to around 0.1.
2.6.12

Exercises

Exercise 2.6.1
Re-implement new_oscilp using separated creation and init functions, and test the phase
variable for correct range.
Exercise 2.6.2
A pulse wave is deﬁned as a waveform in which all the harmonics are of equal amplitude. A
pulse wave containing 20 harmonics is shown in ﬁgure 2.21. Create the required generation
function new_pulse and add it to the program tabgen. Update the usage message accordingly.

Figure 2.21
Pulse wave with 20 harmonics.

319

Audio Programming in C

Exercise 2.6.3
One limitation of the implementation of GTABLE (and similarly with the OSCIL types) is
that the example creation functions do not support declaring an instance as a local variable
(i.e. on the stack), and initializing it with a ﬁlled table (other than by creating the code
explicitly). Remedy this by implementing a further creation function int create_
gtable(GTABLE* table) so that the code below is possible:
GTABLE table;
if(create_gtable(&table)){
puts("no memory!\n");
error++;
goto exit;
}
The function should return 0 for success, 1 for an error. It should return an error if table
already contains an allocated table.
Exercise 2.6.4
A programmer friend suggests that ‘‘all the wrap-around code (based on a while loop) could
be eliminated by using the C math library function fmod, which takes the modulus (remainder after division) of a ﬂoating-point number’’—for example,
curphase = fmod(curphase, dtablen);
Make this change. Compare the performance with the original code as modiﬁed above, using
the program’s timing facility based on clock. What conclusion(s) can you draw from this
experiment?
Exercise 2.6.5
At a sampling rate of 44,100 Hz, a lookup table of 128 samples has a ‘‘root’’ pitch of 344.53
Hz (around ‘‘Middle F’’ on the piano, or MIDI note 65).
(a) Using a truncating lookup oscillator of that size to generate a triangle wave (set nharms
to 20), predict the shape and sound of the output waveform when generating a ﬁxed frequency of one-fourth the root frequency—i.e. 86.133, then when generating a frequency
sweep between 50 Hz and 172 Hz over 10 seconds. Check your predictions by running tabgen
with these parameters.
(b) Repeat (a) while increasing the table size by factors of 2 (128, 256, 512, 1,024, . . .) each
time. With what table size does the output sound free of distortion?
Exercise 2.6.6
On a certain computers, tabgen was run twice (with the default interpolating lookup) to
generate a ﬁxed frequency of 440 Hz (srate 44100) using table sizes of (a) 128 samples, and

320

Chapter 2

(b) 2,048 samples. The processing time was found to be respectively 1.86 seconds and 1.77
seconds. Explain this result.
Exercise 2.6.7
Why can’t we use a table lookup oscillator to synthesize inharmonic sounds?
Conclusion
This chapter introduced a number of important concepts of audio programming. Starting
with self-describing soundﬁle formats and their attributes, we were able to proceed through
basic signal processing algorithms to elements of sound synthesis. In particular, we have
been able to explore a workhorse of computer music, the wavetable oscillator, in some detail.
In addition to these speciﬁc elements of audio processing, we were able to complement the C
language topics seen in the previous chapter with some more advanced principles. This
chapter should serve as a springboard to the exploration of other aspects of audio programming found elsewhere in the book.
Notes
1. The WAVE format was designed for computers based on the Intel CPU series (IBM PC), while the AIFF
format was designed for computers using the Motorola CPU family (PPC Apple Macintosh). Consequently, WAVE ﬁles are little-endian, while AIFF ﬁles are big-endian. Thus, to read a WAVE format
soundﬁle on a big-endian machine, all numeric values (not only the samples, but also most of the ﬁle
header) have to have the low and high bytes reversed, in a process known as ‘‘byte-swapping.’’ Similarly,
byte-swapping must be performed when reading an AIFF format ﬁle on a PC. For 32-bit ﬂoats, all four
bytes have to be reversed. This naturally consumes some CPU time, and it is understandable that AIFF
ﬁles are rarely preferred on the PC, and WAVE ﬁles are rarely preferred on the PPC Macintosh. It is one
of the main tasks of any portable soundﬁle library to perform all the required byte-swapping, so that
users do not have to worry about it.
2. The usefulness of a makeﬁle is by no means conﬁned to compiling programs. It can be used as a general-purpose scripting system for any project that may involve dependencies. For example, a musical
project may involve the generation of new soundﬁles based on old ones, which in turn may be based
on yet older ones. Such soundﬁles may be long, and the processes time-consuming. Thus the creation
of one soundﬁle is dependent on that of another—the latter is then a dependency of the former. Make
can detect whether a dependency is up to date, and only if it is not will it run the process to recreate it.
This is very different from the operation of a shell script or batch ﬁle, which will blindly perform all the
listed tasks, even if nothing has changed since the previous run.
3. This is not unusual. Csound, for example, uses a ﬂag argument to indicate the ﬁle format (e.g. -W for
WAVE and -A for AIFF), while the user is free to employ the opposite ﬁle extension to the one intended.
It is as easy to use a ﬁle extension but forget the format ﬂag. Many programs read the format not from
the ﬁle extension but from the ﬁle header.

321

Audio Programming in C

4. Macintosh users will be familiar with the idiomatic practice of avoiding all ﬁle extensions (considered
at that time by Apple as old-fashioned), relying instead on a ‘‘File Type’’ property maintained by the OS.
This is especially unfortunate for a general-purpose ﬁle format that is intended to be cross-platform. Signiﬁcantly, with the release of OS X (which is based on a UNIX kernel), Apple now (re)asserts the importance of using and reading ﬁle extensions.
5. The use of goto is probably the most hotly debated aspect of C programming. Technically speaking,
it is always possible to eliminate the use of goto; and many programmers (we can call them purists, as
opposed to pragmatists) abhor its use. Nevertheless, it is a C keyword, and no tutorial would be complete
without giving it at least some degree of attention. The realities are that with care, it can be used quite
safely, and over time, certain ‘‘rules of thumb’’ have emerged that serve to ensure it is not abused. The
nightmare scenario is ‘‘spaghetti code’’ in which control jumps all over the place and reading the ﬂow of
control (and debugging) becomes impossible. The program presented in this chapter demonstrates two
such rules: that the jump target is always below the goto (on the page) and that there is only one label
in the function, to which all gotos jump. Another situation in which a goto is sometimes favored is in
escaping from a deeply nested loop, to a point beyond the topmost loop:
for(...) {
for(...) {
for(...){
if(power_cut)
goto dressing_room;
}
}
}
dressing_room:
drink_beer();
go_home();
The pragmatist will use a goto in this way, conﬁdent that it will not create trouble later. The purist will
avoid the goto by, for example, introducing extra tests in each loop, so that a more respectable keyword
such as break can be used, to step out of the nested loop level by level. Both the purist and the pragmatist will argue about which approach is the more readable.
6. Programming tip: Don’t sabotage the preprocessor. Never write an explicit numeric value in a program, instead of the symbol #defined for it. Indeed, it is a good policy in general to seek out wherever
such explicit constants are used, and consider whether a preprocessor symbol, if not a deﬁned variable,
would not manage and document things better. For example, should you decide to allocate some space
for a waveform table, you might also decide to allocate some extra space for safety and debugging. This
can be done in just one line:
buffer = (float*) malloc(520 * sizeof(float));
However, six months later you may not recall exactly why you did this. Using the preprocessor and a few
extra lines, the intention becomes clear:
#define TAB_SIZE 512
#define TAB_SAFETY 8
...
buffer = (float*) malloc((TAB_SIZE + TAB_SAFETY) *sizeof(float));

322

Chapter 2

Additionally, this enables you to redeﬁne TAB_SIZE and TAB_SAFETY in one place in the code, and
have code elsewhere change as required (you might be allocating 64 such tables, across several source
ﬁles). The latter might even be wrapped inside a debug test:
#ifdef _DEBUG
#define TAB_SAFETY 8
#else
#define TAB_SAFETY 0
#endif
7. There is a yet more advanced procedure that is standard for experienced UNIX developers: to install
frequently used header ﬁles and libraries in what are termed ‘‘the standard locations’’ (e.g. header ﬁles
are placed in /usr/local/include, and built library ﬁles are installed in /usr/local/lib). This
requires the user to have ‘‘admin’’ or ‘‘root’’ privileges, which may not be the case where a machine
supports multiple user accounts under the management of a system administrator. No equivalent convention is established for Windows development—developers simply create whatever development
environment and directory structure suits them. This might even include creating a custom /usr directory to mimic the UNIX architecture, and updating the user’s PATH accordingly.
8. We will leave to other authorities the thorny question of whether this should be 32,768 or 32,767.
9. 16 * 6 ¼ 96; but note that in 16 bits anything below 96dB isn’t ‘‘extremely quiet’’; it is silent.
Or rather, it is buried in quantization noise, which will decide if the sample is silent (¼ 0) or not
(¼ þ1 or 1).
10. Programmer’s tip: Any time you write an expression involving division, take the greatest possible
care to ensure that division by zero cannot happen.
11. Listing 2.3.1 shows that it is possible to use multiple initializer statements in a for statement, each
statement separated by a comma. In fact this is a general facility, and it is common to ﬁnd multiple
update statements too. For example, the for loop in listing 2.3.1 could also be implemented as follows:
for(i=0, out_i = 0; i < framesread; i++, out_i *= 2){
outframe[out_i] = (float)(inframe[i] * pos.left);
outframe[out_i+1] = (float)(inframe[i] * pos.right);
}
The use of multiple update statements is debatable. A good rule of thumb here is that the initializer and
update statements must match, and that there should not be a lot of them. You may well ﬁnd, for example, that the code in listing 2.3.1 is more readable and expressive than the alternative above, and that as
an algorithm it would also scale better to an N-channel process (such as a surround-sound panner). Another (perhaps more ‘‘purist’’) argument says that only variables involved in the conditional test should
be used in the initializer and update statements. It is tempting to think of the comma simply as a sort of
separator between expressions, or between items in a list, but technically it is an operator, and a statement comprising comma-separated expressions has a value, which is that of the rightmost expression:
int j , k;
j = k = 1;
if(j) j = 2, k = 3;

323

Audio Programming in C

Here both assignments are applied: the line j = 2,k = 3 comprises a single statement thanks to the
comma, so that braces are not required after the if test. In practice, the comma operator should be
used sparingly. It is more likely to arise by accident, as a result of a typing error. It has a natural place in
for loops, as shown, and is sometimes useful in deﬁning complex macros. However, one consequence
of the behavior of the comma operator is that you cannot reasonably have multiple comma-separated
conditional tests in a for loop. The result of whichever is the last test in the list is the result of the overall test, so that preceding tests (even if false) would be ignored. This is a good example of C allowing you
to do things you really should not do.
12. In a conventionally correct stereo setup, the two speakers and the listener should form an equilateral
triangle, so that the speakers subtend angles of e30 degrees, left and right of the listening position.
Ensure that speakers are not close to walls or corners (unless speciﬁcally designed to operate under those
conditions), and that the room is as acoustically neutral as possible.
13. When panning a sound between speakers, and especially when composing a moving trajectory, it is
often presumed that the sound pursues a straight-line path between the speakers. However, a little consideration of the geometry of this will show that this cannot be achieved without artefacts. Speciﬁcally,
for a sound to follow this path, the distance of the sound from the listener will not be constant—the
sound is nearer the listener at the central position, than when located right or left. Thus, it should sound
louder. Also, any real sound moving in this way relative to a listener will undergo Doppler shift—that
change of apparent frequency of a moving object familiar to anyone standing next to a busy road. This
therefore is the difference between simple ‘‘pair-wise intensity panning’’ and true ‘‘spatialization,’’ which
takes into account all these and other issues, to create a truer impression of a sound located or moving in
a space, including the position of the listener. Conventional pair-wise stereo panning can only assume
the ‘correct’ stereo speaker arrangement, and similarly can only implement constant-distance panning,
given that for most music applications nether Doppler shift, nor a level change at the centre, is desirable.
On the other hand, for listeners sitting too far away from the speakers, the illusion of a straight-line path
will be more convincing.
14. Some popular programming languages, such as Cþþ and Pascal, deﬁne a special quasi-arithmetical
type to be used for true/false values. In Pascal the type name is ‘‘Boolean,’’ and in Cþþ it is bool. The
collective name for such variables is thus ‘‘Boolean variables,’’ and is taken from the name of the English
mathematician George Boole (1815–1864), who devised a notation and system, known as Boolean Algebra, for applying mathematical operations to logic, including symbols for TRUE and FALSE. This work
subsequently became the foundation for the whole modern science of computing. Each ‘‘bit’’ making
up a binary number is an instance of a Boolean value. The core logical operations deﬁned by Boolean
Algebra are AND, OR, and NOT. These are represented in C by the operators &&, ||, and !. However, a
continuing source of annoyance to C programmers is the fact that the fundamental values TRUE and
FALSE are not represented by an explicit symbol or type—you have to use one of the integer types,
such as char or int. The complication in C is that whereas FALSE is deﬁned implicitly, but uniquely,
as 0, corresponding to the value of a conditional expression such as (1 == 0), TRUE is deﬁned equally
implicitly, but non-uniquely, as ‘‘any non-zero value.’’ Thus the tests if(-1) and if(1) both succeed:
both 1 and 1 evaluate to TRUE in a C conditional test. This is not of itself a problem—C is entirely
consistent in its behavior, and programmers soon become familiar with the idiomatic way of doing

324

Chapter 2

things. The problem arises when one attempts to overcome the absence of a Boolean type in C by deﬁning custom symbols. The most common way of doing this is to use the preprocessor, or typedef:
#define TRUE 1
#define FALSE 0
typedef int BOOL;
leading to
BOOL more_points = TRUE;
There are several possible objections to this, however: in C, any non-zero value is also TRUE, so some
expressions that evaluate to non-zero values cannot be safely used with TRUE as deﬁned above. These
methods do nothing to help avoid syntactically correct but semantically incorrect constructions. For
example, the statements below will not trigger as much as a warning from the compiler:
more_points = 10;
more_points--;
You may not be the only programmer who has thought of name collisions. Try to ﬁnd a programmer
who has not used the names TRUE and FALSE. Indeed, the developers of Microsoft Windows thought of
this a long time ago, and use both the deﬁnitions and the typedef shown above throughout the WIN32
API. If you need to combine Windows code with code from some other third-party source, that happens
to have deﬁned them differently, you can expect problems. Someone somewhere is bound to have done
it this way:
#define TRUE 0
#define FALSE -1
In short, creating deﬁnitions for TRUE and FALSE (or in general for any two-valued type) in C is ﬁne so
long as the limitations are understood. Never use such symbols to deﬁne function arguments or return
values, for example. In any case, avoid using lower-case symbols for these; true, false, and bool are all
keywords in Cþþ, and it has to be assumed that sooner or later code written in ANSI C will be copied
into a Cþþ source ﬁle.
15. What is so special about viewpoints separated by a right angle? Imagine that the second hand of this
imaginary clock is extremely thin, and that you do not have the beneﬁt of stereoscopic vision. Viewed
exactly on-end, this line appears as a mere point, whereas from the other viewpoint, it is visible as a line
at its maximum length. Should the line change length at this position, the view of the point would be
unchanged. This is a special property of sines and cosines, termed by mathematicians ‘‘orthogonality.’’
For example, the three physical dimensions of length, width, and height are orthogonal to each other.
This is not just an esoteric property of interest only to theorists; it is of fundamental practical importance. All of audio synthesis and processing depends upon this property of sines and cosines—additive
(Fourier) synthesis being but one example.
16. Despite the impossibility of representing p exactly, we have no choice but to approximate is as
closely as possible, for practical audio calculations. The math library functions employ double precision,
which is comfortably accurate enough for even high-resolution audio. Many programmers simply deﬁne
p as a number, and are even generous with the number of decimal places they specify:

325

Audio Programming in C

#define PI (3.14159265358979323846264338327950288419716939937510)
But this is in fact a little optimistic for a C double. If we use C to calculate p directly (a solution often
preferred over use of the preprocessor):
#include <math.h>
const double pi = 4.0 * atan(1);
printf("PI = %.20f,"pi); /*write out PI to 20 decimal places*/
the output is in fact merely
PI = 3.14159265358979310000
A standard 64-bit double can resolve to only 17 decimal digits (wherever the decimal point is), and as
we see, the number above is accurate to only 15 decimal places. For audio this is still plenty; and even
the lower precision of a float (no more than 8 decimal digits, but broadly comparable to the precision
of a 24-bit integer) is sufﬁcient for a dynamic range of more than 140 dB. In deﬁning such symbols, care
must be taken however to avoid name collisions. The symbol M_PI is supplied by some compilers, and is
widely used by programmers (as is PI) so, whichever symbol name is used, it is important to avoid redeﬁning it. Given the importance of the value 2p, it is common to deﬁne this too. Note that we cannot
use the symbol name 2PI because preprocessor symbols, like C variable names, cannot begin with a
number. Any serious compiler will automatically recalculate the value of TWOPI as a single number in
the course of preprocessing the code. Technically, there can be advantages to deﬁning PI and its relatives as a literal number rather than as a variable. The number can be embedded explicitly in the machine code, whereas accessing a variable from memory may prove to be a slower operation.
17. Were OSCIL to be declared as a local variable,
OSCIL* new_oscil(unsigned long srate)
{
OSCIL osc;
...
return &osc;
}
this would lead to a crash with an access violation as soon as one attempted to use the returned pointer.
A variable declared locally like this is destroyed when the function returns. The object is created on the
system stack, a temporary scratch-pad area of memory created for local variables at the beginning of a
function call, and recovered afterward. Thus the returned pointer no longer points to an OSCIL, but to
whatever has replaced it in that part of memory, almost certainly something it has no business pointing
to. By creating the object with malloc, memory is allocated for it on the global memory heap. Now the
returned pointer points to a genuine instance of OSCIL. The allocated memory must eventually be
returned to the system using free. Allocating memory inside a function is an important and idiomatic
technique. As noted in the text, documentation is essential, to tell the programmer to free the object
later. Note, however, that it is reasonable to declare an instance of an object at the top level of main
with the other variable declarations, i.e. on the top-level stack, and pass its address to oscil_init, as
now the lifetime of the object extends beyond that of the function call:
OSCIL osc;
oscil_init(&osc, outprops.srate);

326

Chapter 2

18. The name of this function is chosen in conscious tribute to the freely available ‘‘Synthesis Toolkit,’’
written by Perry Cook in Cþþ. Here, the functions that generate or process individual samples are called
‘‘tick.’’ Many alternative names have been used by programmers, such as ‘‘get_sample’’; but none
improves on this simple, short, yet self-documenting name.
19. Listing 2.5.8 illustrates an often-encountered situation for C programmers, where lines of code are
repeated identically in several places. Apart from the tedium of typing the same code multiple times
(eased somewhat by the availability of cut-and-paste editing tools), the presence of the repeated code
can sometimes obscure what is different in the various instances. The programmer’s ﬁrst thought might
well be to deﬁne a function to replace the inline code:
double wrap_phase(double curphase)
{
if(curphase > TWOPI)
return curphase - TWOPI;
if(curphase < 0.0)
return curphase + TWOPI;
return curphase;
}
For audio programmers, however, this has a major disadvantage in that it adds the overhead of a function-call in code that needs to run as fast as possible. The alternative is to deﬁne a preprocessor macro. In
such cases the text being substituted is often lengthy, and may need to extend over several lines. The
backslash has the special meaning of ‘‘line continuation’’ in a macro, to enable such multi-line macros
to be written. The line continuation character must be the last character on the line (i.e. followed immediately by <newline>). In this example there is no parameter associated with the macro—it performs
plain text substitution:
#define OSC_WRAPPHASE if(p_osc->curphase >= TWOPI) \
p_osc->curphase -= TWOPI; \
if(p_osc->curphase < 0.0) p_osc->curphase += TWOPI
Note that the ﬁnal semicolon is excluded from the text. While not practicable in all cases, this possibility
is always welcome as it enables the macro usage to look a little more like properly formed C code:
p_osc->curphase += p_osc->incr;
OSC_WRAPPHASE;
The preprocessor will replace the symbol OSC_WRAPPHASE with the substitute text, so that the code
passed to the compiler is identical to the original fully written out form. In such cases it is especially important that the macro name is written in upper case, to indicate to the reader that a macro is being
used. As these macros are speciﬁc to the code in wave.c (they reference the name p_osc), they are best
placed at the top of that ﬁle, rather than in wave.h.
The warnings given in chapter 1 about possible bugs arising from the use of macros apply even more
strongly here. Unless you are conﬁdent that the code will not need debugging in any way (e.g. using the
source-code single-step debugging facilities of modern compilers), it is better to resist the temptation to
use a macro, and keep to the fully written-out code. Don’t forget that the use of extra levels of brackets
(whether curved or curly) is often the key to preventing bugs in macros.

327

Audio Programming in C

20. In practice, such standard timers are not reliably accurate to 1 msec; there can be a signiﬁcant degree
of timing ‘‘jitter,’’ depending on the design of the operating system, and the time taken by the OS to
switch between processes. Measured differences of the order of a few milliseconds should therefore be
disregarded.
21. The use of a new structure variable sizeovrsr for the OSCILT type illustrates a common problem
for C programmers. As the corresponding variable in OSCIL, twopiovrsr, is available but unused in the
OSCILT functions, there is a good reason to use it, to avoid using what is ostensibly an unnecessary extra
variable in the OSCILT structure (economizing on memory consumption, especially for objects that may
exist in large numbers, is an important and often prime concern). However, the meaning of these variables is different in each case (one expresses a relationship to TWOPI, the other to a table size), and as has
been emphasized frequently in this book, choosing appropriate names for variables and functions is an
important aspect of securing readability and the self-documentation of your code. Conversely, programmers also like generality and economy. An alternative approach, given that we have created both
OSCIL and OSCILT and are therefore able to modify both at will, is to use a generic name such as
‘‘incrfac’’ for OSCIL, which is neutral enough to cover any likely usage. This however makes the code
for each speciﬁc oscillator less expressive and self-documenting. We are thus confronted with a choice
between economy (arising from the preference for generality), and readability, that may favor the use
of multiple alternative variables. The approach taken in these introductory sections is, as this example
demonstrates, biased toward the latter approach. This is an issue that will not go away, however, and
for Cþþ programmers it becomes even more taxing, as the urge, almost a moral imperative, intensiﬁes
to identify common behavior among a host of objects—leading ultimately to the creation of objects so
general that they end up being called OBJECT.
22. It has to be said, however, that for the highest audio quality, linear interpolation itself performs
poorly. Extended interpolation techniques are widely employed. One common technique is so-called
cubic interpolation, which seeks to interpolate a curve between sample points rather than a simple line.
Examples can be found in a number of Csound opcodes. A major objective of these more advanced
interpolation methods is to minimize the ﬁltering effect that can reduce the high-frequency of a sound
to an unacceptable degree.

3

Working with Audio Streams

Gabriel Maldonado

3.1

Introduction
In the computer, a ‘‘stream’’ is a sequential ﬂow of data that moves from one point to another. These two ‘‘points’’ can be two different hardware devices, such as the random-access
memory (RAM) to the hard drive, or, as in the case of audio streams, the ﬂow might move an
audio signal that results from some signal processing algorithm to the digital-to-analog converter (DAC) and then out of the computer to your loudspeakers.
As you are probably well aware, digital computers only deal with numbers (‘digital’ derives
from the word ‘digit’, a synonym for ‘numeric’). Thus, the only kind of stream allowed by a
computer is a numeric stream—a ﬂow of binary numbers, zeroes and ones, which are combined to represent different numeric types. To generate such streams, we can sample analog
signals1 to digitize audio (as well as any sort of varying physical quantity).
A digital audio signal is a sequence of numbers that precisely represents the variation of air
pressure that, when it stimulates our ear, produces the phenomenon we call sound.2 In this
section we will deal with audio streams. In particular, we will learn how to generate an audio
signal in the C/Cþþ language and to store that signal in a ﬁle or send this signal directly to a
digital-to-analog converter (DAC, the computer soundcard) in order to listen at it. Since the
code that I present can be applied to both C and Cþþ, I will refer to the language used as
‘‘C/Cþþ.’’ Actually Cþþ is a complete superset of the C programming language. Most of
what is valid and true for C is also valid and true for Cþþ. We will avoid code that is only
compatible with Cþþ in this text. Some understanding of these languages is expected from
the reader, but this text will also provide some further support for the study of programming
in general.

3.2

Synthesizing Audio Streams to an Output
In this section, I will introduce a simple synthesis program hellosine.c,3 and compare it with
the famous helloworld.c 4 code. Our program will generate a sequence of samples5 from a sine
wave, and then stream the signal to the standard output.6 There are several ways to generate
such signals, and in this chapter we will use the following two:

330

Chapter 3

Using a standard C library function that calculates the sine of a number.
Calculating a single cycle of the wave, storing it in an area of the computer’s memory called
a table,7 and using the so-called table-lookup method or wave-table synthesis technique to
generate the signal. In this case, any waveform stored in the table could be played—not
only a sine wave, but a wave of any shape.

n
n

3.2.1

HelloWorld and HelloSine: A Comparison

This section introduces our simple audio-stream example, written in analogy to famous
helloworld.c program that simply prints a string of text to the console and terminates:
/* helloworld.c */
#include <stdio.h>
main()
{
printf("Hello, world!\n");
}
This program (a single C function called main()) does nothing more than stream a simple
string to the standard output. In the UNIX operating system (and in DOS, the Windows console, and Linux) almost all devices, such as the screen, the keyboard, the printer, a ﬁle, etc.,
are considered to be a stream or a ﬁle (meaning a set of sequential data). By default, the standard output is associated with the console (and consequently the output is directed to the
screen). But it is possible to redirect the standard output to another device, for example to a
ﬁle, by simply calling the executable with the redirection character followed by the device
name (in the case of a ﬁle, the name of the ﬁle itself). The redirection character is >. If we
execute the program with the console line,
$ helloworld > pluto.txt
the program will not print anything to the screen, but rather, to a ﬁle named pluto.txt, which
is created with the output from the program.
Our program HelloSine will do exactly the same thing, but instead of streaming a sequence
of characters, it will stream a sequence of samples (as text):
/* hellosine.c */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
#define
#define
#define
#define
#define

SAMPLING_RATE 44100
NUM_SECONDS 3
NUM_SAMPLES (NUM_SECONDS * SAMPLING_RATE)
PI 3.14159265
FREQUENCY 440

331

Working with Audio Streams

main()
{
int j;
for(j = 0; j < NUM_SAMPLES; j++) {
float sample;
sample = sin(2 * PI * FREQUENCY * j / SAMPLING_RATE);
printf("%f\n", sample);
}
}
By running our program, we can produce an audio stream (which in this case will be text
containing a sequence of numbers) to a ﬁle. Example:
$ hellosine > sound.txt
3.2.2

A Functional Analysis of hellosine.c

In this section I will discuss what HelloSine does and see how it accomplishes its task. My goal
is to provide you with some insights that will make your approach to software design more
effective. When you are writing a program, it is important to begin with a clear list of ideas
on what it will have to do. Therefore, I encourage you to begin their own programs by writing a set of assertions regarding the task(s) of each program. At the beginning, these assertions need not consider the peculiarities of the particular programming language that will
be used to develop the program. Rather, they should be quite generic. In the case of HelloSine
the ﬁrst assertion is Develop a program that writes the samples of a sine wave to the standard
output. When a programmer attempts to realize this sentence in the C language, he or she
quickly discovers that the idea is quite clear, but that the information provided by the sentence is far from complete. ‘‘How many samples should it write, or, how many seconds?’’ If
you have some notion about digital audio, you would ask yourself ‘‘Will the sine wave be
heard? If so, what will be its frequency and amplitude? What will it have to be its sampling
frequency?’’ All these questions must have concrete answers, because the computer only
does what the programmer asks, it is unable to make a decision by itself. Such information
can be provided in two ways:
n
n

in a ﬁxed way, i.e. embedded in the program itself
in a parameterized way, i.e. it can be set by the user each time the program is run.

In order to be as simple as possible, our program adopts the ﬁrst way (ﬁxed).
Now the assertions can be completed:
Develop a program that will
write a stream of samples of a sinusoidal wave to the standard output
n
write 3 seconds of audio samples in text format
n

332

Chapter 3

n
n
n

be sampled at the same sampling frequency of a commercial audio CD (44,100 Hz)
correspond to the pitch of the orchestral tuning note—middle A (440 Hz)
have a monophonic output (one channel).

The speciﬁcation is now complete. But I am able to use the word ‘complete’ only because
I know that there is an existing C language library that contains a function able to calculate
the sine of a number (i.e. the sin() function). Had I not been aware of this function, I would
have had to ﬁgure out how to implement a sine function and add these steps to my previous
outline. This set of assertions is often called the ‘‘speciﬁcations’’ (‘‘specs’’) of a program.
Previous assertions correspond only to the ﬁrst pass of the design phase, i.e. what the program should do. The second pass is: ﬁgure out how to do it. And then, only after answering
the second question(s) is it possible to proceed with the third pass: implement it.
Here are my three phases of software development:
1. Outline what your program is supposed to do.
2. Figure out how to do it.
3. Do it.
How do we proceed to the ‘‘do’’ phase? Well, old programming books often suggest that
we should devise a graphic scheme called a ﬂow chart before beginning to write the code.
Sometimes this kind of approach can be useful for beginners or for small programs, but personally, I think that in most cases it is a waste of time, especially for programs written by
a single person, because a complete ﬂow chart can turn out to be longer and complex than
the code itself. Furthermore, ﬂow charts force people to think in a particular programming
paradigm, that is ‘‘structured programming,’’ but they don’t apply so well to the newer paradigms such as ‘‘object-oriented’’ or ‘‘declarative programming.’’ At best, I feel that ﬂow charts
are quite useful for work-groups. Here it makes sense that everyone should literally be ‘‘on
the same page,’’ i.e. reading from the same ‘‘ﬂow chart.’’
However, I don’t intend to say that a ﬂow chart is useless. I simply want to recommend
that programmer not get too attached to a particular development style, such as traditional
ﬂow-charting style. Rather than using a ﬂow-charting approach, I prefer visualizing a program as a series of input-output blocks connected by cables. This is a particularly appropriate
model for audio programming, in which we are quite used to connecting audio devices like
microphones to mixers to recorders to ampliﬁers to loudspeakers. Actually, this approach is
embodied in the very user interface of a number of visual programming applications that
deal primarily with audio—Max/MSP, PD, Reaktor, etc.
This kind of visualization is suited for any process dealing with signals (not only audio
signals, but also control signals). These diagrams deal with the interconnection of modules
or blocks, but hide the internal mechanism of each block from the programmer. Each of
these signal modifying, signal processing, or signal generating blocks can be considered a
‘‘black box.’’ And in a black box paradigm such as this, the programmer only knows the
input(s), the output(s) and the behavior of the box, but knows nothing of the algorithm

333

Working with Audio Streams

that is employed to make it work. This way of thinking is sometimes called ‘‘encapsulation’’
or ‘‘implementation hiding.’’ These are two of the basic principles of an object-oriented paradigm. The most basic means for information hiding in C and Cþþ is the function. But
normally a single function is not powerful or rich enough to speak of it as a form of objectorienting. For now, we are dealing with the ‘‘structured programming’’ or ‘‘imperative programming’’ paradigm. Figures 3.1 and 3.2 show a comparison between the ﬂow chart and a
block (black box) scheme.
Clearly the ﬂow chart is closer to describing what actually happens in hellosine.c, whereas
the block diagram gives us a better overview of the structure of the system and all of its connections while hiding what happens internally (in this case, there is only a block made up of
the sine-wave generation mechanism). For the graphic representation, one could easily substitute a verbal description of what the program will do to accomplish its task:
1. Fill in all the external information that the program needs to run.
2. Based on the total duration (in seconds) and the sampling rate (in hertz), calculate how
many samples the program will generate.
3. Initialize the time to zero.
4. Calculate the ﬁrst sample by using the formula
sin(2pft),

(1)

where f is the frequency in Hz and t is the instantaneous time in seconds.
5. Output the signal to the standard output.
6. Increment instantaneous time t by a sample period (i.e. 1/samplingRate) in order to
advance to the next sample.
7. Repeat steps 4–6 until all samples have been computed and sent to the standard output.
8. Exit the program.
Now that I have described what and how the program should proceed to do its task, we
can move on to the implementation stage. Let’s continue with our analysis. As was stated
previously, the inputs of our program are embedded, and so, they can’t be considered as
true inputs from the actual point of view. If the programmer has to change any of these
inputs, they would have to recompile the program before running it. They are implemented
by means of C macros and are SAMPLING_RATE, NUM_SECONDS, and FREQUENCY (at the top
of the program code). There are two further macros: NUM_SAMPLES (the number of samples
to be sent to the standard output), that is obtained by using two previous arguments (i.e.
NUM_SECONDS multiplied by the SAMPLING_RATE), and PI (which is nothing more than
the famous constant p—the ratio between the circumference and the diameter of a circle)
used in the formula, that was previously deﬁned by the programmer.
In order to calculate and output all the samples, we need a loop iterating/repeating
NUM_SAMPLES times. In the body of this loop, the temporary variable ‘‘sample’’ is ﬁlled
each time with a new value, that is obtained by incrementing the index of the loop (the variable j ) each cycle.

334

Chapter 3

Figure 3.1
A ﬂow chart of hellosine.c.

335

Working with Audio Streams

Figure 3.2
A block diagram of hellosine.c.

Using the input macro constants, notice that the math formula: sin(2pft) is translated into
sin(2 * PI * FREQUENCY * j / SAMPLING_RATE)
In particular, the instantaneous time t is incremented by a sample period by means of
the j/SAMPLING_RATE expression, in which the j variable expresses both the index of the
loop and current sample number.
3.2.3

Table-Lookup Oscillators

In this section we will continue to work with audio streams and we will be introduce the
table-lookup method for generating waveforms. This method is also called wavetable synthesis
and it can be used for both artiﬁcial sounds, generated entirely by computer calculations,
and for acoustic sounds, recorded with a microphone.
Wavetable synthesis is a technique based on reading data that has been stored in blocks of
contiguous computer-memory locations, called tables. This sound-synthesis technique was one
of the very ﬁrst software synthesis methods introduced in the MUSIC I–MUSIC V languages
developed by Max Mathews at Bell Labs in the late 1950s and the early 1960s. Back then,
computers were slow and reading pre-computed samples from memory was much faster
than calculating each sample from scratch (as in the case of previous hellosine.c, in which
the sin() function was called for each sample of the synthesized sound).
With table-lookup synthesis, it is sufﬁcient to calculate only a single cycle of a waveform,
and then store this small set of samples in the table where it serves as a template. In order to
playback the actual sound, this stored single cycle of the waveform must be re-read in a loop
at the desired frequency. Among other things, this method provided a huge advantage over
the analog oscillators used in radio and electronic music studios of early 1960s because

336

Chapter 3

analog oscillators were capable of producing but a limited set of wave shapes (sinusoid, triangle, sawtooth, and square), whereas with the table-lookup method virtually any wave shape
could be synthesized.
Three methods were devised to allow for the speciﬁcation of arbitrary frequencies:
1. varying the reading speed (such as in the case of a tape recorder)
2. reading samples at a ﬁxed rate, but varying the table length for each frequency (using a
bigger table for lower frequencies and a smaller for higher frequencies)
3. reading samples at a ﬁxed rate from a ﬁxed length table, but varying the increment of the
indexes of the samples to be read from the table.
The method actually used for wavetable synthesis (and the most convenient) is the third
one. In order to understand it, let’s suppose that, given a ﬁxed reading rate (called the
sampling rate), the ‘‘natural’ frequency of a waveform is 100 Hz, when all subsequent samples
(or elements) of the table are read, one a time. Each subsequent element of the table is numbered by an index, starting from 0 up to the length of the table (1). The ﬁrst sample of the
table has index 0, the second has index 1, and so on, up the last sample that is table length
1. So, in a table made up of 1,000 samples, the last sample has an index of 999.
We begin by reading the ﬁrst element, and sending its value to the output, then the
second, then the third, etc. After last element (having index 999) is read, the cycle restarts
again from index 0 and so on.
To have a ‘‘natural’’ frequency of 100 Hz with a table of, suppose, 1,000 elements, all
1,000 samples must be read in a hundredth of second, so each sample must be read in
1/100/1,000 ¼ 1/100,000 second. This slice of time is called the sampling period. The sampling rate (actually the reading speed) is the inverse of the sampling period, so in our case it
is 100,000 Hz. In most digital audio applications, the sampling rate is ﬁxed.
If you wanted the waveform to ‘‘oscillate’’ at twice the frequency (200 Hz), it would be sufﬁcient to read only samples with even indices, skipping the odd ones and reading one value
from every other location in the table (i.e. index 0, 2, 4, . . . ). Again, to have a frequency of
300 Hz it is sufﬁcient to read one sample every three indices, skipping two contiguous
indexes each time (i.e. index 0, 3, 6, 9, . . . ).
How to obtain frequencies less than 100 Hz? Simply by reading the same sample more
than once. For example, to play the waveform at a frequency of 50 Hz, it is sufﬁcient to read
the value from each sample twice and then read the next (i.e. index 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4, 4, . . . )
and to listen to that waveform at 1/3 the ‘‘natural frequency’’ (33.33. . . Hz), it is sufﬁcient to
read the same sample 3 times before moving along to the next value in the table (i.e. index
1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3, . . . ).
You might be wondering at this point whether this method is capable of obtaining any
frequency. The answer is no. Given the technique as explain thus far, the only frequencies
that can be obtained from our table-lookup oscillator are those that are integer multiples or
integer fractions of the ‘‘natural’’ frequency of the table. But there is a method that would
allow us to obtain any frequency. In order to understand it, we have to introduce the con-

337

Working with Audio Streams

cept of phase (which for table-lookup oscillators has an extended meaning), and the concept
of a sampling increment.
In wavetable synthesis, the phase is a variable that acts as a pointer to the index of a current table element (note: this not to be confused with a C-language pointer, we will cover this
topic in depth later). The speciﬁc phase value is advanced by the amount of the sampling
increment for each sampling period, in order to point to the appropriate table-index at each
subsequent reading. In the ﬁrst of previous examples, a frequency of 100 Hz was obtained by
incrementing the phase value by 1 for each sampling period; 200 Hz was obtained with a
sampling increment of 2; 300 Hz with a sampling increment of 3 and so on. But, in order
to obtain a frequency of 50 Hz, you needed a sampling increment lower than 1, actually
1/2 or 0.5; to obtain a frequency of 33.33. . . Hz, you needed a sampling increment equal
to 1/3 or 0.333 and so on.
Actually, the value of the sampling increment determines, and is proportional to, the frequency of the wave. In most cases, the sampling increment is a fractional number, not an integer. The phase value is also a real number. So, if the instantaneous value of the phase is, for
instance, 10.92843, the actual table element that is extracted has an index of 10 because the
integer part of the phase is taken as a pointer to an index of table elements. And obviously,
the possible range of values of our phase pointer can only be from 0 up to the table-length
minus 1 (a 100-element table goes from 0 to 99). And when the phase value reaches or surpasses the table length, it needs to wrap back around to the beginning in order to restore the
phase pointer to a useful range, and this is done by subtracting the length of the table from
the calculated sampling increment (if our table is 100 samples long, and our sampling increment is 105, then our phase is set to a value of 5 and points to a table-index back at the
beginning of the table). The method described here, is the ‘‘raw,’’ un-interpolated method
and this obviously introduces some error and some ‘‘noise’’ in the signal. To obtain a better
sound quality (a more accurate representation of the data/curve stored in the table) one of
several interpolation methods are usually employed with the most common being the linear
interpolation method.
3.2.4

A Wavetable Example: HelloTable

In this example, named hellotable.c, we will send a stream of samples to an output, just as we
did in hellosine.c, but in this case, the output will be to a location other than our standard
output because sending samples to the standard output is useless if we want to actually hear
the sound. In order to listen to the generated sound, we will have to send the samples to a
device (either a binary ﬁle in one of a number of audio ﬁle formats, such as .wav or .aiff, or
a physical device such as the computer’s DAC) that allow us to hear it directly, in real time
or in deferred time (in the latter case, deferring our listening until ‘‘after’’ the .aiff or .wav ﬁle
containing the output samples has been written to the hard drive). As we learned previously,
we’ll start with a simple verbal description of the requirements of our program:

338

Chapter 3

Write a program that
will output a stream of samples to a destination (device) that can be chosen by the user, at
compile time, from the following: the standard output (like previous hellosine.c); a raw
binary ﬁle made up of 16-bit integer samples; a Windows standard wav-format ﬁle; or the
DAC of our computer or on an audio card in real-time
n
will use the wavetable-synthesis method to generate the samples
n
will store a single cycle of a waveform in a table
n
will allow the user to set the following parameters at run time: the frequency of the waveform in hertz; the duration of the waveform in seconds (during which the program will reiterate the single wave-cycle stored in the table the corresponding number of times); and the
waveshape, chosen from: sinusoid, sawtooth, triangle or square.
n

Here is the (partial) source code of hellotable.c:
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
#define SAMPLING_RATE 44100
#define PI 3.14159265
#define
#define
#define
#define
#define

TABLE_LEN 512
SINE 0 /* macros to make array index to mean something */
SQUARE 1
SAW 2
TRIANGLE 3

float table[TABLE_LEN ]; /* array (table) to be filled with a
waveform */
/* . . . OTHER CODE HERE (containing functions that
fill the table with a waveform le, initialization-cleanup, and
appropriate
output
according to the chosen out-tination),
see later . . . */
void main()
{
int waveform;
const float frequency, duration;
printf("Type the frequency of the wave to output in Hz, "
"and press ENTER: ");
scanf("%f", &frequency);
printf("\nType the duration of tone in seconds, and
press ENTER: ");
scanf("%f", &duration);

339

Working with Audio Streams

wrong_waveform:
printf("\nType a number from 0 to 3 corresponding to the "
"waveform you intend to choose\n");
printf("(0 = sine, 1 = square, 2 = sawtooth , 3 = triangle), "
"and press ENTER: ");
scanf("%d", &waveform);
if ( waveform < 0 || waveform > 3) {
printf("\nwrong number for waveform, try again!\n");
goto wrong_waveform;
}
/*------ FILL THE TABLE -----------*/
switch (waveform) {
case SINE:
printf("\nYou've chosen a SINE wave\n");
fill_sine();
break;
case SQUARE:
printf("\nYou've chosen a SQUARE wave\n");
fill_square();
break;
case SAW:
printf("\nYou've chosen a SAW wave\n");
fill_saw();
break;
case TRIANGLE:
printf("\nYou've chosen a TRIANGLE wave\n");
fill_triangle();
break;
default: /* impossible! */
printf("\nWrong wave!! Ending program.\n");
return;
}
init();
/*------ SYNTHESIS ENGINE START ---------*/
{
int j;
double sample_increment = frequency * TABLE_LEN / SAMPLING_RATE;
double phase = 0;
float sample;
for (j = 0; j < duration * SAMPLING_RATE; j++) {
sample = table[(long) phase];
outSample(sample);

340

Chapter 3

phase += sample_increment;
if (phase > TABLE_LEN) phase -= TABLE_LEN;
}
}
/*------ SYNTHESIS ENGINE END -----------*/
cleanup();
printf("End of process\n");
}
This is only a part of the code of ﬁle hellotable.c; the other parts (indicated by the comment
OTHER CODE HERE) will be viewed later. Here are the steps that the program has to follow in
order to accomplish its task:
1. Provide default settings and ‘‘built-in’’ information (for example, sampling rate, symbolic
tags representing the various wave shapes, etc.) in the form of #deﬁne constants.
2. Deﬁne a table in the form of a global array of ﬂoats, that will contain the waveform
samples.
3. Provide a set of four user-deﬁned functions that can ﬁll the table with one of the possible
waveshapes (not shown in previous code).
4. Provide user-deﬁned functions that initialize and cleanup the output device (not shown
in previous code).
5. Provide a user-deﬁned function that sends each sample to the output device chosen at
compile time.
6. Ask the user to provide the run-time information (frequency, duration and wave shape)
by typing some numbers to the console.
7. Store the information typed by the user into numeric variables (ﬂoating-point for frequency and duration, integer for the waveshape).
8. If the user makes a mistake when typing the waveshape number, repeat the operation
again (this is called ‘‘defensive programming’’).
9. Based on the user’s choice, ﬁll the table with a waveform cycle by selecting one of previous user-deﬁned functions.
10. Initialize the output device by calling a user-deﬁned function initialize the processing
variables and calculate the sample-increment by using the expression
frequency 

table_length
.
sampling_rate

(2)

12. Start cycling the wavetable-synthesis engine loop by using the following steps:
(a) Initialize the sample index to zero.
(b) Read a sample from the table according to current phase.
(c) Output the sample to the device chosen at compile time by calling a user-deﬁned function.
(d) Increment the phase by a sample step.

341

Working with Audio Streams

(e) If the new phase value is greater than table length, subtract the table length from the
phase value itself (to wrap around to the beginning).
(f) Increment the sample index by a unit.
(g) If the sample index is less than the value corresponding to the overall duration, continue
looping by jumping again to step b.
13. Clean up the output device and exit the program.
(In order to make hellotable.c a little more readable at this point, I have omitted the deﬁnitions of the functions fill_sine(), fill_square(), fill_saw(), fill_triangle(),
init(), cleanup(), and outSample(). These will be discussed in more detail later in this
chapter.)
Let’s look at the main() function. The integer variable waveform serves to contain a symbolic identiﬁer, whose value is chosen by the user among those deﬁned by previous macros—SINE, SQUARE, SAW, and TRIANGLE. The ﬂoat variables frequency and duration will be
used to hold the other user-supplied parameters. These variable are ﬁlled by the scanf()
function (from the stdio.h library). To ﬁll a variable (or a set of variables), this function is
passed the addresses of target variables as function arguments, by means of the & operator.
Syntactically, the address of a variable is equivalent to a pointer, and such pointer is passed
as an argument to the scanf() function. After this call, the pointed target of such address is
ﬁlled with an item coming from the standard input (by default, the computer keyboard).
Thus, the program pauses at the different scanf() lines and waits for the user to type a
number corresponding to the frequency, duration or waveform, respectively, and carries on
when the enter key is hit.
Notice that this part of the program contains a label, wrong_waveform. A label marks a
point in the source code. It is made up of a text identiﬁer followed by a colon. Labels are
used with two C/Cþþ statements, goto and case. The goto statement is used to jump to
the point where a corresponding label is located, inside a function. Good programming style
suggests that goto statements should be avoided, or at least reduced to a minimum, because
they make the program difﬁcult to read and messy. However, there are situations in which
goto is very useful, such as in our hellotable.c, in which some lines are repeated until the
user provides a value in the range 0–3 (i.e., it avoids wrong user inputs that could cause
the program to crash.)
The other statement that works with labels is switch(). . .case, which appears next in
the program:
switch(waveform) {
case SINE:
. . .something here. . .
break;
case SQUARE:
. . .something here. . .
break;

342

Chapter 3

case SAW:
. . .something here. . .
break;
case TRIANGLE:
. . .something here. . .
break;
default:
. . .something here. . .
}
The switch(). . .case statement allows a selection among multiple sections of code,
depending on the value of an expression, in this case the content of the waveform variable.
The expression enclosed in parentheses, is the ‘‘controlling expression,’’ and must be an
integer variable or constant. The switch statement causes an unconditional jump to a label
belonging to a set of labels, called case labels enclosed in s. Such labels are different from
goto labels, because they express an integer value, while goto labels are only a text literal.
Depending on the value of the controlling expression, the jump goes to the corresponding
matching label. The values of the case labels must be integer constants. The statements in
the switch body are labeled with case labels or with the default: label, which will be
used if nothing matches.
In our case, the labels are macros deﬁned at the top of hellotable.c, serving as identiﬁers of
our waveshapes. So if our variable waveform has been ﬁlled, for instance, with 1, after the
switch() controlling expression, program ﬂow will jump to case SQUARE: (line 143) and
will execute the two following lines. After that, the break statement (line 146) will exit the
switch block, continuing the execution at line 158.
In the switch() block of hellotable.c there are four cases (plus one default case), each
contains a call to a user-deﬁned function whose purpose is to ﬁll the array table[] with
a single cycle of a wave. The functions are fill_sine() (at line 141 of hellotable.c), fill_
square() (line 145), fill_saw() (line 149), and fill_triangle() (line 153). These functions will be examined later (together with the initialization and clean-up functions init()
and cleanup()).
The synthesis engine is enclosed in a brace-delimited instruction block. The reason for this
enclosure is to be able to declare some local variables placed inside the engine zone itself.
The integer variable j is a looping index. The variable sample_increment (declared as a
double in order to increase its precision), contains the sampling increment, which depends
on the frequency:
double sample_increment = frequency * TABLE_LEN / SAMPLING_RATE;
The phase variable is also a double; it is initialized to zero, and it will be used as a storage
space for the temporary phase value during the performance of the synthesis engine. The
sample variable is declared as a float and will contain the instantaneous value of the audio
wave.

343

Working with Audio Streams

The part of the code that makes up the synthesis engine begins at line 168 with a for()
loop whose body is reiterated for all samples of the output. The actual number of samples is
calculated with the expression duration * SAMPLING_RATE, where SAMPLING_RATE is the
number of samples per second. During each cycle of the loop, the sample variable is ﬁlled
with a table element whose index is determined by the integer truncation of the phase (line
169). Since an array accepts only integer numbers as indexes, this truncation is done by converting the phase variable, which is a double, into a long, by means of the cast operator.
In line 170, the current value of the sample variable is sent to the (previously chosen) output device by calling the user-deﬁned outSample() function. (We’ll examine this function
shortly.) The current phase value is then incremented by the sampling increment, in order to
allow the index of the table to point to the appropriate array element at the next cycle.
When the value of the phase variable exceeds TABLE_LEN, a new cycle is starting, and the
phase variable must be decremented by that amount. This pass is done by the if() conditional at the end of the code block.
After the loop block has generated the appropriate number of samples, the program calls
the user-deﬁned cleanup() function and ends. Here is the listing of the remaining code of
hellotable.c (which was omitted from the previous listing for clarity’s sake):
void fill_sine()/*fills the table with a single cycle
of a sine wave */
{
int j;
for(j = 0; j < TABLE_LEN; j++)
table[j] = (float) sin(2 * PI * j/TABLE_LEN);
}
void fill_square()
{
int j;
for( j = 0; j < TABLE_LEN/2; j++)
table[j] = 1;
for( j = TABLE_LEN/2; j < TABLE_LEN; j++)
table[j] = -1;
}
void fill_saw() /* descending ramp */
{
int j;
for( j = 0; j < TABLE_LEN; j++)
table[j] = 1 - (2 * (float) j / (float) TABLE_LEN) ;
}
void fill_triangle()
{

344

Chapter 3

int j;
for( j = 0; j < TABLE_LEN/2; j++)
table[j] = 2 * (float) j/ (float) (TABLE_LEN/2) - 1;
for( j = TABLE_LEN/2; j < TABLE_LEN; j++)
table[j] = 1 (2 * (float) (j-TABLE_LEN/2) / (float) (TABLE_LEN/2));
}
#ifdef REALTIME /* uses Tiny Audio Library */
#include "tinyAudioLib.h"
#elif defined(BINARY_RAW_FILE)
FILE* file;
#elif defined(WAVE_FILE) /* uses portsf library */
#include "portsf.h"
PSF_PROPS props;
int ofd;
#endif
void outSample(float sample)
{
#ifdef REALTIME /* uses Tiny Audio Library */
outSampleMono(sample);
#elif defined(BINARY_RAW_FILE)
short isample = (short) (sample * 32000);
fwrite(&isample,sizeof(short),1,file);
#elif defined(WAVE_FILE) /* uses portsf library */
psf_sndWriteFloatFrames(ofd,&sample,1);
#else /* standard output */
printf("%f\n", sample);
#endif
}
void init()
{
#ifdef REALTIME /* uses Tiny Audio Library */
tinyInit();
#elif defined(BINARY_RAW_FILE)
file = fopen("hellotable.raw","wb");
#elif defined(WAVE_FILE) /* uses portsf library */
props.srate = 44100;
props.chans = 1;
props.samptype = PSF_SAMP_16;
props.format = PSF_STDWAVE;
props.chformat = STDWAVE;

345

Working with Audio Streams

psf_init();
ofd = psf_sndCreate("hellotable.wav", &props, 0, 0,
PSF_CREATE_RDWR);
#else /* standard output */
printf("\n. . .Nothing to initialize. . .\n");
#endif
}
void cleanup()
{
printf("cleaning up. . . ");
#ifdef REALTIME /* uses Tiny Audio Library */
tinyExit();
#elif defined(BINARY_RAW_FILE)
fclose(file);
#elif defined(WAVE_FILE) /* uses portsf library */
{
int err1, err2;
err1 = psf_sndClose(ofd);
err2 = psf_finish();
if(err1 || err2)
printf("\nWarning! An error occurred"
"writing WAVE_FILE file.\n");
}
#else /* standard output */
printf("nothing to clean up. . . ");
#endif
}
The user functions fill_square(), fill_saw, and fill_triangle() simply ﬁll the
table[] array with the corresponding single-cycle (non-band-limited) waveshapes square,
sawtooth, and triangle. Notice that, in these cases, the for() loop is used without braces
because the statement is the assignment of the calculated sample to each element of the
table. In C, braces are optional if the for() loop contains a single C statement. This time,
the cast operator is used to convert an int variable to a float.
In programs made up of a single source ﬁle, the main() function is typically placed after
all the other user-deﬁned functions, as in hellotable.c. The reason for this practice is that the
compiler needs to know the types of the function arguments, and the types of function
return values before the lines in which such functions are called from the main(). Alternatively, it is typical to precede the function calls with function prototypes. These typically
appear in the #include (or header) ﬁles of libraries. In this case, the bodies of such functions are usually pre-compiled into the library binary ﬁle.

346

Chapter 3

Next in the code we see these lines:
#ifdef REALTIME /* uses Tiny Audio Library */
#include "tinyAudioLib.h"
#elif defined(BINARY_RAW_FILE)
FILE* file;
#elif defined(WAVE_FILE) /* uses portsf library */
#include "portsf.h"
PSF_PROPS props;
int ofd;
#endif
Here we see some C pre-processor statements, followed by lines of normal code (global variable declarations). The #ifdef, #elif defined(), #else, and #endif statements relate to
conditional compilation. They are used to check to see if a certain macro has been deﬁned.
Depending on this, the pre-processor tells the compiler to compile or not the different
chunks of code between #ifdef or #elif up to next #elif or #else statement.
In our case, the C pre-processor checks if the REALTIME macro has been deﬁned somewhere (either in a header or as an option to the compiler). If it has been deﬁned, the preprocessor tells the compiler to compile the line
#include "tinyAudioLib.h"
ignoring the rest. Otherwise it checks if the BINARY_RAW_FILE macro has been deﬁned, and
skips the other conditions. Thanks to conditional compilation, the hellotable program allows
the programmer to choose, from a set of different devices, an output device at compilation
time (not at runtime). The compilation options are as follows.
Realtime: the program sends the output directly to the DAC in order to play the sound while
the processing stage is happening. This choice uses the Tiny Audio Library (a simple library
that is a wraps the Portaudio pablio library in a way that makes it much easier to use by
beginners).
Binary Raw File: the output is written to a raw audio ﬁle (16-bit mono) that can be played
later with any wave players or editors that supports the speciﬁcation of information about
the format of the data in the raw audio ﬁle, such as the sampling rate, the number of channels (stereo or mono), and the sample resolution (8-bit, 16-bit, 24-bit, or even 32-bit ﬂoats).
The advantage of using a Raw Audio File is that in this case hellosine.c doesn’t require us to
link in any special libraries. We can write the ﬁle by simply using the stdio library.
Wave File: the output is written to a standard Windows .wav ﬁle (based on Richard Dobson’s
portsf library). This format is automatically recognized by most wave players. Thus, it might
prove easier to use than raw ﬁles, because the user doesn’t have to remember the special format of the audio ﬁle.
Standard Output: the default choice. Sends each output sample to the standard output and
provides numeric text strings expressing the fractional values of each sample (like hellosine.c).

347

Working with Audio Streams

This choice is valid if the REALTIME, BINARY_RAW_FILE, or WAVE_FILE macros have not
been deﬁned.
The programmer need only provide the libraries corresponding to the compilation choice,
and can ignore all other libraries. Conditional compilation can help to successfully build a
program that might be missing some libraries are those that might have included libraries
that were platforms or operating system speciﬁc. In fact, in the second and fourth cases of
conditional compilation of hellotable.c (i.e. Binary Raw File and Standard Output), the programmer doesn’t have to provide any special library because stdio is available on all platforms.
Next in the source code, there is the deﬁnition of the outSample() function. This function accepts a float as an input and sends the number, from the sample argument variable, to an output device chosen by the user at compilation time.
Again, there are some conditional compilation statements:
1. Given the REALTIME choice, the input argument is simply fed as an argument to the
outSampleMono() function (line 63) that belongs to the Tiny Audio Library. This function
sends the ﬂoat to the DAC in real time, in order to listen at it.
2. Given the BINARY_RAW_FILE choice, the short variable isample (a 16-bit integer) is
ﬁlled with the sample input argument value, after rescaling it between the ranges of
32,000 and þ32,000 (the original range was between 1 and 1). Also, in order to truncate
eventual fractional values, a type conversion is done by the cast operator. In the following
line, there is a call to the fwrite() function from the stdio standard library that writes a
chunk of contiguous binary data to a previously opened ﬁle. The three input arguments
required by this function are: the initial address of the data chunk operator (in our case this
is simply the address of the isample variable), the size of one of the data elements to be
written (in our case this is a short and its size is obtained by means of the sizeof( ) operator),
the total number of data elements to be written, and ﬁnally, a pointer to a previously opened
ﬁle (in our case the ﬁle is opened in the init() user-deﬁned function, but its pointer was
previously declared as a global variable).
3. Given the WAVE_FILE choice, the input argument is simply fed as an argument to the
psf_sndWriteFloatFrames() function that belongs to the portsf library.
4. Given the default case, a simple printf() function call feeds the sample argument to the
standard output.
The next deﬁnition seen in the code is of init(). At compilation time, it serves to initialize the chosen output device in the appropriate way. Here again, there are some conditional compilation statements:
1. In the case of the REALTIME (i.e. Tiny Audio Library) choice, a tinyInit()[ function call
is provided. (This is not necessary, because the Tiny Audio Library automatically initializes
itself on the ﬁrst call to an input or output function).

348

Chapter 3

2. In the case of the BINARY_RAW_FILE choice, a ﬁle is opened by calling the fopen()
function (belonging to stdio standard library) that gets, as its input arguments, a string containing the name and path of the ﬁle to be opened, and a string containing some speciﬁers
that set the mode and operations to be applied to the corresponding ﬁle (in our case, the
string wb stands for ‘write’ and ‘binary’). The fopen() function returns a FILE pointer that
ﬁlls the file global variable.
3. In the case of the WAVE_FILE choice, the ﬁelds of the global props structure belonging to
the user-deﬁned type PSF_PROPS (deﬁned inside the portsf.h header ﬁle belonging to the
portsf library), are ﬁlled, one at a time. Then a call to the psf_init() function initializes
some of the hidden stuff in the portsf library. Finally, a call to the psf_sndCreate() function ﬁlls the ofd ﬁle descriptor.
4. In the default case, nothing has to be done in this pass.
Finally, we have the deﬁnition of the cleanup(). In an appropriate way, it serves to close
the output device and terminate all pending actions. In this case, the conditional compilation statements are the following.
1. REALTIME: Calls the tinyExit() function of Tiny Audio Library, that closes opened devices (Note: not really necessary because the Tiny Audio Library automatically calls this function at exit if it is not called explicitly).
2. BINARY_RAW_FILE: Calls the fclose() function of the stdio standard library, which
closes the corresponding ﬁle. It accepts a pointer to a previously opened ﬁle as an argument.
3. WAVE_FILE: Calls two functions: the psf_sndClose() that takes the osf ﬁle descriptor
as an argument and the psf_finish() function. Return values are provided that express
some information that indicates the presence or absence of errors. Such return values, used
to show speciﬁc warnings, are stored in the err1 and err2 variables.
4. Default (standard output): No operation is needed to clean up.
3.3

Playing an Audio File
In this section we will write a set of waveplayer programs using the Tiny Audio Library and the
portsf library, for playing .wav and .aif ﬁles. This application will perform two basic actions
with a streaming read and play operation: read a block of samples from an audio ﬁle stored
in the hard disk, and send samples to the DAC. This means that it is not necessary to load
the entire ﬁle in memory to play it. Rather, we read a small amount of it while playing a previously read chunk. This kind of operation involves the concept of buffering. However, in
these programs, most of buffering mechanism is hidden from the programmer by library
functions, so that user need not worry about them. In more complex applications, the programmer will have to deal with the buffering mechanism directly.

349

Working with Audio Streams

3.3.1

A Simple Command-Line Audio File Player

The ﬁrst example, player.c, is a program that can play a mono or stereo audio ﬁle from the
command line. The command-line syntax is
$ player

filename

where player is the executable name and filename is the name of a .wav or .aif ﬁle.
Here is a verbal description of the steps that the program will cover to accomplish its task:
Include the needed libraries.8
Make declarations: Declare and deﬁne an array of ﬂoats that will act as the sample streaming buffer (see later); declare the ﬁle handle (actually a descriptor in portsf library) and a
structure containing some information about the opened audio ﬁle; declare a long variable
that will contain the number of read sample frames.
n
Check the command-line syntax.
n
Initialize the libraries and open the audio ﬁle; check if it has been opened correctly; exit
with an error if the number of channels of the audio ﬁle is greater than 2 (only mono and
stereo ﬁles are allowed).
n
Perform the loop in which a block of samples is read into a buffer from the ﬁle, then such
block is played by sending the buffer to the real-time output.
n
Repeat the loop body until all samples of the ﬁle are played.
n
Close the ﬁle, ﬁnish library operations, and exit the program.
n
n

And here is the source code of player.c:
#include <stdio.h>
#include "tinyAudioLib.h"
#include "portsf.h"
#define FRAME_BLOCK_LEN 512
void main(int argc, char **argv)
{
float buf[FRAME_BLOCK_LEN * 2]; /* buffer space for stereo (and
mono) */
int sfd; /* audio file descriptor */
PSF_PROPS props; /* struct filled by psf_sndOpen(), containing
audio file info */
long nread; /* number of frames actually read */
if ( argc != 2 ) { /* needs a command line argument */
printf("Error: Bad command line. Syntax is:\n\n");
printf(" player filename\n");
return;
}

350

Chapter 3

psf_init(); /* initialize portsf library*/
sfd = psf_sndOpen(argv[1], &props, 0); /* open an audio file
using portsf lib */
if (sfd < 0) { /* error condition */
printf("An error occurred opening audio file\n");
goto end;
}
if (props.chans > 2) {
printf("Invalid number of channels in audio file\n");
goto end;
}
/*========= ENGINE =========*/
do {
nread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(sfd, buf, FRAME_BLOCK_LEN);
if (props.chans == 2) /* stereo */
outBlockInterleaved(buf, FRAME_BLOCK_LEN);
else /* mono */
outBlockMono(buf, FRAME_BLOCK_LEN);
} while (nread == FRAME_BLOCK_LEN);
/*======== ENGINE END ======*/
end:
printf("finished!\n");
psf_sndClose(sfd);
psf_finish();
}
We start the program by including the necessary header ﬁles9 for the libraries used in this
code. The macro FRAME_BLOCK_LEN deﬁnes the length of the buffer block, used for the temporary storage of samples, expressed in frames. A frame is similar in concept to the sample,
and is actually the same thing in the case of mono audio ﬁles. For multi-channel ﬁles, a frame
is the set of samples for all channels, belonging to a determinate sample period. For example,
in the case of a stereo ﬁle, each frame contains two samples, the ﬁrst sample representing the
left channel, the second one representing the right channel. In the case of a quad ﬁle a frame
will contain four samples, and so on.
Next, we have the main() function head. This time the main() function takes two
arguments:
void main(int argc, char **argv)
These two arguments serve the main() function to handle the command-line arguments
typed by the user at the operating system shell in order to run the program. The argv argument is a pointer to char (an 8-bit integer, often used to express a character) that points to
an array of strings (remember that a string in the C language is nothing more than an

351

Working with Audio Streams

array of char). So, the argv pointer is used to handle the command-line arguments provided by the user when starting a program from the text-based console shell. Commandline argument access can be accomplished in the following way:
n
n
n
n

argv[0] returns the address of a string containing the name of program executable
argv[1] returns the address of a string containing the ﬁrst command-line argument
argv[2] returns the address of a string containing the eventual second argument
and so on

The argc argument is an int (integer) containing the number of arguments that the user
typed at the console to run the program (this number must also include the program executable name which is also considered to be an argument). From the console, each argument
must be separated from others by means of blank spaces or tabs. In our case, the user has to
type two arguments (the program name and the name of the audio ﬁle to be played), so
argc has to contain 2. If it doesn’t, an error message will be displayed and the program will
stop.
Next, an array of 1,024 float elements (FRAME_BLOCK_LEN * 2) is declared and deﬁned:
float buf[FRAME_BLOCK_LEN * 2];
This array is the buffer that will contain the block of 512 frames read from the audio ﬁle.
It is dimensioned to 1,024, in order to ﬁt 512 stereo frames. In the case of mono frames
the exceeding space will not be used, but this will not affect the correct functioning of the
program.
Following this section of code we declare the ﬁle identiﬁer sfd and the props variable,
which is a structure PSF_PROPS, deﬁned in portsf.h. This structure contains information
about an audio ﬁle opened with portsf lib, and has the following ﬁelds:
typedef struct psf_props {
long
srate;
long
chans;
psf_stype samptype;
psf_format format;
psf_channelformat chformat;
} PSF_PROPS;
where the srate member variable contains the sample rate of the audio ﬁle, the chans variable contains the number of channels, the samptype variable (an enum type declared in
portsf.h) contains the format of samples (16-bit integers, 8-bit integers, 24-bit integers, 32-bit
ﬂoating-point values, and so on), the format variable contains the format of the audio ﬁle
(for example .wav or .aiff), and the chformat variable contains information about channel
displacement (not particularly useful in our current case). The last variable to be declared is
nread, a long that will contain the number of frames read from the ﬁle by the loop engine.

352

Chapter 3

The program goes on to initialize portsf lib and open an audio ﬁle:
psf_init();
sfd = psf_sndOpen(argv[1], &props, 0);
This function attempts to open the audio ﬁle whose name is contained in the string pointed
to by argv[1], and returns a ﬁle descriptor in the sfd variable, if that ﬁle has been correctly
opened. In the case of the psf_sndOpen() function, a valid ﬁle descriptor is a positive integer value. It will be used by further functions that access the corresponding ﬁle as a unique
identiﬁer. If the ﬁle doesn’t exist, or any other error occurs, the sfd variable will be ﬁlled
with a negative value.
Normally, C language functions are able to return only a single argument, but there is
a trick to make it possible to return any number of arguments. We use this trick with the
second input argument of the psf_sndOpen() function. It behaves as an output argument,
or better, as eight output arguments, given that eight is the actual number of member variables belonging to the props structure. Having an input argument behave as an output
argument is done by passing the address of the corresponding variable (that will be ﬁlled
with the return value), instead of passing the variable itself to the called function. To enable
this, the address of the props is passed as an input argument (even if it will contain a return
value), and this structure is ﬁlled by the psf_sndOpen() function internally (with the
return value itself, i.e. the ﬁlled props structure). The third argument is a rescaling ﬂag that
is not set in our case (because we don’t want to rescale the samples), so it is set to zero.
We then test if the audio ﬁle has been correctly opened, by evaluating the sign of the sfd
variable. If it is negative, an error message is printed to the console; and in this case, the program is ended by the goto statement, which forces program ﬂow to the end: label at the
bottom of the main() function. We will also test the member chans of props. If the
opened ﬁle has more than two channels, the program prints an error message and exits , because such types of ﬁles are not supported by the program.
The next section is the synthesis engine loop. Because the conditional has to be placed
after at least one iteration has been done, a do. . .while() statement block is used. Look
at line 32:
nread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(sfd, buf, FRAME_BLOCK_LEN);
This function reads a block of frames and places them in the buf array. The input arguments
are, in order, the ﬁle descriptor (sfd), the buffer address (buf), and the number of frames to
be read into the buffer itself (FRAME_BLOCK_LEN). It returns the number of samples actually
read, equal to FRAME_BLOCK_LEN, unless the end of the audio ﬁle has been reached.
Inside the loop, there is a conditional that switches two different lines, depending on
whether the audio ﬁle is stereo or mono. Actually, the Tiny Audio Lib offers support to various buffer formats, i.e. mono or stereo, separate channels or interleaved frames, and so on.

353

Working with Audio Streams

The outBlockInterleaved() function accepts a buffer made up of multi-channel interleaved frames, whereas outBlockMono() accepts only mono buffers.
Finally, we have the loop conditional. When nread contains a value different from
FRAME_BLOCK_LEN, it means that the end of ﬁle has been reached, and so the loop stops.
The program then closes the audio ﬁle and terminates the portsf library operations.
3.3.2

A Command-Line Player with Some Options

A new, slightly different player is presented in this subsection. This player will allow us to
specify both the starting point and the duration of the ﬁle to play. It also provides an opportunity to see how to handle the positions of a block of audio data. The command-line shell
syntax of this player will be
$ player2 [-tTIME] [-dDUR] filename
where player2 is the name of the executable; -t is an optional ﬂag that must be followed
by an integer or fractional number (without inserting blank spaces) denoting the starting
TIME point expressed in seconds (note: brackets indicate that the corresponding item is
optional and does not have to be typed in command line), -d is another optional ﬂag followed by a number denoting the DURation in seconds of the chunk of sound actually played,
and filename is the name of the .wav or .aiff audio ﬁle to play.
Here is our usual verbal description of the steps the program has to do to accomplish its
task:
1. Include the necessary library headers.
2. Deﬁne a tiny function that displays the command-line syntax of the program in several
error-condition points
3. Deﬁne the length of the array containing the streaming buffer.
4. In the main() function, declare (and eventually deﬁne) most local variables used in the
program.
5. Check if the optional command-line ﬂags are present, and evaluate corresponding arguments.
6. Check if the syntax is correct, otherwise display an error message and exit the program.
7. Initialize everything and open the audio ﬁle.
8. Display some audio ﬁle information.
9. Calculate play-start and play-stop points in frames.
10. Seek the calculated play-start point in the opened ﬁle.
11. Start the playing engine loop.
12. Read a block of frames and output it to the DAC.
13. Repeat step 12 until the play-stop point is reached.
14. Close the audio ﬁle, clean up the library, and end the program.

354

Chapter 3

Here is the listing of the player2.c ﬁle:
#include
#include
#include
#include

<stdio.h>
<math.h>
"tinyAudioLib.h"
"portsf.h"

void SYNTAX(){
printf ("Syntax is:\n player2 [-tTIME] [-dDUR] filename\n");
}
#define FRAME_BLOCK_LEN 512
void main(int argc, char **argv)
{
float buf[FRAME_BLOCK_LEN * 2]; /* buffer space for stereo (and
mono) */
int sfd; /* audio file descriptor */
int opened = 0; /* flag telling if audio file has been opened */
PSF_PROPS props; /* struct filled by psf_sndOpen(),
containing audio file info */
long counter; /* counter of frames read */
long length; /* length of file in frames */
long endpoint; /* end point of playing */
extern int arg_index; /* from crack.c */
extern char *arg_option; /* from crack.c */
extern int crack(int argc, char **argv, char *flags, int ign);
int flag, timflag=0, durflag=0; /* flags */
long nread; /* number of frames actually read */
double startime, dur;
while (flag = crack(argc, argv, "t|d|T|D|", 0)) {
switch (flag) {
case 't':
case 'T':
if (*arg_option) {
timflag=1;
startime = atof(arg_option);
}
else {
printf ("Error: -t flag set without
specifying a start time in seconds.\n");
SYNTAX();
return;
}
break;

355

Working with Audio Streams

case 'd':
case 'D':
if (*arg_option) {
durflag=1;
dur = atof(arg_option);
}
else {
printf ("Error: -d flag set without"
"specifying a duration in seconds\n");
SYNTAX();
return;
}
break;
case EOF:
return;
}
}
if ( argc < 2 ) { /* needs a command line argument */
printf("Error: Bad command line arguments\n");
SYNTAX();
return ;
}
psf_init(); /* initialize portsf library */
sfd = psf_sndOpen(argv[arg_index], &props, 0); /* open an audio
file using portsf lib */
if (sfd < 0) { /* error condition */
printf("An error occurred opening audio file\n");
goto end;
}
printf("file \'%s\' opened. . .\n", argv[arg_index]);
printf("sampling rate: %d\n", props.srate);
printf("number of chans: %d\n", props.chans);
length = psf_sndSize(sfd);
printf("duration: %f\n", (float) length / (float) props.srate);
if (timflag)
counter = (long) (startime * props.srate); /* length in frames */
else
counter = 0; /* beginning of file */
if (durflag) {
endpoint = (long) (dur * props.srate + counter);
endpoint = (endpoint < length) ? endpoint : length;

356

Chapter 3

}
else {
endpoint = length;
dur = (double) (endpoint-counter) / (double) props.srate;
}
if (props.chans > 2) {
printf("Invalid number of channels in audio file, "
"max 2chans allowed\n");
goto end;
}
psf_sndSeek(sfd, counter, PSF_SEEK_SET); /* begin position at the
appropriate point */
printf("Playing the file from time position %0.3lf for %0.3lf
seconds. . .\n", startime, dur);
/*========= ENGINE =========*/
do {
nread = psf_sndReadFloatFrames(sfd, buf, FRAME_BLOCK_LEN);
if (props.chans == 2) /* stereo */
outBlockInterleaved(buf, FRAME_BLOCK_LEN);
else /* mono */
outBlockMono(buf, FRAME_BLOCK_LEN);
counter+=FRAME_BLOCK_LEN;
} while (counter < endpoint);
/*======== ENGINE END ======*/
end:
printf("finished!\n");
psf_sndClose(sfd);
psf_finish();
}
Since most of the code of this new ﬁle has been taken from previous examples, all lines
will not be explained; only new concepts will be clariﬁed. In the main() function, a ﬂag
opened is declared. In a program source, a ﬂag is a variable (normally an int variable) that
can contain a limited number of states that affect the program’s behavior during execution. (Don’t confuse ﬂag variables, in the source code, with the option ﬂags, provided at
the command line. Even if they could sometimes be related, they are two very different
concepts.) The states of a ﬂag are expressed by means of the value of the variable itself.
Each possible state is determined by a unique integer number which is assigned to the ﬂag
variable. And these numbers are actually symbols of some strictly non-numeric concept,
and so, they will not be used as true numbers (for example, arithmetic operations on ﬂags
are senseless).

357

Working with Audio Streams

Often, as in our case here, a ﬂag is boolean. This means that its possible states are either true
or false. Boolean ﬂag values are non-zero to indicate the true state and zero to indicate the false
state. The ﬂag is initially set to zero (false) to indicate that the ﬁle is not opened.
We also declare a long variable named counter, to contain the count of read frames. It is
declared as long, not as int, because in some platforms int might express a 16-bit integer
that would not be sufﬁcient for most ﬁle lengths. The Variable length (a long) will contain
the ﬁle length, and endpoint will hold the end point of playback, both expressed in frames.
There are three extern declarations: the variable arg_index (an index to the commandline arguments), the string pointer arg_option (which will point at the currently parsed
command-line argument), and the function prototype of crack() (a function deﬁned in
another source ﬁle—actually a library function, even if in this case the library contains only
this function—located in the ﬁle crack.c, so is compiled together with player2.c). Being a
library function, crack() will be used as a black box—that is, we have only to know what
it does, not how it functions internally.
Finally, we have the declarations of three ﬂags: the flag variable (used as temporary storage of starting option ﬂags provided by the user when starting the program at the commandline shell), the timflag variable (which signals if the -t option has been provided), and the
durflag variable (which signals if the -d option has been provided). These two variables are
linked to startime and dur, respectively, which will contain the start time and the duration optionally provided by the user from the command line.
The program execution contains a loop that checks the command-line options by evaluating the crack() function. This function (authored by Piet van Oostrum and provided with
his mf2t open-source program), receives the command line by means of its arguments:
flag = crack(argc, argv, "t|d|T|D|", 0)
We can see that this function has one output argument and four input arguments. The ﬁrst
two input arguments, argc and argv (coming from the main() function), pass the command line to the crack() function, in order to evaluate the command line itself and see if
some option ﬂags are present. According to a UNIX-style convention, every option ﬂag must
be preceded by a hyphen. In player2.c, valid ﬂags are -t and -d; in fact, the third input argument of crack() is a string containing the letters allowed for option ﬂags, which in this
case must be followed by a numeric datum indicating the starting point (for -t ﬂag) and the
duration (for -d ﬂag) in seconds. In the string provided in the third argument of crack(),
the ﬂags we deﬁne are -t, -d, -T, and -D (upper-case letters meaning the same thing as lower-case letters). The | character indicates that other data must follow the corresponding ﬂag
letter, without spaces between the ﬂag letter and the datum in the command line.
The last input argument of crack() is a boolean ﬂag indicating whether crack() should
raise an error message in case of unknown ﬂags (when set to 0) or simply ignore them (when
set to 1). In this case, the action of raising the error message when an unknown ﬂag is found
is enabled.

358

Chapter 3

Each time crack() is called, it puts a found ﬂag character in the flag return variable. It
also ﬁlls the global variables arg_index and arg_option. The arg_index variable is incremented each time a new ﬂag is found, in subsequent calls to the crack() function. If some
data follows a found ﬂag, such data is contained in a string pointed to by the arg_option
pointer. The arg_option pointer is updated with corresponding string at each subsequent
call. More information about using crack() is available in the ﬁle crack.c.10
The crack() function is called repeatedly until the last command-line ﬂag has been read.
The switch() block at line 28 offers two choices: if the return value of crack() contains
the ﬂag -t (or -T), then timflag is set to 1 (i.e. true, meaning that user has provided a
custom play-start time) and the startime variable is ﬁlled with the corresponding value
in seconds (line 33). Notice that the standard library function atof() has been used to
convert the play-start datum from the original representation (i.e. a character string set by
arg_option variable) into a double ﬂoating-point value. If the -t ﬂag was speciﬁed without
providing a corresponding datum, an error message will arise. In this case, the command-line
syntax will be displayed by means of a call to the user function SYNTAX()(deﬁned at the
start of the program) and the program will be stopped. If the return value of crack() contains the ﬂag -d (or -D), then the durflag is set to 1 (true) and the dur variable is ﬁlled with
the corresponding playing duration in seconds. Again, if the user forgot to provide the
datum, the corresponding messages will be displayed and the program will end. If the return
value of crack() contains a special value deﬁned by the EOF macro constant, the program
will terminate (after crack() itself displays an error message). This will happen if the user
provides a ﬂag other than -t or -d.
If the user has not provided an audio ﬁle name, an error message is displayed (the command-line syntax) and the program terminates. Otherwise the portsf library is initialized
and we open the ﬁle, as in player.c. Once this is done, the program prints some information
about the opened ﬁle to the console, such as its name and sampling rate. The length
variable is ﬁlled with the length of the ﬁle in frames by the portsf library function
psf_sndSize(), and this is converted to seconds and printed to the console.
Next the program sets the counter to the appropriate initial value. (Notice how the state of
timflag determines the conditional ﬂow.) The endpoint is also assigned the appropriate
value, with the state of durflag determining the conditional ﬂow. The play-stop point (i.e.
the endpoint variable) is calculated by adding starting time (the value of counter variable)
to the duration, whose unit is converted from seconds to frames by multiplying it by sampling rate. We then need to check whether this variable exceeds the length of the ﬁle, using
a conditional assignment:
endpoint = (endpoint < length) ? endpoint : length;
The right member of the assignment is a conditional that evaluates the expression inside the
round braces. If the result is true, we assign the value immediately after the question mark;
otherwise we assign the value after the colon. Such expressions are used quite often in C.

359

Working with Audio Streams

In case the user did not provide the -d option ﬂag, endpoint is assigned the total length
of the ﬁle and dur is set to the corresponding duration in seconds. Notice that the two members of this division are previously converted to double in order to produce a reliable result.
As in the previous example, if the opened ﬁle has a number of channels greater than two,
the program is ended because it only supports mono and stereo ﬁles. The portsf library function call
psf_sndSeek(sfd, counter, PSF_SEEK_SET);
moves the current ﬁle pointer to the location corresponding to the second input argument
(the counter variable). The PSF_SEEK_SET argument is a macro that indicates that the
ﬁle pointer has to be moved by counting from the beginning of the ﬁle. (Other option
macros are PSF_SEEK_CUR, which moves the pointer starting from current position, and
PSF_SEEK_END, which counts backward from the end of ﬁle.) The psf_seek() function is
similar to the fseek() function from the stdio library.
Complementing the program, we have the performance engine loop of player2.c. It is
very similar to that of player.c, but in this case the exit-loop conditional compares the current
counter value with the play-end point of the ﬁle (from the endpoint variable). At each loop
cycle, counter is incremented by the block length.
3.4

Critical Real-Time Issues
In this section a number of special techniques will be explained that are used for streaming
audio or MIDI data in real time either from an input or to an output. So far, our audio data
has been simply output by means of a single C library function (Tiny Audio Lib). We have
treated this library as a black box without being aware of what is really happening inside.
The audio engine of some of the previous applications (player.c, player2.c,
playerGUIsimple.cpp, and playerGUI.cpp) was realized by means of a simple loop, something
like this:
do {
buf = get_new_data();
outBlock(buf, FRAME_BLOCK_LEN);
} while (buf != NULL);
In this hypothetical function,11 which gets sample data from an eventual input and returns
a pointer to each data block, buf is a pointer to a block of samples returned by get_new_
data(). The buf pointer is then used as an argument of the outBlock() function.
The concept of buffering is inherent in this do-while loop. A buffering technique is encapsulated inside the function outBlock(), so the user doesn’t have to worry about it. The user
need only ﬁll the buffer with the proper data items (in musical cases these items are sample
frames, MIDI messages, or control signal frames) and provide the address of the buffer. The
outBlock() function call doesn’t return until the block of sample frames has been sent

360

Chapter 3

to the target device. If this device is an audio interface, the call to outBlock() freezes the
program until the block of samples is actually played by the DAC. Each time a streaming
operation has successfully ﬁnished, outBlock() returns, the program is unfrozen and it
continues to ﬁll another block with the new items. Finally, the stream terminates when a
NULL pointer is returned by get_new_data(). (Obviously the outBlock() function should
be able to interpret a NULL pointer correctly by performing an appropriate action. This can
be as simple as doing nothing or it can involve cleaning up the relevant device.)
3.4.1

FIFO Buffers

If the previous example were used for real-time audio streaming, and if the block of samples
were completely played, there would be a time lag during which the program would calculate the new block of samples. If this time lag were to exceed the duration of a sample period,
the audio interface would remain, for some moments, without samples to send to the output. This situation would cause a drop-out12 in the sound, which would be perceived by the
listener as an annoying click. To avoid drop-outs such as this, the solution is to use more
than a single block of samples. In this case, the block passed to the function outBlock() would
be copied to another internal block (often hidden to the user) before the samples were
played by the DAC, and the program would be free to calculate another block while the
audio interface was converting the samples stored in the previously copied block. This technique is often called ‘‘double buffering.’’ If necessary, more than one block can be ﬁlled
before the audio converter stage. Thus, we can have ‘‘triple buffering,’’ ‘‘quadruple buffering,’’ and so on. In these cases, the items of such buffering techniques would be the block
of samples.13
Buffering is an important technique for real-time streaming, and the buffering scheme
used for streaming is referred to as a FIFO (ﬁrst-in ﬁrst-out) queue or a circular buffer.14 Realtime streaming buffers can be synchronous or asynchronous. When the rate of the items is
constant (for example, in the case of audio or video streams), we deal with a synchronous
stream; if the rate is not constant (for example, in MIDI), we deal with an asynchronous
stream. There are two types of FIFO buffers: input buffers and output buffers. Input buffers
receive data from an input device and feed the program such data. The data is then processed
by the program, and eventually send to an output FIFO buffer, which sends such data to an
output device. An input FIFO buffer is made up of a memory block and a routine that inserts
the items coming from the input source into the head of the buffer (this action is normally
called ‘‘push’’), continuing to do such operation until there is no more buffer space available.
An input-buffer-full situation can happen if the average processing speed of the program is
not fast enough15 to extract and process the incoming data. In fact, each item should remain
in the buffer only for a limited amount of time, then it must be extracted and removed from
the tail of the buffer by the program itself, in order to process it (this action is normally
called ‘‘pop’’). If the input buffer is empty, the program temporarily stops processing and
waits for more data to be available.

361

Working with Audio Streams

In the case of output buffers, the data items are generated by the program and pushed to
the head of the buffer. The output device receives the data items from the tail of this buffer
and sends them to the output when they are needed. The processed data is popped from the
buffer by the output device. In case the buffer is completely full (this is a normal case),
the program waits until the buffer is able to receive more data. Be aware that, in the case of
output buffers, if the program provides the processed data items more slowly than they are
sent to the output the buffer can become empty. And in the case of synchronous real-time
processes, a situation of an empty output buffer is an abnormal, pathologic situation in
which the items (for example, samples in the case of an audio DAC, or in the case of recording, a CD in your CD burner) must maintain a strictly regular period when transferred. This
situation is also called ‘‘buffer underrun.’’
In short, there are two kinds of FIFO buffers: input and output buffers. With an input
buffer, data items are received from the outside, and pushed into the buffer by the input
device. The program has the task to pop such data items from the buffer in order to process
them. In real-time processes, the program has to maintain this buffer empty, or, at least, not
full. If the program is not fast enough at popping data, the buffer could became full and
some incoming data items could be lost. With an output buffer, data items are generated by
the program, and pushed into the output buffer. In real-time synchronous streaming, the
output device pops such data items from the buffer at a strictly constant rate. It is a duty of
the program to maintain a full buffer, or, at least, not empty. If the program is not fast
enough in pushing data, the buffer could became empty and drop-outs could occur, breaking
the regularity of the streaming operation.
The larger that the buffer is,16 the greater the security that ‘‘buffer underruns’’ can be
avoided. Although there can never be absolute certainty that such a pathological situation
will not occur, you can trust that, at a reasonable buffer size, buffer underruns cannot occur
in normal situations.
Why don’t we just use a huge buffer for streaming audio in real time for total security?
There is a drawback in using large buffers for real-time processing, and such drawback is
directly proportional to the buffer size: it is the so-called latency. The theoretical latency17 is
the average time lag that passes between a push action of a data item in the FIFO buffer and
the subsequent pop action of that particular data item. Such latency is directly proportional
to the buffer size and inversely proportional to the sampling rate, in the case of audio
streams. Normally the latency is calculated in milliseconds, so the maximum latency can be
calculated by the formula
maxlatency ¼ 1,000  bufferSize 

blockSize
,
sampleRate

(3)

where bufferSize is the size of the FIFO buffer (for example, in the case of triple buffering it is
equal to 3), blockSize is the number of sample frames of each block (for example, 512 stereo
frames), and sampleRate is the sampling rate (for example, 44,100 Hz). In this case the maximum latency is

362

Chapter 3

maxlatency ¼ 1,000  3 

512
Q 34.83 ms
44,100

(4)

—that is, 34.83 ms (maximum latency delay). Now we have to calculate the minimum
latency with the following formula:
minlatency ¼ 1,000  (bufferSize  1) 

blockSize
sampleRate

(5)

—that is,
minlatency ¼ 1,000  2 

512
Q 23.22 ms.
44,100

(6)

The theoretical average latency is obtained by the mean value between maximum and minimum latency:
averageLatency ¼

minlatency þ maxlatency
2

(7)

34.83 þ 23.22
¼ 29.02 ms.
2

(8)

—that is,
averageLatency ¼

Remember that this is a theoretical value, and that the real latency delay is always bigger
than the theoretical one. Furthermore, in the case of simultaneous input and output data
transfer (full-duplex, sometimes required for digital effects such as guitar fuzz boxes) the
theoretical latency is the sum of the latencies obtained by the input and output buffers and
block sizes.
The choice of the appropriate buffer size and block size is a compromise between latency
and security from buffer underruns. So, most commercial audio programs, leave it up to the
user to customize the optimal buffer size, and this can only be achieved by means of trail and
error tests.
To sum up: Instead of sending data items directly to the output, there are at least three reasons for using FIFO buffers:
In synchronous streaming operations, the physical output (or input) device has to guarantee a perfectly constant rate and precise timing, but a computer tends to process data at irregular speeds, so by ﬁlling the buffer with a certain number of data items, there will always be
at least an item ready to be sent out.
n
In both synchronous and asynchronous streaming operations, the data items could be fed
faster than the output device is able to handle them, so some items could be lost. By storing
the ‘‘overfed’’ items in the buffer, we guarantee that all items will be recognized, in turn by
the output device.
n
Processing and transferring blocks of data is often faster than processing single data elements one a time.
n

363

Working with Audio Streams

By accumulating data into the buffer, the processing engine is able to process blocks of data
at the maximum speed, without the necessity of waiting for the output port to be ready to
receive the datum.
3.4.2

Host-Driven and Callback Mechanisms

Since a device driver most often hides the buffering mechanism from the user, the implementation is rarely an issue. Still, a basic knowledge of these techniques is necessary in order
to use the device driver’s audio or MIDI API. For example, when we used the functions
outBlockInterleaved() and outBlockMono() in the programs player.c, player2.c,
playerGUIsimple.cpp, and playerGUI.cpp, there was actually a buffering mechanism hidden
in these functions (belonging to the Tiny Audio Library), that was invisible to the ﬁnal application programmer. However, the programmer had to provide a routine that generated each
block of samples and allocated the array that would host such block.
The kind of mechanism provided by the Tiny Audio Library is a blocking mechanism18 —
it blocks the program processing each time the output buffer is full (or the input buffer is
empty), waiting until new data items are ready to be processed. An API for data in/out with
a blocking mechanism is easy to use, because the program is automatically blocked when
there is not enough room in the audio buffer for more data items. In this case the write function will just block the program until more room is available, in a transparent way for the
user. But this mechanism, even if it is simple to use, is not the most efﬁcient, since its waiting can waste many CPU cycles that could be applied to other jobs in the meanwhile.
There are much more efﬁcient mechanisms than blocking. Among them are multithreading, host-driven, and callback mechanisms. Often these methods are combined
in the same application. We have seen a simple way of using multi-threading in the
playerGUIsimple.cpp and PlayerGUI.cpp programs. In these cases, the creation of a new execution thread has been done to separate the GUI part of the application from the audio engine.
A new engine thread was created each time the ‘‘play’’ button was clicked, and such thread
was terminated (or destroyed) each time the ‘‘stop’’ button was pushed. Actually the engine
itself was made up of a single thread, so it was not really an example of a multi-threading
engine in these cases. In fact, a multi-threading engine would take advantage of buffer-full
streaming stops for calculating new samples. Such an engine is quite complicated to develop,
because any non-trivial multi-threading technique is quite tricky and advanced to develop
A callback mechanism is based on the concept of callback function. A callback function is a
function automatically called by the operating system (not by the main ﬂow of the program)
at a moment that is appropriate for its own purpose. There are several way to make the operating system calls a callback function, for example, in the Win32 operating system API there
are timer objects that, when activated, are able to call a function written by the user at regular intervals of time. The user can set the duration of such time intervals. Other kinds of callback functions can be associated with computer hardware interrupts, or simply called in

364

Chapter 3

response to messages generated by a GUI event. We have already seen this sort of callback
functions in the playerGUIsimple.cpp and playerGUI.cpp programs. Often, the best way to learn
a new concept is to see it applied to a practical example. This is what we will do now, in
order to learn to use the callback mechanism provided by the Portaudio library. In the next
section we will deal with an example of callback mechanism applied to full-duplex audio
streaming, based on Portaudio.
3.4.3

Using the Portaudio Library

The Portaudio library19 is a standard, open-source, multi-platform library that is able to support real-time audio streaming very efﬁciently, thanks to its integrated callback mechanism.
Portaudio wraps most hardware-dependent implementation code into a common API available for several operating systems, such as Windows, Linux, Solaris, FreeBSD, Mac OS, and
Mac OS-X. Since version v.19, Portaudio provides multiple host-API support in the same
binary. This means that, for example, under Windows it can provide MME, DirectX, and
ASIO support in a single binary build of an application. The ﬁnal application user can
choose, at run time, between the different host-APIs. Portaudio provides both a blocking
API20 and a callback-mechanism API. The programmer is free to choose whichever of these is
more appropriate to the speciﬁc application, but the callback mechanism is by far the most
efﬁcient (although also a bit more difﬁcult to program than the blocking mechanism).
Up until this point, we have used the blocking mechanism in our programs; but there are
two main advantages in using a callback mechanism instead of a blocking mechanism:
It frees the CPU from dead-cycles, when the output buffer is full or the input buffer is
empty, thereby optimizing the overall machine performance and allowing the main thread
of execution to continue processing while the i/o buffers are ﬂushing (i.e. the main thread is
not blocked by the buffer status).
n
It helps to reduce latency to a minimum, especially when using low-latency-oriented host
APIs such as ASIO or ALSA.
n

3.4.4

The Callback Mechanism in Practice: HelloRing

The application shown in this section is a console program that implements a real-time ring
modulator21 in which the user sets the modulation frequency. Since ring modulation is such
an extremely simple synthesis technique, it frees us to concentrate on the callback mechanism provided by Portaudio.
In this subsection we will focus will on the following:
how to write a full-duplex audio callback function (containing the audio engine) specially
suited for Portaudio
n
how to get and display all the available audio devices of the Portaudio-supported host-APIs
n

365

Working with Audio Streams

how to choose a speciﬁc device for input and output
how to set the parameters of an audio stream (for example, number of channels, sampling
rate, block size, and so on)
n
how to initialize Portaudio and start the audio callback mechanism
n
how to stop the callback mechanism and cleanup Portaudio.
n
n

The user selects the audio input and audio output ports when the program starts, by
choosing them from a list of available ports. Since the v19 version of Portaudio, the program
user can choose from all the host APIs available on the target machine. This allows the user
to chose MME, DirectX or ASIO under Windows, OSS or ALSA under Linux, and so on.
The program HelloRing will accept a stereo input: both channels will be modulated by a
sinusoidal signal (whose frequency is chosen by the user), and the two modulated channels
will be sent to a stereo output.
Here is a descriptive summary of the requirements of the program helloRing.c:
Write a console program where
A stereo audio signal is accepted as input, and the processed signal is streamed to a stereo
output in real time, using the callback mechanism provided by the Portaudio v19 library.
n
The input signal is processed in real time by means of the ring-modulation technique, i.e.
each channel of the input signal is multiplied by a sinusoidal signal that acts as a modulator.
This signal is calculated by means of the sine function provided by the standard C library
math.h.
n
The user is allowed to choose (1) the frequency of the modulating sinusoid, in hertz, and
(2) the input and output audio device among the several host-APIs present in the target
machine.
n

And here is a description outline of the steps that we will cover to accomplish the task:
1. Include the needed library headers.
2. Make the external declarations:
a. Deﬁne the macro constants of the frame block length, the sampling rate, and the 2p value
(needed for the modulator frequency calculation).
b. Declare the portaudio stream pointer as global.
c. Declare the sampling increment as global.
3. Deﬁne the callback function that contains the ring modulation engine (that is, a loop that
multiplies each channel by a sinusoid and outputs the result).
4. Deﬁne all the initialization stuff inside a function. The initialization function has to
a. ask the user the modulator frequency and get it
b. calculate the sampling increment and store it in the corresponding global variable
c. initialize Portaudio for operation
d. show all the available audio output devices for each host-API, and ask the user to choose
one of them

366

Chapter 3

e. ﬁll the corresponding parameter structure. Such structure will contain information about
the output stream, such as the chosen port, number of channels, sample format, etc. that
will be used for opening the audio stream
f. show all the available audio input devices for each host-API, and ask the user to choose
one of them
g. ﬁll corresponding parameter structure
h. open the Portaudio stream
i. start the stream.
5. Deﬁne all the terminate stuff inside a function. The termination function has to
a. stop the stream
b. close the stream
c. terminate Portaudio (this cleans up all internal stuff initiated by Portaudio).
6. Deﬁne the main() function. The main function has to
a. call the init function at start
b. begin a dummy loop that stops only when a key is pressed by the user
c. call the termination function.
Here are the contents of helloRing.c:
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
#include "portaudio.h"
#define FRAME_BLOCK_LEN 256
#define SAMPLING_RATE 44100
#define TWO_PI (3.14159265f * 2.0f)
PaStream *audioStream;
double si = 0;
int audio_callback( const void *inputBuffer, void *outputBuffer,
unsigned long framesPerBuffer,
const PaStreamCallbackTimeInfo* timeInfo,
PaStreamCallbackFlags statusFlags,
void *userData
)
{
float *in = (float*) inputBuffer, *out = (float*)outputBuffer;
static double phase = 0;
unsigned long i;
for( i=0; i < framesPerBuffer; i++ ) {
float sine = sin(phase);
*out++ = *in++ * sine; /* left channel */
*out++ = *in++ * sine; /* right channel */

367

Working with Audio Streams

phase += si;
}
return paContinue;
}
void init_stuff()
{
float frequency;
int i,id;
const PaDeviceInfo *info;
const PaHostApiInfo *hostapi;
PaStreamParameters outputParameters, inputParameters;
printf("Type the modulator frequency in Hertz: ");
scanf("%f", &frequency); /* get the modulator frequency */
si = TWO_PI * frequency / SAMPLING_RATE; /* calculate sampling
increment */
printf("Initializing Portaudio. Please wait. . .\n");
Pa_Initialize(); /* initialize portaudio */
for (i=0;i < Pa_GetDeviceCount(); i++) {
info = Pa_GetDeviceInfo(i); /* get information from
current device */
hostapi = Pa_GetHostApiInfo(info->hostApi); /*get info from
curr. host API */
if (info->maxOutputChannels > 0)/* if curr device supports
output */
printf("%d: [%s] %s (output)\n",i, hostapi->name, info->name );
}
printf("\nType AUDIO output device number: ");
scanf("%d", &id); /* get the output device id from the user */
info = Pa_GetDeviceInfo(id); /* get chosen device
informationstructure */
hostapi = Pa_GetHostApiInfo(info->hostApi);/*get host API struct */
printf("Opening AUDIO output device [%s] %s\n",
hostapi->name, info->name);
outputParameters.device = id; /* chosen device id */
outputParameters.channelCount = 2; /* stereo output */
outputParameters.sampleFormat = paFloat32; /* 32 bit float
output */
outputParameters.suggestedLatency =
info->defaultLowOutputLatency; /*set default*/
outputParameters.hostApiSpecificStreamInfo = NULL; /*no
specific info*/

368

Chapter 3

for (i=0;i < Pa_GetDeviceCount(); i++) {
info = Pa_GetDeviceInfo(i); /* get information from
current device */
hostapi = Pa_GetHostApiInfo(info->hostApi); /*info from
host API */
if (info->maxInputChannels > 0) /* if curr device supports input */
printf("%d: [%s] %s (input)\n",i, hostapi->name, info->name );
}
printf("\nType AUDIO input device number: ");
scanf("%d", &id); /* get the input device id from the user */
info = Pa_GetDeviceInfo(id); /* get chosen device information
struct */
hostapi = Pa_GetHostApiInfo(info->hostApi); /* get host API
struct */
printf("Opening AUDIO input device [%s] %s\n",
hostapi->name, info->name);
inputParameters.device = id; /* chosen device id */
inputParameters.channelCount = 2; /* stereo input */
inputParameters.sampleFormat = paFloat32; /* 32 bit float input */
inputParameters.suggestedLatency = info->defaultLowInputLatency;
inputParameters.hostApiSpecificStreamInfo = NULL;
Pa_OpenStream(/* open the PaStream object */
&audioStream,/* portaudio stream object */
&inputParameters, /* provide output parameters */
&outputParameters /* provide input parameters */
SAMPLING_RATE,
/* set sampling rate */
FRAME_BLOCK_LEN, /* set frames per buffer */
paClipOff
/* set no clip */
audio_callback,
/* callback function address */
NULL );
/* provide no data for the callback *
Pa_StartStream(audioStream); /* start the callback mechanism */
printf("running. . . press space bar and enter to exit\n");
}
void terminate_stuff()
{
Pa_StopStream( audioStream );
/* stop the callback mechanism */
Pa_CloseStream( audioStream ); /* destroy the audio stream
object */
Pa_Terminate();
/* terminate portaudio */
}

369

Working with Audio Streams

int main()
{
init_stuff();
while(getchar() != ' ') Pa_Sleep(100);
terminate_stuff();
return 0;
}
At the top, we have the headers and constants used in the code. Particularly important is
FRAME_BLOCK_LEN, the length, in frames, of the frame block22 used by the Portaudio callback function. We need to be aware of the fact that the larger the block size, the higher the
latency.23 The audioStream pointer (to a Portaudio stream object24) is declared global:
PaStream *audioStream;
This is a handle that encapsulates a relevant number of inner gears, most of which are completely transparent to the API user. Also made global is si, which will hold the sampling
increment of the modulator.
Next the audio stream callback25 is deﬁned, which contains the most important code: the
engine of the ring modulator. This user-supplied function can have any name but must
always have the same number, type, and order of arguments as well as the same return type
as expected by Portaudio. The callback is not invoked directly by our code, but automatically
from the Portaudio inner mechanism. This function receives a pointer to the block of incoming samples and a pointer to the block of outgoing samples from the Portaudio mechanism.
It is your task to read and, eventually, process the samples of the input block, as well as to
calculate the samples of the audio output block at each function call. Notice that this function has a long list of arguments, and returns an int. This is the function head:
int audio_callback (void *inputBuffer,void *outputBuffer,
unsigned long framesPerBuffer,
const PaStreamCallbackTimeInfo* timeInfo,
PaStreamCallbackFlags statusFlags,
void *userData)
However, in our case, we only have to care about the ﬁrst three arguments and the return
value (i.e. inputBuffer, outputBuffer, and framesPerBuffer), since the others are not
used in this program. Nevertheless, the Pa_OpenStream() API26 function requires the address of a function having such a prototype as an argument (so we must declare it as above).
That function will register our callback with Portaudio.
Concentrating now on audio_callback(), let us review its code:
int audio_callback( const void *inputBuffer, void *outputBuffer,
unsigned long framesPerBuffer,
const PaStreamCallbackTimeInfo* timeInfo,

370

Chapter 3

PaStreamCallbackFlags statusFlags,
void *userData
)
{
float *in = (float*) inputBuffer, *out = (float*)outputBuffer;
static double phase = 0;
unsigned long i;
for( i=0; i < framesPerBuffer; i++ ) {
float sine = sin(phase);
*out++ = *in++ * sine; /* left channel */
*out++ = *in++ * sine; /* right channel */
phase += si;
}
return paContinue;
}
The arguments inputBuffer and outputBuffer are pointers that contain the addresses
of the input and output blocks27 of sample frames. Such variables are void pointers. In order
to use them, they must be cast to a pointer of a concrete type. Since, in this case, we plan to
deal with samples of 32-bit ﬂoating-point format,28 we have to cast them to float pointers
(in and out). Since the audio stream was opened as a stereo stream, each buffer frame is
made up of two interleaved29 ﬂoat samples. The in and out buffers can be considered as
arrays of stereo frames, each having framesPerBuffer length. The current phase of the
modulator is stored in a static double variable, initialized to zero at the start of the program.30
The for loop is our audio engine, which is iterated framesPerBuffer times. Here, the
modulator is obtained by calculating the sinus of current phase value, and the output is
stored in the temporary sine variable. Then the left input channel is ring-modulated (i.e.
multiplied) by the sine output and the output is stored to current buffer (i.e. frame block)
location. Notice the indirection (asterisk) and post-increment operators of the out and in
pointers:
*out++ = *in++ . . .
These asterisks are indirection operators (a unary preﬁx operator whose purpose is to access,
for writing or reading, the location currently pointed to by the corresponding pointer). Don’t
confuse them with the asterisk of the multiplication operator (a binary inﬁx operator that is
placed in between the in pointer and the sine variable):
*in++ * sine
This operator simply multiplies the two items. In the statement
*out++ = *in++ * sine; /* left channel */
the value of the input buffer location, having the in pointer as an address, is extracted and
multiplied by the current sine value. The result is copied to the output buffer location hav-

371

Working with Audio Streams

ing the out pointer as an address. After this assignment, the in and out pointers are both
incremented (be aware that the increment operation is done on the addresses contained in
the pointers, not on the values of the pointed locations), and consequently point to the next
locations of corresponding buffers. This statement is applied to the left channel. Given that
the buffer is made up of interleaved frames, an identical statement is provided for the right
channel. Because of its perceived efﬁciency, this use of buffer pointer increment is very common in audio applications.31
At the last line of the loop, current phase value is incremented by the sampling increment.
After the loop has processed all the frames of the input and output blocks in this way, the
audio_callback() function returns the paContinue API enumerator constant.32
Our main() function is minimal:
int main()
{
init_stuff();
while(getchar() != ' ') Pa_Sleep(100); /* wait for space-bar
and enter */
terminate_stuff();
return 0;
}
It calls the init_stuff() function, which gets the modulator frequency and the audio
ports from the user, initializes everything, opens the audio stream, and starts the Portaudio
callback process. Then it starts a while loop that calls the Pa_Sleep() API function. This
function blocks the main thread of execution for 100 milliseconds (this value represents its
argument) and yields, for this time interval, all the CPU time to the other threads and processes (among which there is the Portaudio callback mechanism). This loop has, as a testing
condition, getchar() != ' '. This function checks the terminal for keyboard input: if the
user has pressed space bar followed by enter, the condition becomes false (i.e. getchar()
returns the space character) and the loop is exited. In this case, the terminate_stuff()
function is called to stop the callback process and destroy the PaStream object.
Now let’s look into the details of the init_stuff() function. It contains the code to
create the PaStream object and to start the callback process. We get the frequency of the
modulator from the user and calculate the sampling increment (si), used in audio_
callback() to increment the phase of the modulator.
The Portaudio library is initialized by calling the Pa_Initialize() API function, which
must be called before any other API function belonging to Portaudio. The loop
for (i=0;i < Pa_GetDeviceCount(); i++) {
info = Pa_GetDeviceInfo(i); /* get information from current
device */
hostapi = Pa_GetHostApiInfo(info->hostApi); /*get info from current
host API */

372

Chapter 3

if (info->maxOutputChannels > 0)/* if curr device supports
output */
printf("%d: [%s] %s (output)\n",i, hostapi->name, info->name );
}
is used to display all the available audio output devices. These devices include all available
host APIs supported by Portaudio (for example, MME, DirectX, and ASI in Windows, and
OSS and ALSA in Linux). The loop is iterated the number of times equal to the value returned
by the Pa_GetDeviceCount() API function, which provides the number of available devices belonging to all host APIs.
At each loop iteration, the info pointer is ﬁlled with the (read-only, or const) address of
a variable belonging of the type PaDeviceInfo, by calling Pa_GetDeviceInfo(). This
contains details about a corresponding audio device. Here are all the members of a
PaDeviceInfo structure33:
typedef struct PaDeviceInfo {
int structVersion;
const char *name;
PaHostApiIndex hostApi;
int maxInputChannels;
int maxOutputChannels;
PaTime defaultLowInputLatency;
PaTime defaultLowOutputLatency;
PaTime defaultHighInputLatency;
PaTime defaultHighOutputLatency;
double defaultSampleRate;
} PaDeviceInfo;
The relevant members in our case are name, hostApi, and maxOutputChannels. The
name member is a pointer to a string containing the name of current device; the hostApi
member contains an int value that expresses the host API index of the current audio device.
With this, we can get information about a host API by calling Pa_GetHostApiInfo(). This
function returns a (read-only, or const) pointer to PaHostApiInfo, which contains some
host API information. Here are all the members of the PaHostApiInfo structure34 (of which
we need only name):
typedef struct PaHostApiInfo {
int structVersion;
PaHostApiTypeId type;
const char *name;
int deviceCount;
PaDeviceIndex defaultInputDevice;
PaDeviceIndex defaultOutputDevice;
} PaHostApiInfo;

373

Working with Audio Streams

The code inside the loop also tests the maxOutputChannels member of PaDeviceInfo:
if (info->maxOutputChannels > 0)
/* if curr device supports output */
printf("%d: [%s] %s (output)\n",i, hostapi->name, info->name );
This is done to know if the current audio device supports output channels. If this test is true,
i.e. if there is a number of output channels greater than zero, a line of text is printed to the
console displaying the audio device number, its host API, its name, and whether it is an
output device. On my computer, the output of the loop displaying the output devices is as
follows:
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

[MME] Microsoft Sound Mapper - Output (output)
[MME] MOTU Analog 1-2 (output)
[MME] MOTU Analog 3-4 (output)
[MME] MOTU Analog 5-6 (output)
[MME] MOTU Analog 7-8 (output)
[MME] MOTU TOSLink 1-2 (output)
[MME] Avance AC97 Audio (output)
[Windows DirectSound] Driver audio principale (output)
[Windows DirectSound] MOTU Analog 1-2 (output)
[Windows DirectSound] MOTU Analog 3-4 (output)
[Windows DirectSound] MOTU Analog 5-6 (output)
[Windows DirectSound] MOTU Analog 7-8 (output)
[Windows DirectSound] MOTU TOSLink 1-2 (output)
[Windows DirectSound] Avance AC97 Audio (output)
[ASIO] ASIO DirectX Full Duplex Driver (output)
[ASIO] ASIO Multimedia Driver (output)
[ASIO] MOTU FireWire Audio (output)

Notice how the number of the device begins with 7 (not with zero) and skips several numbers: these devices are skipped because they contain zero output channels (i.e. they don’t
support audio output). After the list is shown, the user is asked to type the number of the
output device they intends to choose, and the id variable is ﬁlled with that number. Information on the chosen device is then printed to the terminal.
Once we have an output device, then we can set it up. We do this by ﬁlling the data members of the outputParameter variable, which has the type PaStreamParameters35:
typedef struct PaStreamParameters {
PaDeviceIndex device;
int channelCount;
PaSampleFormat sampleFormat;
PaTime suggestedLatency;
void *hostApiSpecificStreamInfo;
} PaStreamParameters;

374

Chapter 3

This structure contains the following information:
device: an int number (chosen by the program user) that expresses the index of a supported
audio device. Its range is from 0 to (Pa_GetDeviceCount() - 1).
channelCount: the number of audio channels to be delivered to the stream callback. It can
range from 1 to the value of maxInputChannels in the PaDeviceInfo structure for the
device speciﬁed by the device parameter.
sampleFormat: the sample format of the buffer provided to the stream callback. It may be
any of the formats supported by Portaudio.36
suggestedLatency: The desired latency in seconds. Be aware that an audio device could
not support the value of latency set by the user, and so provide a latency quite different
than this setting. The actual latency values for an already-opened stream can be retrieved
using the inputLatency and outputLatency members of the PaStreamInfo structure returned
by the Pa_GetStreamInfo() API function.
hostApiSpecificStreamInfo: This is an optional pointer to a host API speciﬁc data structure containing additional information for device setup and/or stream processing. Often not
used, as in helloRing.c, in which case it must be set to NULL.
The address of outputParameter structure will be provided as an argument of the
Pa_OpenStream() API function, which creates the audio stream object. In addition to
output, we must select and set-up audio input. We will proceed similarly by ﬁlling the
inputParameters variable. We can then pass the addresses of both variables to the
Pa_OpenStream() API function37:
Pa_OpenStream( /* open the PaStream object and get its address */
&audioStream, /* get the address of the portaudio stream object */
&inputParameters, /* provide output parameters */
&outputParameters, /* provide input parameters */
SAMPLING_RATE, /* set sampling rate */
FRAME_BLOCK_LEN, /* set frames per buffer */
paClipOff, /* set no clip */
audio_callback, /* provide the callback function address */
NULL ); /* provide no data for the callback */
Pa_StartStream(audioStream); /* start the callback mechanism */
}
This function has the task of creating (opening) an audio stream object, capable of starting
the callback process. Notice that the address of the audioStream pointer is passed as an
argument. After a call to this function, it will point to the audio stream object, which is
now open.
The paClipOff item is a bitwise ﬂag that can be used together with other ﬂags38 to describe the behavior of the callback process. Normally, Portaudio clips39 out-of-range samples.
Since we are dealing with ﬂoating-point samples, paClipOff disables default clipping of the

375

Working with Audio Streams

samples. To set more than one ﬂag, it is possible to use a bitwise OR operator | between ﬂag
identiﬁers. For example, to set the paClipOff and the paDitherOff ﬂags at the same time,
one would provide the following expression as an argument:
paClipOff | paDitherOff
We will also provide the audio_callback function address40 as an argument so that the
Pa_OpenStream() function can register it with Portaudio. The last argument is a pointer to
an optional user-deﬁned data pointer that is passed at each call to the audio callback function. In helloRing.c we don’t make use of this feature, so the pointer is set to NULL.
At the end of the init_stuff() function, the callback mechanism is started by a call to
the Pa_StartStream() API function. It will automatically call the audio_callback()
function every time the input and output buffers need to be ﬁlled, in a completely transparent way.41 The callback mechanism stops when the terminate_stuff() function is called
(in response to a user keypress, as discussed above):
void terminate_stuff()
{
Pa_StopStream( audioStream );
/* stop the callback mechanism */
Pa_CloseStream( audioStream ); /* destroy the audio stream
object */
Pa_Terminate();
/* terminate portaudio */
}
Both Pa_StopStream() and Pa_CloseStream() get the pointer to the audio stream object as an argument. The ﬁrst stops audio streaming, and the second close the stream object
(invalidating corresponding pointer). The Pa_Terminate() function cleans up Portaudio.
3.5

Conclusion
In this chapter we have explored the concept of audio streams, a concept that is central to
audio processing and programming. We have looked at several examples ﬁrst producing
streams as text, then as binary data, generating output to soundﬁles and ﬁnally real-time
audio. This text should have provided the basis for further exploration of the manipulation
of audio signals, as discussed in other chapters of this book and on the DVD.

3.6

Exercises
Exercise 3.6.1
The waveform-drawing functions fill_square(),fill_saw() and fill_triangle() in
HelloTable.c are quite basic and have a major ﬂaw: they are not band limited. This means that
the sound synthesized with these always contain aliased components, which contribute to
the low quality of the sound. How would you go about generating band-limited versions of

376

Chapter 3

these ﬂawed functions? Please implement these and then substitute them in the example
program, comparing the results.
Exercise 3.6.2
The audio callback used in HelloRing.c includes the line
static double phase = 0;
which declares a static variable. The use of static variables is highly discouraged in modern
programming, as it can cause problems in large systems. In keeping with a better style of programming, do the following:
(a) Remove the static deﬁnition.
(b) Replace the static deﬁnition with some externally provided memory. (Hint: The userData
argument to the callback is never used. Perhaps you could try giving it something to do.)
Rebuild and test your program.
Exercise 3.6.3
Implement a stereo ring modulator with two oscillators, one for each channel, at different
frequencies. Remember that each oscillator will have to keep its phase and its increment separate. In complement to what you have done in exercise 3, remove another simplistic feature
of HelloRing: the use of a global variable to hold the sampling increment. Substitute it for two
local variables (to main), which will keep the separate increments and use some means of
passing their value to the callback. (Hint: You can group the two increments and two phases
in a data structure.)
Notes
1. ‘Signal’ is referred to here with its technical meaning, such as a function describing variations of voltage in an analog device, or the ﬂow of related numbers describing the course of some physical quantity,
such as ﬂuctuating air pressure, plotted and displayed as an exponential curve on a computer screen. (See
chapter 5 for more background.)
2. In my chapters, the term ‘sound’ will not always be used with its appropriate meaning, but rather, it
will often serve as a synonym for ‘‘audio signal.’’
3. The ‘.c’ ﬁle extension of ‘‘helloworld.c’’ and ‘‘hellosine.c’’ indicates that they are C language source ﬁles.
Other extensions we will deal with in this book are ‘.h’ (include ﬁles of both C and Cþþ languages),
‘.cpp’ (Cþþ language source ﬁles), and ‘.hpp’ (Cþþ header ﬁles).
4. The ‘‘Hello world!’’ program is famous because it appeared as the ﬁrst example in The C Programming
Language, a book by B. W. Kernighan and D. M. Ritchie, the creators of the C programming language.
Their book is the ‘‘ofﬁcial’’ C programming tutorial and the most renowned book about the C programming language.

377

Working with Audio Streams

5. A sample is the numerical representation of the instantaneous value of a signal, in this case of the air
pressure, given that our signal is a sound signal. It is a single numeric value, and a sequence of samples
makes up a digital audio signal.
6. We will see what ‘‘standard output’’ is later in this chapter.
7. In the C language, a table is normally implemented as an array. Later in this book you will learn what
arrays are and their purpose in detail; for now, it is sufﬁcient to know that an array is nothing more than
a sequence of computer memory locations containing items of the same kind. In the case of audio tables,
these items are numbers that represent the samples of a sampled sound or of a synthesized wave.
8. Some non-standard libraries are needed: the ﬁrst, the portsf.lib (also known as Dobson Audio Lib)
provides several useful routines that deal with reading/writing audio ﬁles from/to disk; the second, the
Tiny Audio Lib has already been used for hellotable.c, and serves to provide an easy-to-use API for DAC/
soundcard real-time audio in/out.
9. stdio.h for the printf() function, portsf.h for special audio ﬁle functions such as psf_init(), psf_
sndOpen(), psf_sndReadFloatFrames(), psf_sndClose(), psf_ﬁnish(),and tinyAudioLib.h for outBlockInterleaved()
and outBlockMono().
10. You can ﬁnd the sources of crack.c on the DVD.
11. -, In the previous programs player.c, player2.c, playerGUIsimple.cpp, and playerGUI.cpp, used the
function
long psf_sndReadFloatFrames(int sfd, float *buf, DWORD nFrames);
from the portsf library, instead of our hypothetical get_new_data() function. The function
psf_sndReadFloatFrames( ) reads a block of samples from a wave ﬁle and copies them into a previously allocated memory block. In this case, the user must provide the address of the block in the buf
pointer before the function call.
12. This is not to be confused with the term as it is used when referring to analog recording tape,
in which a drop-out is a sudden loss of amplitude. In digital audio, ‘drop-out’ means a total absence of
signal due to the temporary lack of available samples to convert. This is much more noticeable and disturbing than in the analog case, because loud clicks can be heard.
13. A block of items of the same type (for example a block of samples) is often called a buffer. So, in our
case, the term buffers of samples refers to the sample block. Consequently, using a multiple buffering technique, means we can deal with something like ‘‘buffering of buffers.’’ For example, assuming that we
deal with blocks of 512 samples, in the case of double buffering, we have a buffer made up of two data
items, each one made up of a block (or buffer) of 512 samples. In the case of triple buffering we deal with
a buffer of three elements (i.e. three blocks of samples) and so on.
14. There is another buffer type, these are called LIFO (Last-In First-Out) buffers or stacks. They are used
in other cases, but not in streaming data items to an output.
15. In most cases, the processing speed of a computer routine is not constant: in certain moments it can
be extremely fast, whereas in others it can remain blocked for a limited time or ﬂow extremely slowly.
There are several reasons for this, for example: in an operating system there are normally many concur-

378

Chapter 3

rent processes completely independent from each others, sometimes a process needs more CPU cycles
than the other ones and vice versa in other moments; the cache memory of the processor can sometimes
help to increase the speed of a loop, and other times might not be available, because it is busy with other
processing routines, and so on. For these reasons some kind of buffering scheme is a necessary prerequisite for real-time streaming.
16. The unit of measure for buffer size is the number of data items that can be contained by the buffer
itself. For example, a buffer of 512 elements is obviously bigger than a buffer of 256 elements.
17. Such latency calculation is theoretical because, in practice, there is another time lag you have to add
to obtain the real latency delay, this lag is determined by the hardware device driver internal mechanism, that is completely hidden from the programmer. Also, sound has a limited propagation velocity
in the air medium, so, depending on speaker distance from the listener, the real latency can be proportionally higher. Therefore, real latency delay is always bigger than the theoretical one, obtained by
counting the FIFO buffer’s data items.
18. Remember that the Tiny Audio Library wraps the blocking part of the Portaudio library, in order to
make its use simpler for beginners. A more efﬁcient and versatile (but even more difﬁcult) way can be
obtained by using the Portaudio library directly, as will be the case in the following applications. Portaudio not only supports a blocking mechanism, but also a much more efﬁcient callback mechanism, as we
will see later.
19. Copyright 1999 and 2000 by Ross Bencina and Phil Burk.
20. The blocking API is not as efﬁcient as the callback-based API. But it is mainly provided to simplify the
programming and development of simple audio utility programs. It consist of a single thread of execution, whose ﬂow is blocked each time an in/out function is called, i.e. such function doesn’t return until
the corresponding buffers has been ﬂushed. The Tiny Audio Library we have used so far is based on the
blocking API of Portaudio. For real-world tasks, the callback-based API is highly recommended. In this
chapter we deal with the callback-based API of Portaudio only.
21. The ring modulation technique is perhaps the simplest way to modify and process an input signal.
Actually, this technique consists of a single multiplication of two signals: the carrier and the modulator. In
a multiplication, the order of the operands is not signiﬁcant, this means that modulator and carrier are
symmetric, i.e. they are swappable without affecting the resulting output. The resulting spectrum of the
output signal is made up of the sums and the differences of all the partial frequencies of the two starting
signals. Ring modulation is very similar to the amplitude modulation technique, the only difference is
that, in the latter, a DC offset is added to the modulator, in order to make it positive only. The spectrum
of the amplitude modulation contains not only the sums and differences of the frequencies of all carrier
and modulator partials (as in the case of ring modulation), but also the original frequencies.
22. In cases like this, the term ‘buffer’ is often used interchangeably with ‘block’.
23. Latency doesn’t depend solely on the block size, but also on how many blocks are used. The exact
number of blocks used at runtime is transparent to the user of the Portaudio API, so that you do not have
to worry about it. In any case, the user of this API does have some control over this number, by setting
an approximate suggestion of the latency time by means of speciﬁc parameters (we will see such parameters later in this chapter).

379

Working with Audio Streams

24. A PaStream object has nothing to do with Cþþ classes and objects. It is actually a C structure containing pointers, pointers to functions and data that apply in all inner mechanisms of Portaudio. Its type
is initially a null pointer.
25. Here is the type deﬁnition of an audio stream callback function in Portaudio v19:
typedef int PaStreamCallback(void* input, void* output,
unsigned long frameCount,
const PaStreamCallbackTimeInfo* timeInfo,
PaStreamCallbackFlags statusFlags, void* userData );
26. The API functions are, in this case, the library functions belonging to the Portaudio library. The
audio_callback() function is not an API function, because it is written by the Portaudio user, and
doesn’t belong to the Portaudio library.
27. In this case, ‘blocks’ and ‘buffers’ are synonymous.
28. Current Portaudio implementation (v.19) supports blocks of frames having any number of channels,
and the following sample formats, expressed by symbolic macro constants:
paFloat32

32-bit ﬂoating-point samples (ﬂoats)

paInt32

32-bit signed integers (longs)

paInt24

packed 24-bit format

paInt16

16-bit signed integers (shorts)

paInt8

8-bit signed integers (chars)

UInt8

8-bit unsigned integers (unsigned chars)

Even if in helloRing.c, we chose a 32-bit ﬂoating-point sample format, such a format may not be natively
supported by you audio interface (and almost surely it isn’t, because most audio interfaces are based on
16-bit or 24-bit integer sample format). However, this fact won’t prevent helloRing.c from working with
your interface because there is a Portaudio internal setting that automatically converts the sample format
into a format compatible with your interface, so you needn’t worry about explicitly using a sample format natively supported by your interface.
29. Normally Portaudio uses interleaved blocks, made up of frames, in which each frame contains a sample of all channels. However, since v19, Portaudio now optionally supports non-interleaved blocks. By
using the paNonInterleaved macro constant, one sets a bitwise ﬂag which informs the engine that
the user doesn’t want a single default frame block for all channels, but rather, multiple separated noninterleaved sample blocks, one for each channel. When non-interleaved blocks are chose, the callback
arguments void *inputBuffer and void *outputBuffer don’t point to a single sample-frame block,
but rather, to an array of sample blocks. And consequently, the void pointers must be cast in the following way inside the audio callback:
float *left = ((float **) inputBuffer)[0];
float *right = ((float **) inputBuffer)[1];
30. Remember that local static variables are created at the start of the program and keep their content
unchanged between function calls. This is the reason we used a static variable in this context. So, the
variable phase will keep the last value assumed in each subsequent function call, and you have to be

380

Chapter 3

aware that it is set to zero only at the program start, not each time the audio_callback function is
called (different from non-static local variables).
31. Current compilers can generate machine code with the same efﬁciency, even when using the array
style instead of incrementing the pointers. In this case the loop would assume the following style:
for( i=0; i < framesPerBuffer; i+=2 ) {
float sine = sin(phase);
out[i] = in[i] * sine; /* left */
out[i+1] = in[i+1] * sine; /* right */
phase += si;
}
Another reason of convenience in using the pointer-increment style is how easy it is to modify the code
for multi-channel audio. For example, if we had to support quadraphonic output, the loop would simply
be as follows:
for( i=0; i < framesPerBuffer; i++ ) {
float sine = sin(phase);
*out++ = *in++ * sine; /* front left */
*out++ = *in++ * sine; /* front right */
*out++ = *in++ * sine; /* rear left */
*out++ = *in++ * sine; /* rear right */
phase += si;
}
32. The paContinue API enumerator constant (belonging to the PaStreamCallbackResult enumeration type) is equal to zero in Portaudio v19. This value informs the Portaudio mechanism that the callback process has to be continued. There are two other possible return values of the callback function:
paComplete (equal to one), which informs that the process has completed, so there is no necessity for
further calls to the callback functions; and paAbort (equal to two), which informs that the callback process must be stopped.
33. See the portaudio.h header ﬁle, provided with the Portaudio distribution, for more information and
documentation about this structure.
34. As in note 33.
35. As in note 33.
36. See note 31.
37. This is the prototype of the Pa_OpenStream() API function:
PaError Pa_OpenStream( PaStream** stream,
const PaStreamParameters *inputParameters,
const PaStreamParameters *outputParameters,
double sampleRate, unsigned long framesPerBuffer,
PaStreamFlags streamFlags, PaStreamCallback *streamCallback,
void *userData );
Notice that this function returns an error value, not used in helloRing.c.

381

Working with Audio Streams

38. The possible ﬂags are the following:
paNoFlag no ﬂag is set
paClipOff disable clipping
paDitherOff disable dithering
paNeverDropInput will not discard overﬂowed input samples without calling the stream callback
paPrimeOutputBuffersUsingStreamCallback call the stream callback to ﬁll initial output buffers,
rather than the default behavior of priming the buffers with zeros (silence)
paPlatformSpecificFlags platform-speciﬁc ﬂags.
By default, Portaudio clips and dithers the samples.
39. Clipping means making all samples above and below certain thresholds equal to the corresponding
threshold values. For example if the allowed range is 1 to þ1, and a sample has a value of .8, it passes
unmodiﬁed by the clipping stage, but if a sample has a value of 1.2 it will be clipped to 1, and if a sample
has a value of 2 it will be clipped to 1. By default, the Portaudio mechanism clips samples. Upper and
lower clipping limits can vary, depending on the sample formats:
paFloat32 1 to 1
paInt32 the limits of a long variable (2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647)
paInt24 depends on the implementation, normally the limits are the same of paInt32, but the real
values are approximate, because the lower eight bits are truncated
paInt16 the limits of a short variable (32,768 to 32,767 )
paInt8
the limits of a char variable (128 to 127)
paUInt8 the limits of an unsigned char variable (0 to 255).
40. To get the address of a function, it is sufﬁcient to set the function name without round braces, and
so, to get the address of the audio_callback() function, we can simply provide the audio_callback
identiﬁer. This identiﬁer returns the address of the target function in both C and Cþþ.
41. Once the Pa_StartStream() function has been successfully called, the callback function is repeatedly called without us needing to worry about doing this explicitly. In the case of helloRing.c, there is no
need to control anything more, because the modulator frequency is constant. If we had to control it in
real time, for example via MIDI, some control mechanism would have to be activated and performed
during the callback process. Part of this control mechanism can reside in the audio callback function,
while other part could reside elsewhere (for example, in an eventual MIDI callback function). But often
all control gears reside in the audio callback too.

4

Introduction to Program Design

John fﬁtch

In the earlier chapters of this book you will have had the opportunity to learn the language
aspects of C—how to construct a well-formed statement, a syntactically correct function,
and so forth. In this chapter we are considering the totality of the program. To write a useful
program, we need not only to know how to express our intent, but to know what it is we are
trying to do, and how to achieve our intent. Some people seem to have no troubles with this;
it can be most dispiriting to see these people apparently doing this arcane activity as if it
were instinctive. Fortunately, for the majority of humanity there are methods to assist us.
In the circles of computer science this is usually called Software Engineering, and it has been
a major area of both practical and theoretical research. In light of this, it is clear that in an
introductory book it is simply not possible to give a comprehensive knowledge of the ﬁeld,
let alone provide sufﬁcient work-experience to gain employment. The aim in this chapter is
to show one of the most direct and applicable techniques of software engineering without
the weight of formalism with which this subject is so often burdened.
The approach taken here is to work from a simple example; to create a complete program
to accomplish a simple audio task. The task chosen is to create a wave-table playback synthesizer. The software engineering methodology is a simpliﬁed variant of object-oriented design.
You may ﬁnd it helpful to contemplate an analogy with the composition process. It is
given that the work is to be, say, a string quartet. That means that we are to write for strings,
and we need to be competent in the way this done, in the same way that we need to be
familiar with the C language to write a C program. However that is not the heart of the composition. We need to design the whole work, consider the structure of the entity, what its
emotional content is to be, or whatever suits your musical aesthetic. Technique is used
in the detailed evolution of the notes, or the temporally local processes. Like all analogies
this can be stretched too far, but the major point is that programs need overall design and
organization.
4.1

Where to Begin
In many ways the hardest part of programming is starting. Faced with a blank sheet of paper
or a blank computer screen it is all too easy for the mind to panic. In order to overcome this

384

Chapter 4

natural reaction, object-oriented design suggests a technique to identify the major components of the program. The technique starts by asking for a natural language description of
the problem. If one cannot write such a description then it is almost certain that you do
not really know what you are trying to do, and while the resulting programming experience
can be fun, it is unlikely to be successful.
Thus, our task is to write a wavetable playback system. That is, we need to have a waveform, which is deﬁned either by reading from an external ﬁle or mathematically constructed,
from which we copy to the output, sometimes speeding it up and sometimes slowing it
down. We can take this as our initial description. Later we may ﬁnd that we need to be
more detailed, or add new explanations of what we would like the program to achieve. The
next step in the technique is to identify the nouns (words denoting things), and to identify
the verbs (words that denote actions) in our initial description.
4.1.1

Data Representation

We need to have a waveform, which is deﬁned either by reading from an external ﬁle or
mathematically constructed, from which we copy to the output, sometimes speeding it up
and sometimes slowing it down.
Let’s start with the nouns. In our simple example, the three nouns we have identiﬁed are
the existence of a waveform, an external ﬁle, and an output. The reason we identify these
parts is that we are going to have to provide some mechanism to represent the nouns in
our description. In the jargon of object-oriented design, these nouns would become objects.
In fact, if our target were a program in Cþþ or some other object-oriented language, these
nouns would become the instances and classes. But for the purposes of this chapter, since
we are aiming at C, we don’t need to concern ourselves directly with this, yet.
We have already made a signiﬁcant start. Whatever else happens in our program, or in our
attempt to create it, we now know that without some way of storing the waveform we are
never going to achieve our stated aims. It is tempting to immediately jump to considering
exactly how to represent the waveform,1 but this temptation must be resisted, at least of a
little longer. The reason for the delay is that in order to get a good solution, rather than just
a working one, some ways of representing the object may be preferable to others, and a premature decision may preclude some ways of working. A very good maxim for software
design, as in many other forms of design, is to maximize ﬂexibility, and avoid cutting off
possible futures until late in the process. As part of the rest of the design the representation
may become obvious, or may still remain part of the art of programming.2
We have determined that there must be some representation of the waveform, but we
defer the speciﬁc consideration of how until later. However, before moving on, it is useful
to ensure that there is at least one representation we could use. Observing that WAV ﬁles
exist, we can be sure that there is at least one solution, and so we can move on to the next
problem.

385

Introduction to Program Design

The second noun was ‘ﬁle’. In this case the representation is largely imposed by the computer system, but we will have to consider what kind of ﬁle we will use—WAV, AIFF, MP3, or
some other format. Again we can, and should, defer this to a later stage.
The third noun we identiﬁed was ‘output’. This is a potential problem, with much work
required to complete even an abstract representation. However we can use another trick
from the software engineer’s bag—software reuse. We may notice that a particular object in
our program has been featured in other programs—either written by ourselves or others. In
the speciﬁc case of the output representation of audio, there are many libraries that do just
that. For this example we will make use of just such an object, a component in an existing
software library, the portsf library. This completes the ﬁrst pass: to identify the objects, indicated by nouns, in the original English description.
4.1.2

Actions and Process

Now let’s deal with the verbs. In grammar, a verb is sometimes called a ‘‘doing’’ word. For
our purposes this is a good concept. Verbs are indications of actions that our program must
do to solve the problem. These actions will take nouns, that is data, as their subject and
object.
We need a waveform, which is deﬁned either by reading from an external ﬁle or mathematically constructed, from which we copy to the output, sometimes speeding it up and sometimes slowing it down.
In considering the verb ‘reading’, we can see that it refers to both an external ﬁle and the
waveform. This indicates that there will need to be a function, which will take as arguments
or give as a result, the representations of these two entities. As it reads from a ﬁle to produce
a waveform, one possible formulation is a function with a protocol something like
WAVEFORM readform(FILE_HANDLE);
However, if one thinks of the waveform as an empty structure that is ﬁlled from the ﬁle, then
it might be more natural to think of a function with no result, or just an error indication,
such as
int readform(WAVEFORM,FILE_HANDLE);
The function that is chosen is part of the intangibles of design, based on personal taste,
perhaps personal skill, and a view of what is ‘natural’. For a number of reasons that I
ﬁnd hard to explain,3 I prefer the ﬁrst form, and so it is that one I will use in this design
development.
We also expect that the waveform could be provided by a mathematical formula. This
reading of our description turns up yet another noun, ‘formula’, which will also need a representation. What we are seeing here is that as we investigate each of our nouns and verbs,
we can see that our original statement (called a speciﬁcation in software engineering jargon4)

386

Chapter 4

is not complete, and that we will need to reﬁne it, or to provide a more detailed description.
Usually the initial speciﬁcation of a program is deﬁcient in some respects and the designer
has to provide additional speciﬁcations or to limit the speciﬁcation is some way.
In our example there are a large number of ways that a mathematical formula could be
speciﬁed, let alone represented.5 However, we will simplify this by considering the kinds of
use to which the program might be put. The commonest waveform, from which others can
be built, is the sine or cosine function. Thus, we will provide for the creation of just these
two, while making it possible to extend the program at some later stage to other pre-deﬁned
function.
We now need a representation of a formula that only has two possible values, sine and
cosine. With this simpliﬁcation we deduce that the function we require is
WAVEFORM createformula(FORMULA);
We now turn to the third verb, which may be seen as the heart of the program. We need
to copy the waveform to the output. That suggests a functional form of
int copywaveform(WAVEFORM, OUTPUT);
—but that would be to miss another aspect of the original speciﬁcation, where we stated that
the copy could sometimes speeding it up and sometimes slowing it down. This is part of the copying action, and there is an implied noun that we had not previously noted: the speed of the
copy. We will need some representation of speed; but in line with our previous policy of not
getting to detailed representations yet, we will just note that it is needed and proceed to
modify our function prototype to
int copywaveform(WAVEFORM, SPEED, OUTPUT);
I have returned a value from this function to provide a possible error reporting mechanism.
It may happen that the output cannot take the waveform, or the disk is full, or the speed
is not acceptable, or other possible conditions that we have not yet identiﬁed. It is generally
a good practice to make a provision for what could go wrong throughout the design and
coding processes.
That completes a ﬁrst pass through the speciﬁcation. Just as with the nouns, where we
identiﬁed the objects that needed representation but did not fully consider the representation; with the verbs, we have identiﬁed the actions that will be the functions in our solution,
but we have not yet considered the actual way, the speciﬁc process, in which the functions
will work. Processes are achieved through algorithms.
There is a long mathematical tradition of studying algorithms, but the main features that
mathematicians have identiﬁed for a process to be considered an algorithm is that it must
have a ﬁnite description (that is, our code cannot go on forever6), it must be unambiguous
(imposed largely by the programming language that cannot accept ambiguous statements),
and it must be effective in achieving the result is a ﬁnite time.7

387

Introduction to Program Design

4.1.3

How to Proceed

With the ﬁrst pass completed, we can list the tasks that remain. We need representations for
the following:
a waveform: WAVEFORM
an external ﬁle: FILE_HANDLE
the output: OUTPUT
formulae: FORMULA
speed: SPEED
The actions mean that we need algorithms for the following:
readform: FILE_HANDLE -> WAVEFORM
createformula: FORMULA -> WAVEFORM
copywaveform: WAVEFORM x SPEED x OUTPUT -> INTEGER
I have described the actions via a name and a signature. This is a formal way of talking
about the arguments and results that does not tie us too closely to any speciﬁc programming
language. (They could also be presented as C function prototypes.)
To proceed, we continue in the same way, taking each of the actions and attempting to
give them more detail. In doing this we may uncover more nouns that need representation,
and more processes which require functions; but these will be seen as subordinate to the
functions we have already identiﬁed. In this analysis, we sometimes discover that the same
action is required in more than one part of the program, and we can choose to merge two
instances, and simplify the resulting solution.
The obvious question about this process is when to stop. Obviously, we could do this successive reﬁnement indeﬁnitely. Again, this is where the ‘‘art’’ comes in. At some stage we
should decide that the action is obvious, or similar to what we have done in other programs,
and so should not cause us any problem. Another indicator that it is time to stop is when
any further reﬁnement depends closely on the representation. Clearly this stage differs between individuals, based on their experience and talents. In our example, we will continue
a little further as I am not yet clear how we are to achieve these actions.
The ﬁnal process is to create concrete representations for the nouns. By leaving this to the
end we will know exactly what we want to do to the representation, and this can guide us
toward choosing good or appropriate representations. We will consider the concrete representations much later.
4.1.4

Reading a File as a Waveform

In considering the function readform that I have determined will have the signature
FILE_HANDLE -> WAVEFORM

388

Chapter 4

or equivalently in C
WAVEFORM readform(FILE_HANDLE);
we can proceed in the same way as the main problem. We start by trying to describe what we
expect this function to do, in simple textual form. We then examine this for nouns and
verbs, and check that we have captured the required intent.
The function is supposed to get a WAVEFORM and copy the data contained in the associated
ﬁle into the representation.
There are no new nouns in that speciﬁcation, but there are two verbs, which have been
underlined. The get operation needs to create an empty waveform, and the copy operation
populates it. To make this clearer, we need to narrow the deﬁnition somewhat, and consider,
still in an abstract fashion, how a waveform is to be represented.
We could still widen this description, or have a number of possible representations, but I
am going to impose the condition that all waveforms will be represented in digital sampled
format. This form has a number of variants and at this point I do not wish to decide on
exactly which. But it does give some structure to the abstract data object WAVEFORM. It needs
to maintain some representation of a number of samples, and in addition, we will need to
know the number of samples it uses, the size. We may need more components as we continue the analysis, but this is enough to determine that we have some kind of composite
object that can be divided into sub-components. We can continue to use our noun/verb
methodology to see that there are (at least) two of these subcomponents, identiﬁed by the
two nouns samples and number.
WAVEFORM:
SIZE
SAMPLES
We are still not saying how the samples are to be represented inside the running program,
or how the size of the collection of samples is to be represented. We may be tempted to think
that the size will be an integer, but that is a premature thought. However, we can continue
the design to the two verbs. The creation of an empty waveform might be expected to
require the number of samples that are to be represented,8 and this implies a function:
WAVEFORM getnewform(SIZE);
The other function is to read the data from the external ﬁle. Again without deciding on the
exact format of the ﬁle, we can deduce a functional prototype:
int readfile(WAVEFORM, FILE_HANDLE);
We have, however, introduced a new problem: the need to determine the size of the sample
collection. We could for example take this as a ﬁxed constant, or we could assume that the
ﬁle contains this information. I will take the second as it is a little more general and it ﬁts our
general approach. Thus, we will need to ensure that there is a function to get the size from
the ﬁle. That function is

389

Introduction to Program Design

SIZE lengthoffile(FILE_HANDLE);
and the complete function readform will be approximately as follows:
WAVEFORM readform(FILE_HANDLE file)
{
WAVEFORM xx;
int err;
xx = getnewform(lengthoffile(file));
if ((err=readfile(xx, file)) !=0) return xx;
error("Failed to read wave form for reason %d", err);
return NULL;
}
The purists say that one should continue moving from an abstract program toward a concrete one in stripes, but in practice we sometimes can complete one component independently. Indeed the whole purpose of this approach to program design is to clarify what is
independent and separate.
We can move this part of the program forward by considering how the samples are to represented in the external ﬁle. Note that this does not place any constraints on how the internal representation is to be maintained, as the readfile function could make any alterations
if wished. As the designer of the program, I am going to impose an external format of textbased numbers, one to a line. The ﬁrst number will be the length of the ﬁle in samples, followed by values of the samples at equally spaced time intervals, and the wave repeating after
the length.9 That decision allows us to make a step forward with the design of readfile.
Clearly we have to read the count, and then, in a loop, read and set the internal structure.
Indeed the process we are seeing is one where, as we simplify and deﬁne the program structures, we can see more clearly how the data structures should be, and the data structures
inform what the program should be. It seems as if the FILE_HANDLE of our abstract version can be thought of as the name of the ﬁle, and we can use FILE* from the standard C
library associated with this name as a C string. We will tentatively propose a deﬁnition of
readfile:
typedef char *FILE_HANDLE;
. . .
int readfile(WAVEFORM xx, FILE_HANDLE file)
{
int count, i;
double val;
FILE *ff = fopen(file, "r");
if (ff==NULL)
return ERR_NO_FILE;
if (fscanf(ff, "%d", &count)!=1)
return ERR_NO_COUNT;

390

Chapter 4

for (i=0; i<count; i++) {
if (fscanf(ff, "%f", &val)!=1)
return ERR_NO_DATA;
put_val(xx, i, val);
}
fclose(ff);
return 0;
}
We now have a potential solution to the internal structure of a waveform. (I say this tentatively, as we really need to ensure that there are no fence-post problems with the count,
and I have skipped a number of stages of error reporting and design; but we will return to
them later.)
A feature of software design that so far I have only hinted at is the need to review and
revise decisions taken when later it seems that the solution is not complete or could be
made easier. In general, software is a complex entity, and some have even deﬁned the whole
subject of computing as managing complexity; that is why so often programmers and software engineers refer to simplicity. We know that a simple program is easier to understand
and hence develop or maintain. To paraphrase Einstein, programs should be as simple as
possible, but no simpler.
4.1.5

Filling a Waveform from a Formula

In the previous subsection we decided on an initial internal structure for storing a waveform.
We can now test that structure by seeing if it can deal with the other way we have suggested
for obtaining a waveform: from a mathematical formula. Previously we had a prototype of
WAVEFORM createformula(FORMULA);
and we had decided that we would limit ourselves to only sine and cosine functions in the
ﬁrst instance. We now have to face up to the problems of specifying the formula. Just to say
we want a sine wave is insufﬁcient. We need to have a range of values to store, that is the
range of the x axis for which we will store sin(x) or cos(x). But what range of x? Starting
at 0 seems a good idea. As we know that the circular functions repeat over a range of 2p, we
could say that we will store one complete cycle. This is still not a complete description, as we
need to decide on the number of points. (See ﬁgure 4.1.)
Knowing that we are making a simplifying decision, and marking this as a point we may
wish to reconsider later, let us decide to store one cycle in 4,096 points—computer scientists
tend to like powers of 2. We will see later how this could give a simpler solution than allowing any value for the size. Even so, we will use a C macro so that this can be changed to a
different constant with ease. If we later decide that this value should not be constant, then
more drastic changes will be needed.

391

Introduction to Program Design

Figure 4.1
A sine waveform function table.

We can then represent FORMULA as a simple label, and the function can be like
#define TRIG_SIZE (4096)
#define TWOPIBYSIZE (6.28318530718/(double)TRIG_SIZE)
WAVEFORM createformula(FORMULA trig)
{
WAVEFORM xx = getnewform(TRIG_SIZE);
int i;
double val;
for (i=0; i<TRIG_SIZE; i++) {
if (trig==SINE)
val = sin((double)i*TWOPIBYSIZE);
else if (trig==COSINE)
val = cos((double)i*TWOPIBYSIZE);
else return ERR_NO_FORMULA;
put_val(xx, i, val);
}
return xx;
}
We now have most of the program designed and programmed. Only one major component remains: the copying of the waveform to the output. What we have not completed is

392

Chapter 4

the actual representation of all the components. Rather than continuing in the strict topdown order of development we will now consider concrete representations.
4.2

Choosing Concrete Representations
The last stage of the development is to choose how to represent the low-level entities we
have deﬁned. In order to make this decision we need to know the range of opportunities.
Part of this is just knowledge of the C language, but it also includes other aspects, such as
the target computer.
4.2.1

The Palette of Options

The C language provides a small number of built-in data types, and two ways in which they
can be used to create more complex items. The basic integer types are char, short, int, and
long ; there are two ﬂoating-point types: float and double. The types short, int, and
long can also be given as unsigned if strictly negative numbers are not required. Also,
chars can be used directly, or can be signed or unsigned. This is very confusing; below I
will attempt to explain it.
There is a great deal of confusion about the exact meanings of char, short, int, and
long. The language standard guarantees that these are in non-decreasing order of size. They
can in fact all be the same (and yes there are computers like that), but on most computers
today they correspond to 8-bit, 16-bit, and 32-bit numbers, with longs the same as ints.
On the early PCs, the sizes were 8, 16, 16, and 32, and on the coming generation of 64-bit
machines the sizes may be 8, 16, 32, and 64 or 8, 16, 64, and 64. One should not make
assumptions, and one should rely on a reasonable range.
Why would one use a short rather than an int? It may save space if only small values are
needed, and that is the main reason. Unfortunately, shorts are sometimes slower than
ints, because hardware manufacturers optimize their chips for int use.
A similar situation arises with floats and doubles. Though traditionally these correspond to 32-bit and 64-bit ﬂoating-point numbers, this is not guaranteed. Many older compilers were not good at handling floats, and floats are still often handled more slowly
than doubles, even though they are smaller.
The problem with chars is that some hardware treats 8-bit integers as signed and some
treat them as unsigned. In creating the C standard it was necessary to reconcile these two
differing stances, and so the standard does not say which is meant. For most use of chars
this is not important, but if you wish to compare characters with < or > then they are different. If it really matters to you, you should use the signed or unsigned versions explicitly,
and accept that on some machines this may give slower code. More complex representations
can be constructed from arrays or from structs.

393

Introduction to Program Design

Two other features in C are useful in considering representations. An enum allows a list of
names to be treated as basic tokens of the language. In fact they usually are mapped to ints.
(For example, they could be useful in our program where we need tokens for SINE and
COSINE formulae; we could just use 0 and 1, but there is no logic in that choice.) And
typedef that allows us to have our own name for any previously deﬁned structure. Usually
this is used with structs, but it can be used well with enum or even the basic types to make
the program read more like the problem than the solution.
4.2.2

Making the Choice

As in many parts of software creation, there are no hard rules to making the choices. There
are however a number of general principles, like being simple, making use of enumeration
types, and using typedef to maintain clarity related to the problem.
In our program-design exercise, we clearly should have the formulae as an enumeration
type
enum FORMULA {SINE, COSINE};
This is simple, and still allows us ﬂexibility to add, say, sawtooth or square waves. One crucial object in our analysis is the WAVEFORM. So far we have only considered the operations we
need to do to a WAVEFORM, but I have deliberately not considered the concrete representation. A good software engineer may well say that it is still too soon to generate a concrete
representation, as we have not yet considered all the operations. Well, I am going to cheat a
little; it is my program and I can break the rules.
In considering the WAVEFORM we can use a simple part of information theory. We can
count the number of items that are identiﬁed and use that as a start to the process of designing the concrete representation. We already have
WAVEFORM:
SIZE
SAMPLES
We will need to represent the size and the actual samples. The size is a count of the number of samples, and so an integer is appropriate. The char type is certainly too small on
many machines, and so I will decide to use int. I could have chosen a short, as it is
extremely unlikely that I will need a waveform with a large number of samples. However as
a matter of personal style, I like shorts only where I know I am memory restricted, as I have
used too many computers where shorts are slow. The samples are a collection of ﬂoatingpoint values or possibly integers. I will decide to use double for each sample, again realizing
that this takes more memory than floats. We are still left with the question of how to represent the collection.
Collections are usually represented by either arrays or lists. Lists are a little more complex to code but are much more ﬂexible when wanting to add new data in the middle, or

394

Chapter 4

wanting to delete data values. In our application we are reading the data and then using it,
and we have not seen any part of the description ask for modiﬁcations of an existing waveform. So with relief we can use an array. What seems to be sought is
struct WaveForm {
int size;
double samples[size];
};
But that is not allowed in C.10 Arrays must be declared with a constant size. There are two
possible approaches. The simplest is to decide that no waveform will be longer than, say,
8,192 samples, and to declare this in the design document, and in the struct. We will also
have to police this limit in the function getnewform. Better would be to use a true dynamic
array. We declare the struct with an array of length 1, and use malloc to create instances of the WAVEFORM. This translates into
typedef struct WaveForm {
int size;
double samples[1];
} WAVE;
typedef WAVE *WAVEFORM;
WAVEFORM getnewform(int size)
{
WAVEFORM xx =
(WAVEFORM)malloc((size-1)*sizeof(double)+sizeof(WAVE));
if (WAVEFORM==NULL){
error("Failed to allocate memory\n");
exit(1);
}
xx->size = size;
return xx;
}
void put_val(WAVEFORM xx, int i, double val)
{
xx.samples[i] = val;
}
4.2.3

Can One Be Certain Which Choice Is Best?

Whenever there is a choice, one might be concerned that the solution is the ‘‘correct’’ one.
This is a rather pointless concern; in software as in composition there is no right solution.
Certainly some choices are better than others, and this is largely a matter of experience.
Good representations are those that avoid awkward code, and for which the algorithms are

395

Introduction to Program Design

easy. Knowing this takes time. But some suggestions can be made. Throughout computing
there are trade-offs, and the largest one is between space and time. Often a small representation requires complicated code to use. Fast access often introduces memory under-use.
One of the advantages of this object-oriented design is that the representations are largely
decoupled from the program structure, so if it turns out that we made a bad decision, it
should be easy to return to the design structure and replace the offending decision with a
better one.
4.2.4

Copy Waveform

We now return to the main design. We have design and code to create waveforms in the
computer, and we have considered many aspects of program design. We now must face
up to the other major task: reading the waveform out at different speeds. We have already
decided that
int copywaveform(WAVEFORM, SPEED, OUTPUT);
and the interpretation of WAVEFORM is largely determined. So let us consider what we mean
by SPEED. Our initial description of the problem stated ‘‘we copy (the waveform) to the
output, sometimes speeding it up and sometimes slowing it down.’’ We have stored
the wavetable as one cycle, so we have a choice of two approaches. The ﬁrst is to know the
intended speed of the stored waveform, and so speed would be a multiplicative factor on
that base speed; the other is to treat speed as an absolute rate in hertz, giving how many
passes a second are needed to give the desired output. I am going to follow the second of
these.11
The speed will be represented in hertz, that is, cycles per second. While it is tempting to
consider only integer values for this, it would be more ﬂexible for this to be any number,
and it surely cannot introduce too much complexity.12
We now have to ask how we are going to achieve the copying of the waveform to the output at the desired speed. Again we can gain insight into what is required by attempting to
describe the process. The ﬁrst thing to recognize is that the output is going to require that
the sound is represented by a series of equally spaced samples, and the spacing is related to
the sample rate. We have another choice here, to use a ﬁxed sample rate or to make it variable, or selectable by the user. I expect that the commonest sample rate will be 44,100 Hz,
but for some real-time uses people are willing to use a lesser quality with the aim of speed. I
suggest that we write the program assuming a sample rate that is a ‘‘name,’’ and I will use sr
for this value. This allows us to delay the question of constancy or variability of the sample
rate until a later stage. If we ﬁnd a part where there is a difference in algorithm we will be
forced to make a decision; if we get to the end of the design without having to make such a
choice, then we know that the sample rate can be varied. This is another general principle of
software design. Use ‘‘names’’ for entities even if they are constant.13 This will lead to a more

396

Chapter 4

ﬂexible design in most cases. Even if it turns out that it really is a constant, the use of a name
makes for more readable code.
If we are to copy the waveform at SPEED hertz, at the sample rate of sr, then we need
to take (sr/SPEED) samples from each traverse of the cycle. This formula can be checked
by using the Factor-Label Method of Units Analysis: sr is in samples/second and SPEED is
in copies/second, hence sr/SPEED is in samples/cycle. We can also verify this formula by
noting that for high frequencies this number is smaller than for low frequencies, so there
are fewer samples in a cycle. (See ﬁgure 4.2.)
The problem we have to solve is how to generate (sr/SPEED) samples when the number
of sample points we have stored is a ﬁxed number, either from the external ﬁle (the size in
the ﬁle) or a constant in the case of the mathematical formulae. Ideally we would like for
have a loop that has a running position in the waveform that is incremented by the size/
(sr/SPEED). The problem is that this result is not necessarily an integer, and so it cannot
identify or index a single sample. Still, we could take the simplest version (to truncate the
result and take the integer below), and use that stored value. With this idea we can code T
seconds of output as
void copywaveform(WAVEFORM w, SPEED s, OUTPUT out)
{
double index = 0.0;
int total_samps = (int)(T*sr);
int size = waveform_size(w);
int i;
for (i=0; i<total_samps; i++) {
double value = waveform_val(w, (int)index);
index += size*s/sr;
if (index >= size) index -= size;
output_sample(out, value);
}
}
where we have postulated two functions, waveform_size and waveform_val, that extract
information from a waveform. This kind of function is often called a ‘‘selector,’’ as it only
reads a value from the representation.14 With the decisions above, these functions can be
easily coded as
int waveform_size(WAVEFORM w)
{
return w->size;
}
double waveform_val(WAVEFORM w, int which)
{
return w->samples[which];
}

397

Introduction to Program Design

Figure 4.2
Copying a waveform.

398

Chapter 4

Figure 4.3
Interpolation, taking the closest value.

Although this solution will generate some kind of output, it will introduce a signiﬁcant
amount of noise. A different solution would be to use the closest sample, which would only
require the change of one line to
double value = waveform_val(w, (int)(index+0.5));
But while this is better for only a small computational cost, it is hardly ideal. The next idea
would be to use some kind of interpolation. Interpolation is the subject of estimating the
value of a function at a point that is not stored. What we have considered so far is taking
the closest value that we do have and using this, as shown in ﬁgure 4.3.
The next suggestion is to determine the two stored values on either side of the value we
want, and to assume that the function is a straight line between them (ﬁgure 4.4). This is,
not surprisingly, called linear interpolation. Mathematically, if we want f (x) and we have
values at x 0 and x1 which are either side of x, then the straight line between f (x 0 ) and f (x1 ) is
y ¼ f (x 0 ) þ

f (x1 )  f (x 0 )
(x  x 0 ).
x1  x 0

(1)

We can check that this formula is correct by considering that when x is x 0 then y is f (x 0 ); if x
is x1 we get f (x1 ). This is what we want. If your mathematical skills are not strong, you may
not know that if the x only occurs to the power 1 then the formula is a straight line.15
Thus, to code a linear interpolating version of our value reader we need code like the
following:

399

Introduction to Program Design

Figure 4.4
Linear interpolation.

double waveform_ival(WAVEFORM w, double which)
{
int x0 = (int)which;
int x1 = (int)(which+1.0);
double f0, f1;
if (x1>=waveform_size(w)) x1 = 0;
f0 = waveform_val(w,x0);
f1 = waveform_val(w,x1);
return f0 + (f1 - f0)*(which-x0);
}
The only problem is what happens when x is greater that the last value stored. As we are
treating the waveform as endlessly repeating, x1 beyond the end is the same as if it were the
ﬁrst value stored (the table wraps around).
Notice that I have made a small simpliﬁcation. When we are storing the waveform at
points 0, 1, 2, . . . , the value of x1 - x0 is unity, so I can save the division. It is possible to
make other simpliﬁcations to the formula, but that will do for the present.
You may feel that just drawing a straight line is a little crude, as indeed it is. If we have
enough points stored in the waveform, then the errors introduced may be acceptable; alternatively, we could seek better interpolation methods.

400

Chapter 4

Figure 4.5
Quadratic interpolation.

The obvious idea is to use a curve rather than a line; in order to decide what kind of curve
we would need to use additional points.
The next simplest interpolation is quadratic interpolation (ﬁgure 4.5), where we ﬁt a seconddegree polynomial through three points.16 This is a valid interpolation method, and it is not
much harder to code than linear interpolation. However, it suffers from a small oddity:
should we take two points before the required x and one after, or one before and two after?
This asymmetry is the reason that quadratic interpolation is rarely used for this style of application. (See ﬁgure 4.5.)
More common is cubic interpolation, with two points before the truncated table position
and two points after. This is certainly more complex. Apart from adding a requirement that
there are actually four points stored,17 the code is much harder. The mathematics is left as an
exercise to the enthusiastic, but the code would be as follows:
double
{
int
int
int

waveform_ival(WAVEFORM w, double which)
x0 = (int)which;
x1 = (int)(which+1.0);
x2 = (int)(which+2.0);

401

Introduction to Program Design

int xm1 = (int)(which-1.0);
int x = which-x0
double f0, f1, f2, fm1;
if (x1>=waveform_size(w)) x1 -= waveform_size(w);
if (x2>=waveform_size(w)) x2 -= waveform_size(w);
(xm1<0) xm1 += waveform_size(w);
f0 = waveform_val(w,x0);
f1 = waveform_val(w,x1);
f2 = waveform_val(w,x0);
fm1 = waveform_val(w,x1);
return f0 + (((f2 - fm1 - 3*f1 + 3*f0)*x + 3*(f1 + fm1 - 2*f0))*x (f2 + 2*fm1 - 6*f1 + 3*f0))*x/FL(6.0);
}
For our sample program we will use linear interpolation as that gives reasonable results
without too much complexity. In line with the general approach I am describing, we may
have to reopen this area if it appears later that it is not good enough. To complete this, the
nearest point interpolation can be written as
double waveform_ival(WAVEFORM w, double which)
{
int x0 = (int)(which+0.5);
double f0;
f0 = waveform_val(w,x0);
return f0;
}
and our main function becomes
void copywaveform(WAVEFORM w, SPEED s, OUTPUT out)
{
double index = 0.0;
int total_samps = (int)(T*sr);
int size = waveform_size(w);
for (i=0; i<total_samps; i++) {
double value = waveform_ival(w, index);
index += size*s/sr;
if (index >= size) index -= size;
output_sample(out, value);
}
}
It does not take much imagination to realize that there must be a ﬁfth-degree (six-point)
interpolation method, and that there must be higher-degree methods. The code tends to be
rather complex and costly. Cubic is a good compromise. There are other, non-polynomial

402

Chapter 4

interpolation methods, but discussing these is beyond the real topic of this chapter. Interested readers are referred elsewhere.18
4.2.5

Output

So far we have largely ignored what we are going to do with the processed samples. In the
initial description, I have said that the samples would be sent to the output and that is all.
There are two major types of output that could have been meant; it could be expected to
become a sound from speakers somewhere, or it may be expected to be stored in the computer as a ﬁle for later use. In either case the output has only to be initialized (or created),
accept the samples, and possibly be closed down when the program has ﬁnished. If we were
to use a library, then we would expect that the library would provide these three facilities,
and possibly others we do not need. If we were to write our own output system we could,
and should, act as if we were writing a library. The critical point, which appears repeatedly
in the whole software design process, is ‘‘separation.’’ We do not want the details of the output to, say, affect the calculation of the speed. The representation of the output could be a
pointer to a struct, or an int, or almost anything. We would expect the functions
OUTPUT initialize_sound(. . .);
int output_sample(OUTPUT, double);
int close_sound(OUTPUT);
where the arguments to the initialization function could vary depending on the library. It
may include things like the sample rate, sample size and format, the number of channels as
well as choosing WAV or AIFF, or the sound card. The results of the other two functions are
for error checking. A false value (that is zero) will mean that it failed.19
For this example application we are going to use and adapt Richard Dobson’s Portsf. The
relevant functions in the library interface are psf_sndCreate, psf_sndWriteFloatFrames,
and psf_sndClose. The output is represented by an int. In addition the library must be
initialized with a call to psf_init.
We are now in a position to start some code. The ﬁle format has been ﬁxed as standard
monophonic WAV. The sample rate must come from the variable we have been using, sr.
I have decided to use 16-bit samples, as they have in use for a long time. This does introduce
a small difﬁculty, as the ‘‘natural’’ range for ﬂoating-point samples is from 1 and þ1 while
the equivalent range for 16-bit samples is from 32,768 to þ32,767. We will deal with this
with a little scaling inside the output function. If at some later stage it is decided to support
other sample sizes, this code will have to be revisited. To implement these ideas, we can provide some functions:
typedef OUTPUT int; /* For Portsf library */
OUTPUT initialize_sound(char *name, int sr)

403

Introduction to Program Design

{
PSF_PROPS inprops;
inprops.srate = (long)sr;
inprops.chans = 1L;
inprops.samptype = PSF_SAMP_16;
inprops.format = PSF_STDWAVE;
inprops.chformat = MC_MONO;
return psf_sndOpen(name, &inprops,0);
}
int output_sample(OUTPUT out, double sample)
{
short buffer[1];
buffer[0] = (short)(sample*32767.0);
if (psf_sndWriteShortFrames(out, buffer, 1) != 1L)
return 0;
return 1;
}
int close_sound(OUTPUT out)
{
psf_sndClose(out);
return 1;
}
and we need to call psf_init in the main program. It is also a good idea to call the
close_sound function at the end of the main program to ensure that the sounds are written to the disk (or to the output device if we were using a more advanced library).
4.3

User Interface
An aspect of the whole program that we have so far ignored is how the user of this program
is going to specify which waveform to use, at what speed to play it back, and for how long.
When this information is speciﬁed, we know what to do with it, with the program fragments
previously developed. This aspect is often called the user interface. In some ways this is very
important; it is the aspect of the program that is most obvious to the user community. Its
style is what is remembered. In another way, it is the least important aspect. It does nothing,
does not solve the problem, and computationally is usually simple.
We can compare the user interface to the ending of a musical piece. It may be what some
of the audience remember, and so skill and artiﬁce must be used, but that is not (usually)
what the musical creation is about, or what is important. The interface is similar to a musical
‘‘hook.’’ We need one.

404

Chapter 4

There are two fundamentally different approaches to the user interface: the command-line
approach and the graphical approach. Traditionally, the former has been favored by computer professionals20 and the latter by consumers and users. From our standpoint, in designing this simple program, the graphical user interface (GUI) is much more complex to use,
and if we have any intention of being cross-platform or platform-neutral, this introduces
a large number of problems which we would rather not face at this time. We will develop a
command-line system, and then consider brieﬂy how this can be adapted to a GUI with
simple tools.21
4.3.1

The Command-Line Interface

In designing the user interface the same design technique can be used. We need to identify
what information the user needs to specify, and what we should do if this information is
omitted. We have already made a start on this when we said that the user of this program
is going to specify which waveform to use, at what speed to play it back, and for how long.
Identifying the nouns provides three entities that must be deﬁned: the waveform, the speed,
and the length. For each of these we can consider the kinds of value we might expect integers, ﬂoating-point numbers, characters, or character strings. When we have thought of the
range we are willing to accept, we can consider the programming aspects. The fourth entity
that I did not mention in the original design is the ‘‘name of the output’’ ﬁle to receive the
results.
Let us consider the three items in turn. The ﬁrst is the waveform. Looking back at our analysis, the waveform comes either from a ﬁle or from a mathematical formula. The ﬁle would
be naturally speciﬁed by its name, which is a character string, but with the formula it is not
obvious what to do. We could use a name like ‘sine’ to stand for that formula, surreptitiously
limiting the names we can use for ﬁles. An alternative would to make the formulae a ﬁfth
item to be speciﬁed, as long as we checked that both were not given, or more weakly we
documented which one took precedence in that case. Which one we choose is largely a
matter of personal style. No doubt there are experts22 who can produce learned reasons in
favor of either. I am going to choose the second version, mainly because I do not like the
restriction of names. You may of course disagree, in which case you will have to reconstruct
this section to suit your own concepts.
We conclude that the waveform can have an external (to the program) representation of a
ﬁle name as a character string. The mathematical formula could be represented either by an
integer (1 for sine, 2 for cosine) or a name. To my mind there is no obvious way of relating
the formulae to numbers,23 so I will use a character string. This is also easily extensible if we
decide to introduce sawtooth waves or square waves later. (See exercises.) As these are different speciﬁcations to the ﬁle names there is no potential for the interface language changing,
as might happen if we had used a single name, and suddenly more ﬁle names had a different
meaning.

405

Introduction to Program Design

The speed of playback has a natural representation in hertz in our program, and as this is a
terminology that we may hope our target user community may be familiar with, I am going
to specify the speed as a ﬂoating-point number in hertz. You should not however think that
this is the only possible choice. If we were expecting the program to be used within a mainstream western musical context, we might think note names more appropriate (A for 440 Hz,
and so on for A#, B, C, C#, . . . ). If the use is expected to be within MIDI systems, the MIDI
note number might be a candidate.
The length of time to play the sound is naturally thought of in seconds, and so a ﬂoatingpoint representation suggests itself. Again there are alternatives. We could restrict ourselves
to integer numbers of seconds, or we could specify the integer number of times we should
scan the waveform. While these may seem less useful, it does depend on the use we are
expecting. You may also note that the program itself is not really affected. The interface
could easily translate the external speciﬁcation into something very different for internal
use. The last item, the output ﬁle name, is similar to the waveform name.
The next stage in designing the command-line interface is to determine how we are going
to know which item is which. There are two basic forms: positional and tagged. In a positional
system, we decree that the items must appear in a ﬁxed order, which we must document. In
a tagged system, the items appear after some kind of symbol to identify how it is to be interpreted. (And of course there are hybrid systems, where some arguments are tagged and some
are positional.) A simple rule of thumb is that if an argument is always required, then making it positional is probably acceptable. A few options can be positional, but are usually better tagged. (If you look at the command of UNIX or the DOS component of Windows, you
will see these options used, and not always in a consistent fashion.) As the waveform and
formula are alternatives it seems logical that they should be tagged. The speed and length
could be positional, but I would prefer to make them both optional, with default values of
440 Hz and 3 seconds. I seem to have come to an all-tagged solution; and that decision was
based on both my experience and my belief of how my program will be used. For now I
suggest that you accept it and we see how it goes. What we do need to decide is how to tag
the information. There are a number of tagging systems in general use. In traditional UNIX,
the normal method is to introduce a tag with a ‘‘minus sign,’’ and the tag is a single character. In DOS a similar system is used, except that a solidus ( / ) introduces the tag. In GNU/
Linux there is an increasing use of a double minus followed by a word to introduce a tag
(e.g. --waveform). For this program I am going to use the single minus tradition, and so I
will use -w, -f, -s, -t, and -o to introduce the waveform, formula, speed, duration,
and the output, respectively.
Remember that in a standard C implementation the command-line arguments are available in an array of strings, usually called argv, and that there is a count in an int variable
called argc. The count includes the name of the program as the ﬁrst value (stored in
argv[0]). To decode the command line, we have to loop through the arguments, see what
they are, and act accordingly. We look at the next item, see that it begins with a - , and then

406

Chapter 4

see which argument it describes. The code is familiar to most programmers from the UNIX
tradition:
double duration = 3.0;
double speed = 440.0;
char *output = NULL;
char *wavename = NULL;
int formula = -1;
enum ARG_RES {WAVEFORM_GIVEN, FORMULA_GIVEN};
typedef enum ARG_RESE ARG_RES;
ARG_RES decode_arguments(int argc, char **argv)
{
int i = 0;
char *a = argv[0];
while (--argc) {
a = argv[i];
if (a[0]=='-') { /* tag found */
switch (a[1]) {
case 'w': /* Waveform */
if (argc == 0) {
printf("No waveform argument\n"); exit(1);
}
wavename = argv[i+1];
argc--; i += 2;
break;
case 'f':
if (argc == 0) {
printf("No waveform argument\n"); exit(1);
}
if (strcmp(argv[i+1], "sine")==0)
formula = SINE;
else if (strcmp(argv[i+1], "cosine")==0)
formula = COSINE;
else {
printf("No valid formula name\n"); exit(1);
}
argc--; i += 2;
break;
case 's':
if (argc == 0) {
printf("No speed given\n"); exit(1);
}
speed = atof(argv[i+1]);

407

Introduction to Program Design

argc--; i += 2;
break;
case 't':
if (argc == 0) {
printf("No duration given\n"); exit(1);
}
duration = atof(argv[i+1]);
argc--; i += 2;
break;
case 'o':
if (argc == 0) {
printf("No output argument\n"); exit(1);
}
output = argv[i+1];
argc--; i += 2;
break;
}
}
else {
printf("No tag found\n"); exit(1);
}
}
/* Now the checks */
if (output == NULL) {
printf("No output file given\n"); exit(1);
}
if (waveform == NULL && formula == -1) {
printf("Neither waveform nor formula specified\n"); exit(1);
}
if (waveform != NULL && formula != -1) {
printf("Both waveform and formula specified\n"); exit(1);
}
if (waveform == NULL) return FORMULA_GIVEN;
else return WAVEFORM_GIVEN;
}
There are a variety of different forms to this function. One common interface is to allow
either -t 10 or -t10. Modifying this program to allow that format is not very hard, and
you might like to think about how to do it.
4.3.2

Graphical User Interface

The major issue with graphical user interfaces is that every platform has a different way
of dealing with and supporting graphics. One way to overcome this is to use a different

408

Chapter 4

programming system, one that is designed entirely to deal with user interfaces. There are a
small number of these; the simplest in many ways is Tcl/Tk.24 The language is slow to run,
and to some eyes it produces a rather simplistic and dull interface. Still, it is easy to create a
prototype interface, and if we already have the complete command-line interface then we
can use Tcl/Tk to call the existing program.25
The following fragment provides a form into which a user can type waveform names or
output names, select a formula, and/or give duration and speed. This form is used to call
the program we have been developing with a suitable command line. We have assumed
that our C program is called waveform.
message .title -width 10c -justify center \
-text "Waveform Interface"
pack .title
set formula 0
radiobutton .f0 -text "none" -variable formula -value 0
radiobutton .f1 -text "sine" -variable formula -value 1
radiobutton .f2 -text "cosine" -variable formula -value 2
pack .f0 .f1 .f2
set waveform ""
message .tw -width 10c -justify center -text "waveform"
entry .w -width 25 -relief sunken -borderwidth 2 \
-textvariable waveform
pack .tw .w
set output ""
message .to -width 10c -justify center -text "output"
entry .o -width 25 -relief sunken -borderwidth 2 \
-textvariable output
pack .to .o
set speed -1
message .ts -width 10c -justify center -text "speed"
entry .s -width 25 -relief sunken -borderwidth 2 \
-textvariable speed
pack .ts .s
set duration -1
message .tt -width 10c -justify center -text "duration"
entry .t -width 25 -relief sunken -borderwidth 2 \
-textvariable duration
pack .tt .t
button .ok -text "OK" -command do_it
button .bad -text "Exit" -command exit
pack .ok -side left
pack .bad -side right

409

Introduction to Program Design

proc do_it {} {
global formula; global waveform
global output;
global speed; global duration
set cc(0) "./waveform"
set cnt 1
if { $formula == 1} {
set cc(1) "-f"
set cc(2) "sine"
set cnt 3
} else {
if { $formula == 2} {
set cc(1) "-f"
set cc(2) "cosine"
set cnt 3
}
}
if { $waveform != ""} {
set cc($cnt) "-w"
incr cnt 1
set cc($cnt) "$waveform"
incr cnt 1
}
if { $output != ""} {
set cc($cnt) "-o"
incr cnt 1
set cc($cnt) "$output"
incr cnt 1
}
if { $speed != -1} {
set cc($cnt) "-s"
incr cnt 1
set cc($cnt) "$speed"
incr cnt 1
}
if { $duration != -1} {
set cc($cnt) "-t"
incr cnt 1
set cc($cnt) "$duration"
incr cnt 1
}
if { $cnt == 1 } {
exec $cc(0)

410

Chapter 4

} else {
if { $cnt == 3 } {
exec $cc(0) $cc(1) $cc(2)
} else {
if { $cnt == 5 } {
exec $cc(0) $cc(1) $cc(2) $cc(3) $cc(4)
} else {
if { $cnt == 7 } {
exec $cc(0) $cc(1) $cc(2) $cc(3) \
$cc(4) $cc(5) $cc(6)
} else {
if { $cnt == 9 } {
exec $cc(0) $cc(1) $cc(2) $cc(3) \
$cc(4) $cc(5) $cc(6) $cc(7) \
$cc(8)
} else {
if { $cnt == 11 } {
exec $cc(0) $cc(1) $cc(2) $cc(3) \
$cc(4) $cc(5) $cc(6) $cc(7) \
$cc(8) $cc(9) $cc(10)
}
}
}
}
}
}
tk_messageBox -message "Success! Output file: $output" -icon info
}
As a C programmer you may understand some of this. The ﬁrst section deﬁnes a number of
buttons and text boxes that are packed into a display box. The ‘‘OK’’ button has the function
do_it associated with it. This long but simple function constructs a call to exec with the
command-line arguments. The exec function is very similar to the C function for calling
an external programs execl(). This program is run using the Tcl/Tk interpreter wish.26
4.4

The Whole Program
We now have all the components of the program we started to write. The next stage is the
assembly of the whole program. There are still some organizational decisions to make. The
main one is between how many ﬁles to distribute the code. One could decide on a single
ﬁle, but except for very simple programs, or ‘‘throw-away’’ programs, it is usually better to
divide the program into logically connected units. The analysis process can be used for this

411

Introduction to Program Design

as well. The ﬁrst level of decomposition would be a suitable breakdown, and so we will
have three ﬁles: one for the creation of waveforms, one for the playing of waveforms, and
one for interface and control. There will also be the library code, with which we will link
our code.
4.4.1

Creation

Collecting the code from above, we get the following, after adding a few forward declarations
and including a header for the deﬁnitions of the types and functions:
#include "waveform.h"
#include <math.h>
WAVEFORM getnewform(int);
int readfile(WAVEFORM, FILE_HANDLE);
void put_val(WAVEFORM, int, double);
WAVEFORM getnewform(int);
enum ERRORS { ERR_NO_FILE=100,
ERR_NO_COUNT,
ERR_NO_DATA,
ERR_NO_FORMULA,
ERR_NO_MEMORY
};
void errormsg(char *format, enum ERRORS err)
{
fprintf(stderr, format, (int)err);
switch (err) {
case ERR_NO_FILE:
fprintf("\nfile not found\n");
return;
case ERR_NO_COUNT:
fprintf("\nno count in file\n");
return;
case ERR_NO_DATA:
fprintf("\ndata malformed\n");
return;
case ERR_NO_FORMULA:
fprintf("\nnot a valis formula\n");
return;
case ERR_NO_MEMORY:
return;
}
}

412

Chapter 4

int lengthoffile(FILE_HANDLE file)
{
FILE *ff = fopen(file, "r");
int count;
if (ff==NULL) return 0;
if (fscanf(ff, "%d", &count)!=1) {
fclose(ff);
return 0;
}
fclose(ff);
return count;
}
WAVEFORM readform(FILE_HANDLE file)
{
WAVEFORM xx;
int err;
xx = getnewform(lengthoffile(file));
if ((err=readfile(xx, file)) ==0) return xx;
error("Failed to read wave form for reason %d", err);
return NULL;
}
int readfile(WAVEFORM xx, FILE_HANDLE file)
{
int count, i;
double val;
FILE *ff = fopen(file, "r");
if (ff==NULL)
return ERR_NO_FILE;
if (fscanf(ff, "%d", &count)!=1)
return ERR_NO_COUNT;
for (i=0; i<count; i++) {
if (fscanf(ff, "%f", &val)!=1)
return ERR_NO_DATA;
put_val(xx, i, val);
}
fclose(ff);
return 0;
}
#define TRIG_SIZE (4096)
#define TWOPIBYSIZE (6.28318530718/(double)TRIG_SIZE)
WAVEFORM createformula(FORMULA trig)

413

Introduction to Program Design

{
WAVEFORM xx = getnewform(TRIG_SIZE);
int i;
double val;
for (i=0; i<TRIG_SIZE; i++) {
if (trig==SINE)
val = sin((double)i*TWOPIBYSIZE);
else if (trig==COSINE)
val = cos((double)i*TWOPIBYSIZE);
else return NULL;
put_val(xx, i, val);
}
xx->size = size;
return xx;
}
WAVEFORM getnewform(int size)
{
WAVEFORM xx =
(WAVEFORM)malloc((size-1)*sizeof(double)+sizeof(WAVE));
if (xx==NULL) {
error("Failed to allocate memory\n");
exit(1);
}
return xx;
}
void put_val(WAVEFORM xx, int i, double val)
{
xx->samples[i] = val;
}
This is still not satisfactory as production level code, as it is totally without comments. As
we have developed the code, the comments we did not provide can be found in the text of
this chapter. So we can now revisit the ﬁnal program and transfer the salient points of this
discussion into the code. As one gets more experience, this happens as one writes; but it
should not be neglected. In large projects sometimes the comments may be references to
some formal design document.
The header ﬁle, which includes the types and main declarations, is as follows:
#include <stdio.h>
enum FORMULAE { SINE, COSINE};
typedef enum FORMULAE FORMULA;

414

Chapter 4

typedef struct WaveForm {
int size;
double samples[1];
} WAVE;
typedef WAVE *WAVEFORM;
typedef char *FILE_HANDLE;
typedef double SPEED;
typedef int OUTPUT; /* For Portsf library */
#define sr (44100)
WAVEFORM readform(FILE_HANDLE);
WAVEFORM createformula(FORMULA);
void copywaveform(WAVEFORM, SPEED, OUTPUT, double);
4.4.2

Output Waveforms

The second major section of the program deals with the output from the waveforms stored
by the previous section. In addition to the header for this project we need to include the
header for the Portsf library that we will use. Apart from that, the program code is just a collection of the fragments we have developed above.
#include "waveform.h"
#include "portsf.h"
double waveform_val(WAVEFORM, int);
int output_sample(OUTPUT, double);
void copywaveform(WAVEFORM w, SPEED s, OUTPUT out, double T)
{
double index = 0.0;
int total_samps = (int)(T*sr);
int size = waveform_size(w);
int i;
for (i=0; i<total_samps; i++) {
double value = waveform_ival(w, index);
index += size*sr/s;
if (index >= size) index -= size;
output_sample(out, value);
}
}

415

Introduction to Program Design

int waveform_size(WAVEFORM w)
{
return w->size;
}
double waveform_val(WAVEFORM w, int which)
{
return w->samples[which];
}
double waveform_ival(WAVEFORM w, double which)
{
int x0 = (int)which;
int x1 = (int)(which+1.0);
double f0, f1;
if (x1>=waveform_size(w)) x1 = 0;
f0 = waveform_val(w,x0);
f1 = waveform_val(w,x1);
return f0 + (f1 - f0)*(which-x0);
}
OUTPUT initialize_sound(char *name, int srate)
{
PSF_PROPS inprops;
inprops.srate = (long)srate;
inprops.chans = 1L;
inprops.samptype = PSF_SAMP_16;
inprops.format = PSF_STDWAVE;
inprops.chformat = MC_MONO;
return psf_sndOpen(name, &inprops,0);
}
int output_sample(OUTPUT out, double sample)
{
short buffer[1];
buffer[0] = (short)(sample*32767.0);
if (psf_sndWriteShortFrames(out, buffer, 1) != 1L)
return 0;
return 1;
}
int close_sound(OUTPUT out)
{
psf_sndClose(out);
return 1;
}

416

Chapter 4

4.4.3

The Main Program

The ﬁnal section of the program is the top level, the main function, which includes decoding
of the arguments. I am only considering the C component, so the code is simple:
#include "waveform.h"
#include "portsf.h"
#include <string.h> /* for strcmp */
#include <stdlib.h> /* for atof */
double duration = 3.0;
double speed = 440.0;
char *output = NULL;
char *wavename = NULL;
int formula = -1;
enum ARG_RESE {WAVEFORM_GIVEN, FORMULA_GIVEN};
typedef enum ARG_RESE ARG_RES;
/* Decode the command line and indicate which style of input is
given */
ARG_RES decode_arguments(int argc, char **argv)
{
int i = 0;
char *a = argv[0];
while (--argc) {
a = argv[i];
if (a[0]=='-') { /* tag found */
switch (a[1]) {
case 'w': /* Waveform */
if (argc == 0) {
printf("No waveform argument\n"); exit(1);
}
wavename = argv[i+1];
argc--; i += 2;
break;
case 'f': /* formula name */
if (argc == 0) {
printf("No waveform argument\n"); exit(1);
}
if (strcmp(argv[i+1], "sine")==0)
formula = SINE;
else if (strcmp(argv[i+1], "cosine")==0)
formula = COSINE;
else { /* we do not have this function yet */

417

Introduction to Program Design

printf("No valid formula name\n"); exit(1);
}
argc--; i += 2;
break;
case 's':
if (argc == 0) {
printf("No speed given\n"); exit(1);
}
speed = atof(argv[i+1]);
argc--; i += 2;
break;
case 't':
if (argc == 0) {
printf("No duration given\n"); exit(1);
}
duration = atof(argv[i+1]);
argc--; i += 2;
break;
case 'o':
if (argc == 0) {
printf("No output argument\n"); exit(1);
}
output = argv[i+1];
argc--; i += 2;
break;
}
}
else {
printf("No tag found\n"); exit(1);
}
}
/* Now the checks */
if (output == NULL) {
printf("No output file given\n"); exit(1);
}
if (wavename == NULL && formula == -1) {
printf("Neither waveform nor formula specified\n");
exit(1);
}
if (wavename != NULL && formula != -1) {
printf("Both waveform and formula specified\n");
exit(1);
}

418

Chapter 4

if (wavename == NULL) return FORMULA_GIVEN;
else return WAVEFORM_GIVEN;
}
int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
int format = decode_arguments(argc, argv);
OUTPUT ff;
WAVEFORM xx;
psf_init();
if (format==WAVEFORM_GIVEN)
xx = readform(wavename);
else
xx = createformula(formula);
ff = initialize_sound(output, sr);
copywaveform(xx, speed, ff, duration);
close_sound(ff);
return 0;
}
4.4.4

Compiling and Linking with the Library

The last stage in the creation of the program is to arrange that it all gets compiled and linked
with the library. The details of how to achieve this goal depend somewhat on the operating
system and the compiler suite you are using. If you are using Visual Studio Express on
Windows or Xcode on the Macintosh, you expect to use the provided IDE. I, on the other
hand, have been writing this program on a GNU/Linux machine, and so I expect to write
my own Makeﬁle.
The creation of Makeﬁles is sometimes considered a black art, but if the application is not
too complex it is not really that complex or difﬁcult. The Makeﬁle consists of rules with three
parts: what we want to create, what needs to exist previously, and how to perform the task.
The main pitfall is that the tab character is considered to be different from a sequence of
single-character spaces.27
I have called the three ﬁles rd.c, out.c, and main.c. So, at least for GNU/Linux, the rules are
as follows:
rd.o: rd.c waveform.h
cc -c -g rd.c
out.o: out.c waveform.h portsf.h
cc -c -g out.c
main.o: main.c waveform.h portsf.h
cc -c -g main.c

419

Introduction to Program Design

where the lines with initial spaces (e.g. ‘cc -c -g rd.c’ actually start with tabs. You will see
that the object ﬁles depend on the sources and the headers. The make program is ensures
that if a ﬁle is changed (as shown by a date change) then things that depend on it will
be rebuilt. The target is before the colon, the dependencies are on the same line, and the
commands are on a number of lines that start with a tab. The default target is the ﬁrst rule,
so we may add an initial rule:
waveform: rd.o out.o main.o portsf.a
cc -o waveform rd.o out.o main.o portsf.a -lm
This assumes that the library exists, but just for completeness I have added lines to create the
library; these could be improved but are sufﬁcient for now. The whole makeﬁle becomes
waveform: rd.o out.o main.o portsf.a
cc -o waveform rd.o out.o main.o portsf.a -lm
rd.o: rd.c waveform.h
cc -c -g rd.c
out.o: out.c waveform.h portsf.h
cc -c -g out.c
main.o: main.c waveform.h portsf.h
cc -c -g main.c
portsf.a: portsf.c ieee80.c portsf.h ieee80.h
cc -c portsf.c
cc -c ieee80.c
ar rv portsf.a portsf.o ieee80.o
rm portsf.o ieee80.o
4.5

Principles of Testing
It is tempting to think that we have ﬁnished, but that would be too easy. We have not
checked in any way that the program works. Privately I have run the make command28
and had no errors in the build. I also have run it with no arguments and got the message
No output file given (which was true). But that is hardly enough to give one any sense
of conﬁdence or belief in the program. We have to test it.
In the ﬁeld of software engineering, testing is a process that has its own methodologies
and language. This is not the time to go into great detail, but there are a few basic lessons
to learn.
The main purpose of testing it to see that the program does what the initial speciﬁcation of
the program asked for. Obviously, if we had been asked to design and build a waveform
player it would not be acceptable to deliver a Web browser, even if it was a good Web
browser. The purpose of systematic testing it to ensure that we have written the correct

420

Chapter 4

program; which is to say that it does what it was asked, and that it satisﬁes other, often unwritten requirements: not crashing, possibly running at a sufﬁcient speed, or using limited
machine resources. In our case we need to ensure that it can read a waveform, or create one
from all of our formulae, and that it can create the output speciﬁed. This is where we hit the
ﬁrst problem. Except in trivial cases, we cannot test all possible inputs, so we must select
examples that we think will typify all. It also shows that when we run a test, we should
have determined in advance what output we expect. Formal testing methods want: a list of
tests, reasons for the tests, and the expected outcome of the tests; but we can be a little less
formal for this simple program.
In this process, we realize the fact that since not ‘‘all’’ inputs can be tested, testing can
show the existence of bugs but not the absence of bugs. Thus, if we test it carefully and thoroughly, we may have conﬁdence in the program, but we cannot be certain that there are no
bad cases. The only way to achieve that is via the processes of program proving, and that is
both hard and currently unreliable. There is a technique called bebugging where a known
number of errors are deliberately inserted into a program before the testers start (who must
be a different team of programmers). If the testers ﬁnd all the inserted bugs then we may
believe that they have been thorough, and they are unlikely to be unknown bugs remaining.
If the testers only ﬁnd half the inserted bugs, then they probably only found about half of
the unknown ones.
There are two main styles of testing: white-box and black-box. In black-box testing, the
testers are not allowed to look at the code, but test the whole program, as if it were an
opaque black box, to see if it conforms with the speciﬁcation. In white-box testing, the
testers are allowed to look at the code, and so devise tests aimed at speciﬁc components.
Typically these are loops which might be ‘‘off by one,’’ running either one time too many
or one time too few. This type of error is also known as a fencepost problem.29
So to test our program we need to devise a small set of examples, the results of which we
know. I suggest that there are two basic cases we need to address—the formula and the
‘‘read-in’’ wave. To test the formulae, we need to specify both sine and cosine, and to output
it at a small number of frequencies. As long as we can plot the output with a sound editor we
should be able to see that the output is the correct function, and we should be able to test
that the frequency is the requested value. For the ﬁle-based input we could use a sine wave,
and compare it with the formula system, and use square-waves and impulse waves which
should allow the results to be easily examined.
4.5.1

Initial Tests

The ﬁrst test is to create a sine wave by formula:
waveform -f sine -o xxx.wav
If we try this, we get the error message No tag found. That is not what we want, so there is
an error that we must ﬁx before we can perform any more testing. Looking at the code, we

421

Introduction to Program Design

see that that this error message comes from the function decode_arguments, so we will
look there ﬁrst.
There are about three main techniques for ﬁnding the source of bugs. The best is to think.
The second, and perhaps most common, is to add print statements at various places in the
program; this can generate rather a lot of information, and then one needs to resort to thinking again. The third method is to do a paper calculation of what the computer should do—
a simple variant of this is to use single stepping of the program, either at the source or at the
binary level.
Using this method, just by reading the code I saw one error; the ﬁrst argument to be
decoded was argv[0], which is the program name, rather that argv[1]. We started the
variable i from 0 rather than 1. We can correct this, recompile, and try again. As is common,
our ﬁrst error was a fencepost error.
Our second attempt is more encouraging; the program runs to completion, but on looking
for the output there is none. This suggests that the program has generated the answers, but
either we did not output them or we have not created the output ﬁle correctly. A little more
thought suggests the later, as there is no ﬁle generated at all. Either it was not opened correctly, or was not closed correctly. We will start by looking at the functions initialize_
sound that opens the output ﬁle, and close_sound that terminates it. Finding the error
may be quick for you, but for me it took quite a time. My program has misused the Portsf
library; I have called the function to read a soundﬁle rather than the function to create a
new soundﬁle. Before correcting this error, it is worth reﬂecting on how it was made. Was it
bad documentation in the library, or carelessness on my part? Figuring out this mistake now,
we may be able to ensure that we do not make the same mistake again, or at the very least
recognize it quicker next time. Actually in this case, it is a personal problem of mild dyslexia;
I frequently have problems distinguishing in and out, and read and write, and I tend to ﬂip
them.
Fixing the code is now a bit more complex. The function we wanted was psf_sndCreate.
It takes two more arguments: a minimum header and an access code. My revised function is
now
OUTPUT initialize_sound(char *name, int srate)
{
PSF_PROPS inprops;
inprops.srate = (long)srate;
inprops.chans = 1L;
inprops.samptype = PSF_SAMP_16;
inprops.format = PSF_STDWAVE;
inprops.chformat = MC_MONO;
return psf_sndCreate(name, &inprops, 0, 0, PSF_CREATE_RDWR);
}

422

Chapter 4

Now I can rebuild (remake) and retest. This time I get output. Looking at it with a sound
editor such as Audacity, I see that it is a sine wave, it is 3 seconds long, and the default frequency sounds correct. To conﬁrm that the frequency output ‘‘is’’ correct, my next test is
waveform -o xxx.wav -f sine -s 10
This should produce a 3-second sine wave at 10 Hz. Counting up to 10 cycles in a second is
easy, and it worked as expected.
Further experiments I made with the -t also seem to work, as do tests with cosine:
./waveform -o xxx.wav -f cosine -s 2 -t 1
Testing the ﬁle input is the next stage. First we need to create a suitable input ﬁle. There
are many ways of doing this but my way would be to write a small program. I suppose it
could be argument that we ought to do a formal design exercise for this, but I am not going
to. We can create a 1,024-point sine wave using the code from createformula:
#define SIZE (1024)
#define TWOPIBYSIZE (6.28318530718/(double)SIZE)
int main(void)
{
int i;
printf("%d\n", SIZE);
for (i=0; i<SIZE; i++)
printf("%f\n", sin((double)i*TWOPIBYSIZE));
}
Testing with this wavetable worked. We can build and run this as shown below:
cc -o sine1024 create_test.c
./sine1024
./sine1024 > sine1024.txt
./waveform -o xxx.wav -w sine1024.txt -s 4 -t 2
./waveform -o xxx.wav -w sine1024.txt -s 440 -t 2
There are still a number of tests that should be considered, but for now this will do.
4.5.2

Maintenance and Development

After initial testing, a program is rarely ﬁnished. In use, a program can be seen to have deﬁciencies in design, or new requirements may emerge. Even in our simple program one might
wish to add more formulae, or improve the user interface with respect to checking. This is
the area of maintenance.

423

Introduction to Program Design

Whenever a report is received about a deﬁciency in the program, one must distinguish
a bug report from a new feature request. After the release of a program, reported bugs are an
indication of a testing failure or a testing weakness. Getting a small, simple bug example is
a useful exercise. It is much easier to ﬁnd a bug in a small program rather than one that exercises more of the code. The other advantage is that the example can be kept for future testing. This is called reversion testing, where a new version is run against all previously reported
errors; it is quite amazing how errors that one thinks they have ﬁxed can reappear. Over time
this can strengthen the test suite. Finding bugs is much the same as in the testing process:
thinking, printing, and stepping.
Developing new facilities can be a little different. It can be useful to revisit the design documentation to see how the facility ﬁts within the overall design. If, for example, there is a
request for a formula for a square wave (if we do not concern ourselves with issues of bandlimiting), then it will be clear that we need to change decode_arguments so we can recognize the word ‘square’:
case 'f':
if (argc == 0) {
printf("No waveform argument\n"); exit(1);
}
if (strcmp(argv[i+1], "sine")==0)
formula = SINE;
else if (strcmp(argv[i+1], "cosine")==0)
formula = COSINE;
else if (strcmp(argv[i+1], "square")==0) /* New code */
formula = SQUARE;
else {
printf("No valid formula name\n"); exit(1);
}
argc--; i += 2;
break;
case 's':
if (argc == 0) {
printf("No speed given\n"); exit(1);
}
. . .
We would have to extend the enumeration type in waveform.h:
enum FORMULAE { SINE, COSINE, SQUARE};
And we would have to make a small change in createformula:
for (i=0; i<TRIG_SIZE; i++) {
if (trig==SINE)

424

Chapter 4

val = sin((double)i*TWOPIBYSIZE);
else if (trig==COSINE)
val = cos((double)i*TWOPIBYSIZE);
else if (trig==SQUARE)
/* New code */
val = (i<TRIG_SIZE/2 ? 1.0 : -1.0);
else return NULL;
put_val(xx, i, val);
}
We can see from the design that this is all that would be required if we wanted to add square
waves to the test system.30
If the requested development is more extensive, such as changing the output to optionally
generate sound directly, then the design documents show what components need to be
changed and which will still be functional. Consider some developments to the system,
such as other formulae. Also consider how difﬁcult is would be to add a band-limited version
of the square wave. In software development there is always a possibility that a requested
change would be so great that it does not ﬁt the overall design. In this case it will be a judgment call based on experience whether to expand the current design (a redesign), to refuse to
implement the feature, or to design a whole new program.
Another aspect of maintenance that is problematic is to review the whole program and
consider if there are any oddities of inefﬁciencies. In the program above, I noticed that the
design of the reading of waveforms from a ﬁle has an inelegance and inefﬁciency. We open
the ﬁle to read the length of the form in the function lengthoffile, and then close the
ﬁle, only to reopen it in readfile. There are two attitudes to this kind of thing; the ﬁrst is
summarized in the phrase ‘‘If it ain’t broke, don’t ﬁx it.’’ The second is to view such things as
design failures, and as a maintenance activity this is an area of the code to redesign and
rebuild. Doing this is left as an exercise.
4.6

Conclusion
In this chapter we have followed the processes by which we can go from an idea for a program, through design by object reﬁnement, to a working program that is tested and so we
have reasonable conﬁdence in its accuracy. The traditional model of software development
acknowledges that half of the effort goes into continuing maintenance and development,
which is often not apparent when caught up in the difﬁculties of learning to write a program
at all. We have seen how the design document can be a continuing help, in understanding
errors and in guiding the long-term maintenance of the system. Programs are rarely ﬁnished,
and frequently live for many years.31 A good design is a ﬁrm foundation on which to build,
or even survive.

425

4.7

Introduction to Program Design

Exercises
Exercise 4.7.1
The waveform program does not have any control of amplitude (or gain, or volume). Design
a new user interface option and implement a way of changing the amplitude of the output.
Exercise 4.7.2
A useful addition to the program is a ‘‘help—usage’’ message, printing options (tags) and
their use. This can be printed when a wrong option is used, or when the program is given
no arguments. Design and implement a solution to add this functionality to the program.
Exercise 4.7.3
Currently, our program produces sounds a wave table that is deﬁned in a ﬁle or by a formula.
The latter is limited to ‘sine’ or ‘cosine,’ as well as non-band-limited ‘square’. Extend these
options to incorporate band-limited sawtooth (harmonics with a 1/N weight, where N is harmonic number), square (1/N but only odd harmonics), and triangle (odd harmonics, 1/N 2 )
using a Fourier series method. Note that some design decisions will have to be made: How
many harmonics? How would they be deﬁned? How to set up the user interface?
Exercise 4.7.4
Design a third modiﬁcation to the program that will apply a trapezoidal amplitude envelope
to the sound output. This envelope is characterized by a rise time, when the amplitude goes
from 0 to the maximum; and a decay time, calculated backward from the end of the total
duration, when the amplitude goes from maximum to 0. (Hint: the amplitude control added
in exercise 1 will now need to be a time-varying function.)

Notes
1. Representation: We say that a waveform must be ‘‘represented’’ in the computer rather than simply put
into the computer. At the most basic level, a digital computer can only store binary bit-patterns. Thus, if
we are storing numbers, characters or more complex entities, like fragments of audio, we need to decide
how to represent these complex entities in this trivial binary format. Languages like C provide direct representation for numbers and characters; but representing anything more complex must be constructed
from numbers and characters using the arrays and structs of C. We distinguish the abstract from the concrete representation of an object. An abstract representation concerns the way an object is built from simpler components; whereas a concrete representation directly concerns the mapping of the abstract
representation to numbers, characters, and bit patterns.
2. In saying this, I am consciously using the title of Donald Knuth’s seminal work, The Art of Computer
Programming. It remains one of the professional programmer’s main references. The title itself reﬂects the
fact that while there may be technology or even science in the subject, at the heart of a computer program is inspiration and intelligent design. Like a painter when choosing and creating the perfect blend

426

Chapter 4

of colors; or the composer’s brilliant orchestration of a beautiful melody, a good programmer makes
good choices. And these ‘‘good choices’’ are informed by both knowledge and experience. If you really
want to go deeply into programming, Knuth’s multi-volume work is required reading; but beware
that Knuth is a mathematician, and the book can be daunting to the algebraically and numerically
challenged.
3. I can try! The ﬁrst form might make it easier to have multiple waveforms in existence, and if we ever
wish to extend the program to include mixing of different waveforms, then I suspect that this formulation will make it easier. The second form still begs the question of how one creates an empty representation, and so will lead to another function being required. Also, I have had a mathematical education
that has emphasized the function as creating things rather than modifying things. I can well understand
that you may have the other view, and you are entitled to it. However you will have to do the exercise of
reproducing this chapter with the other decision.
4. Speciﬁcation: A clear description of what the program is to do, either in text or possibly using some
formal system.
5. There is a whole area of computing, algebraic computation, which is concerned with the representation and manipulation of algebraic forms. Its scope is beyond this book, but the interested reader may
ﬁnd interest in a rather old paper (David Barton and John Fitch, ‘‘The Application of Symbolic Algebra
Systems to Physics,’’ Reports on Progress in Physics 35, 1972: 235–314) or in a more detailed book ( James
Davenport, Yvon Siret, and Evelyne Tournier, Computer Algebra, Systems and Algorithms for Algebraic Computation, Academic Press, 1993).
6. Of course we could write a program to generate the program, but then this new program must be
ﬁnite; we could have a tower of such programs creating programs, but the tower must be ﬁnite to qualify
as an algorithm.
7. Strictly we do not require ﬁnite time, but if we are generating an inﬁnite sequence, like the primes,
the nth answer must appear in ﬁnite time.
8. This is not a deduction, but is actually a design decision. It would be possible to create a design that
started with an empty waveform and, as it was deﬁned from the ﬁle, its internal representation changed
and expanded to the given size. I chose not to do things that way, as my experience tells me that that is
likely to be more complex that the version in the text, and I like to write the simple solutions ﬁrst, and
reconsider the issue later if necessary. The methodology does however identify and isolate these decisions, so if I do decide to revisit this decision, then I have an idea of how much of the program will be
affected.
9. I take this format for simplicity, but if one wanted to have a sample rate as part of the ﬁle then that is
an easy extension and you may like to consider how much it changes the overall program. I just decided
to maintain simplicity at this initial stage. I like the evolutionary development of software, whereby we
add features in an incremental way, using the initial analysis as the guide. For now we will stick to
monophonic samples.
10. This is certainly true in C89; more recent C standards have made changes in this area, but it is still
better to avoid variable-sized arrays for cross-platform compilation.

427

Introduction to Program Design

11. I suppose strictly, as we posed the problem, only the ﬁrst is a direct solution; but as when we started
we were rather unclear as to what we meant, I feel that we can even at this late stage revise what we
had in mind. Of course, if you object to this, you are at liberty to take the other route. You will need to
modify the WAVEFORM representation to remember the initial speed, and similar changes will be needed
in the sine and cosine functions. The other differences should become obvious as we progress.
12. You might like to think about this when the program is complete, and see if this decision added
complexity, or was neutral.
13. I am reminded of a cartoon I saw in an Indian newspaper, where a teacher is saying: ‘‘The problems
for the exam will be similar to those discussed in class. Of course the numbers will be different; but not
all of them—Pi will still be 3.14159. . . .’’
14. You may ask why these are coded as functions rather than directly reading from the structures. The
answer lies in the whole approach to software design we are using. The actions are logically separated
from the representation, and we use these selector functions to provide the ﬁnal link. This would allow
a total change of the representation without changing the main code, and avoids the problems of
searching for all relevant occurrences.
15. But this is the case. If the x is squared, then the function is a quadratic; if the x is cubed, then it is a
cubic, and so forth. We will use these ideas in a short while.
16. In take two points to deﬁne a straight line, three points for a quadratic, four for a cubic and so forth.
You might like to think about why this is so.
17. If you are excessively clever, you will realize that cubic interpolation can be done with only one
point, but the code is even harder, and if you are willing to admit such poor waveforms then it is hardly
worth bothering with interpolation.
18. For technical overviews, see the following: T. Laakso, V. Valimaki, M. Karjalainen, and U. Laine,
‘‘Splitting the Unit Delay,’’ IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 13 (1996), no. 1: 30–60; R. Schafer and L.
Rabiner, ‘‘A Digital Signal Processing Approach to Interpolation,’’ Proceedings of the IEEE 61(1973, no. 6:.
692–702.
19. I am never certain whether to use true to mean success and false to mean failure or to use 0 to mean
OK and a non-zero value to be an error code. This latter version is more general and extensible, but the
simplicity of Boolean values is also attractive.
20. Geeks.
21. Yes they are ‘‘simple,’’ but they will involve learning some new computer language.
22. I was told many years ago that ‘expert’ came from ‘ex’ (meaning used-to-be or has-been) and ‘spurt’
(meaning drip under pressure).
23. Why not 0 for sine and 1 for cosine?
24. Perl/Tk is perhaps more ﬂexible, but with a much steeper initial learning curve, and systems like Qt
can generate more aesthetically beautiful interfaces, but are also more complex. Tcl/Tk is well described
in John K. Ousterhout’s book Tcl and the Tk Toolkit (Addison-Wesley, 1994).

428

Chapter 4

25. Superﬁcially the Tcl language is like C, but in fact there are major differences.
26. If you have the Tcl script in a ﬁle called interface.tcl, and the waveform program is in the same directory, you can run this using the wish command: $ wish interface.tcl.
27. Stu Feldman, who invented the ‘‘Make’’ idea, admits that this was a mistake, but by the time he realized it, he had a user community of about 10 whom he did not want to upset. This is considered by some
people to be one of the largest mistakes in the history of software development, as now thousands of
programmers are confused by this decision.
28. To run make, provided you are in the same directory as your Makeﬁle, just type: $ make. Once this is
built, you can run your program by typing its name preceded by ‘./’ (to indicate you mean the program
that is in the same directory you are in): $ ./waveform.
29. One possible source for this name is the problem of how many fence posts you need for a 100-yardlong fence with posts every yard.
30. Note that the square wave as deﬁned here is non-band-limited as it contains ‘‘straight corners’’ at
the transitions between 1 and 1. A better implementation would be to add band-limited square waves
using the Fourier series (see exercises).
31. In the late 1960s I wrote an algebra system for use in my research into cosmology; the program survived and was used by a small community and myself for more than 20 years. My design was not good in
many ways, and in ﬁxing errors I frequently complained about the original author who did not know
how to design, and left no documentation. Unfortunately, I was that original programmer. I am attempting to protect you from the pain I suffered from that program.

Audio Programming Essentials

5

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

Victor Lazzarini

5.1

Signals
Signals can be deﬁned as information carriers and, more compactly, as functions that can
describe that information. In the case of music, signals are generally deﬁned as onedimensional functions of time, or sometimes space, but can also assume other forms. These
functions will describe a pattern of variation of some parameter; in the case of musical signals, this parameter can be the pressure measured at a point in space, the velocity of air
particles, voltage changes in a circuit, etc. The value of such functions at a certain time t is
known as the signal amplitude. A function of time describing an arbitrary musical signal
(which can be anything from a sinusoid to Stockhausen’s Kontakte) is normally notated as
f (t) and read as function f of t. This means that we are interested in the pattern variations
that are associated with the independent variable t, in this case, conventionally, the ‘‘passing
time.’’ Such functions can assume either continuous or discrete forms. The former occurs
when the function is deﬁned for all possible (inﬁnitesimal) values of t, so it depends on
continuous variables and describes a continuous-time signal. The latter is related to functions
that are only deﬁned for discrete values of t, representing sequences of values that make up a
discrete-time signal. If certain conditions are met, these two types of signals can be considered
equivalent.
Continuous-time functions whose output, the signal amplitude, is also a continuous value
describe what is called an analog signal. Examples of such functions can be found in the
air pressure measured at the tympanic membrane, the output voltage of a microphone, the
magnetic imprints on an audio cassette tape. This type of signal cannot be handled by computers, which are limited by their available memory and internal data representations. In
order to process audio in a computer, we will have to use a signal that is both discrete-time
and discrete-amplitude, in other words, using a function whose output will assume only a
certain number of discrete values. This type of signal is called a digital signal.
The class of discrete-time signals, to which digital signals belong, will be deﬁned by functions in which the independent variable is not continuous, so that it can be treated as an
index to a sequence of values. To avoid confusion, we can notate such functions as f (n),

432

Chapter 5

Table 5.1
A function table.
n

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

...

f(n)

0

-1

2

0

-2

0

4

...

where n, which represents time, is effectively a time index. Such discrete-time signals are
sequences of values, as in
f (n) ¼ {0, 1, 2, 0, 2, 0, 4, . . . },
in which a value in the sequence can be accessed by its index n:
f (0) ¼ 0, f (4) ¼ 2.
A function table can also be built out of such functions—see table 5.1. Such structures can
be useful to hold pre-calculated functions, so that the program has to do the math only
once, after which it need only look up the function values in the table.
5.2

Digital Signals
As deﬁned above, digital signals are discrete-time signals whose output will only assume a
ﬁnite number of values, or states. They can be obtained from an analog signal by a process
of sampling followed by quantization. The former operation measures and obtains values
from the analog signal at discrete points in time. Each value is known as a sample. The output of this operation, which is a continuous-amplitude signal, is then passed through a
quantizer. This assigns discrete states to each value of its input, producing a digital signal.
The exact components and operation of an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) are not of
interest here. However, it is important to investigate the two steps of sampling and quantization in order to gain an insight into the generated signal.
5.2.1

Sampling

For the type of discrete-time signals we will be discussing here, the sampling process is one of
obtaining values off an input signal at evenly spaced time points. This means that the process is periodic, i.e. that it happens at a ﬁxed time interval. The period of time that elapses
between each sampling operation is called the sampling period. Its reciprocal, or the number
of sampling operations in a given space of time, is the sampling frequency or rate. This is the
fundamental attribute of the process, which will determine the amount of data that is
obtained from the analog signal for a given signal duration.
Another consequence of this operation, directly related to the sampling rate, is that it
limits the type of signals that can be successfully converted. This means that the output
signals are effectively equivalent to their analog inputs, and that they can be recovered, or

433

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

Figure 5.1
Snapshots from a rotating wheel: (a) 8 frames per cycle, (b) 4 frames per cycle.

Figure 5.2
Snapshots from a rotating wheel: (a) 2 frames per cycle, (b) 1.75 frame per cycle.

re-converted, back into continuous-time counterparts. In order to understand this, let us use
a visual metaphor for the sampling process.
Consider a steadily rotating wheel from which we take regular snapshots at a certain time
interval (ﬁgure 5.1). This is equivalent to sampling, and the time interval between snapshots
is the sampling period. If we take eight pictures each revolution, we will be picking up the
movement of the wheel perfectly; if we animate the pictures at the right rate, we will see
the wheel rotating at its original speed. Now let us reduce the number of pictures by half
and pick up one snapshot out of every two. In this case, although we have increased the
sampling interval (and reduced the sampling rate), we can still plot the rotating wheel’s
movement correctly.
If we double the sampling interval again, the speed of the wheel’s rotation will still be
plotted correctly (ﬁgure 5.2a). However, we seem to be at the limit, as now we are only picking up two different positions in its movement. In fact, there can be an ambiguity in relation

434

Chapter 5

to the direction of the wheel movement (clockwise or counterclockwise). Things start to go
wrong here.
Consider now increasing the sampling interval by a small amount, by say 25 percent of
the previous value (ﬁgure 5.2b). Now we will be picking up the wheel moving a little beyond
halfway in relation to the start position in one sampling interval. The result is that it would
appear as if the wheel is rotating in the opposite direction to which it was originally. On top
of that, if we animate it at the right rate, the speed of the wheel will appear to be slower than
what it was originally. In other words, our discrete-time representation of the rotating wheel
is defective; it does not match the original continuous-time rotating wheel. This was rotating
at a speed that was beyond what our sampling process could represent. This movement produced a signal that was impossible to represent in discrete-time using that particular sampling frequency, resulting in a misrepresentation, which is often referred to as aliasing. (On
the DVD, you will ﬁnd a simple animation program that demonstrates this principle.)
We have discovered the fundamental theorem of sampling that tells us that in order to
pick up something that changes at a certain frequency, we need to use at least twice that frequency for sampling. The wheel moved at X rpm, we needed a sampling frequency of at least
2X shots per minute. Transferring this analogy to audio signals, we will see that the highest
frequency that can be represented will be half the sampling frequency. The audio CD standard sets the sampling rate at 44,100 hertz (Hz), so it means that we will be able to encode
signals up to 22,050 Hz. Since, for all practical purposes, our hearing will have a frequency
range of 20–20,000 Hz, this should be enough to convert analog musical signals to discretetime signals.
5.2.2

Quantization

So far we have been discussing discrete-time signals, which are not always digital. To make
them digital, we will have to apply the operation of quantization to the output of the sampling process. This involves ﬁnding a numerical value that will represent the input signal,
mapping it to that value. Digital conversion is an example of audio coding, because it
involves an encoding (and decoding) process. It is important to bear that in mind, even
though for practical reasons we tend to think that digital signals are the same as the analog
ones our ears capture.
The numerical value that is the result of the encoding process will apply to a range of
inputs. The process generally involves checking if an input falls within a particular region
and then output the numerical code that corresponds to that region. There will be a ﬁnite
number of regions or quantizing levels between the maximum and minimum values of an
input signal. The number of them and their ranges will be determined by the form and
precision of encoding. The most common types of digital signals, including the ones that
are discussed in most parts this book, are generated using Pulse Code Modulation (PCM)
encoding.

435

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

Figure 5.3
Linear PCM quantization using 5 bits (32 states) of a sinusoid. The squares indicate the samples output
by the quantizer.

5.2.3

Pulse Code Modulation

Digital signals generated by PCM conversion have two basic characteristics:
1. The quantization process is linear. (The full name for PCM is Linear PCM.)
2. The numerical codes generated represent discrete signal amplitude steps, making it easy to
understand and manipulate.
Linear quantization splits up the available amplitude range into a number of regions of equal
width (ﬁgure 5.3). This can be seen as an equivalent to the sampling process, but now
applied to the amplitudes, not the time. The number of regions used will depend on the
available range of numbers for encoding, or, effectively, the number of bits allocated to
each output value.
Computer hardware uses a binary format to represent data, manipulating information on a
basis of two states: on (1) and off (0). The aforementioned bit is the basic unit of information
in the binary system; in fact it is short for ‘binary digit’. In order to be able to represent more
than two states, a computer uses a group of bits. For instance, a bit can only have two states
(0 and 1), but two bits can have four states (00, 01, 10, and 11). In general, n bits can have 2 n
unique states. Thus, with eight bits we can count from 0 to 255 (256 states), and with 16 bits
we can have 65,536 states. For a bipolar signal, such as a waveform, conventionally the

436

Chapter 5

amplitude range in this case will be from 32,768 to þ32,767. In the case of these signals,
the maximum absolute amplitude is said to be 2 n1 . Encoding then can use any number
of bits, which will determine the number of quantization levels. This process effectively
means that there will be some loss of information along the way. The amount of loss will
depend largely on the precision of the encoding, so that with more regions covering the
signal amplitude range, the smaller the loss will be and the closer the output will be to
the input.
The loss of information known as quantization error is the difference between the value
output by the quantizer and the continuous-amplitude input. In PCM, we can assume that
the quantized output will be equivalent to a continuous-value input at the center of the
region. So the maximum error will happen when the detected value is at the boundary
between two regions, or half the region width. The error will be then subject to the region
width, which in turn is determined by the number of bits used in coding.
Quantization error is generally described as system noise and thus can determine the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of a digital signal. The SNR can be described, in simple terms,1 as
the ratio of the maximum absolute signal amplitude (2 n1 , with region width 1 and a bipolar
signal) to the maximum quantization error (0.5):
SNR ¼

2n1
¼ 2n.
0.5

It is often more common to express the SNR in terms of signal pressure (amplitude)
levels (SPL), in the dB scale, which is equivalent to the root-mean-square (RMS) level of a
signal. This is deﬁned as 20 times the base-10 logarithm of the SNR, as in the following
equation:
SNR dB ¼ 20 log10 2 n ¼ n  20 log10 2 ¼ 6.02  n.
Thus, for 24-bit PCM we would have roughly 144 dB of dynamic range. However, this indicates the maximum SNR, and applies only to a full-scale signal (using all the possible range);
the actual value will decrease with the signal level. This is because the average amount of
quantization error, and thus the noise amplitude, is generally said to be constant and independent of the signal amplitude. Lower signal amplitudes would be more severely affected by
noise. This is one of the most problematic aspects of linear PCM.
On the upside, PCM gives us signals that are easy to understand and comparable to their
analog counterparts. In an analog signal, such as a continuous waveform, we have a quantity
(amplitude) that varies continuously in time. In PCM, we have equivalently the same signal,
except that amplitudes are deﬁned discretely and the signal is a sequence of such amplitudes.
We can assume that, if the conditions for equivalence are met, we are dealing with similar
types of signals. This effectively means that many concepts that were evolved to deal with
analog signals can be easily adapted to deal with PCM signals. Unless, otherwise stated, we
will assume PCM encoding for all digital signals discussed in this book.

437

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

Figure 5.4
The trigonometric circle.

5.3

Simple Signals: Sinusoids
A very basic type of musical signal is the sinusoid waveform. In fact, it is so basic that we can
describe more complicated signals as collections or sums of sinusoids. So it is a signal that is
worth investigating. The sinusoid is a general name given to waves that have a particular
shape, of which the sine and cosine waves are special cases. These types of waves are conventionally described as functions of time (but could as well be deﬁned as functions of space,
etc.). Such functions will output the value of the sine (or cosine) of an angle as it varies in
time:
s(t) ¼ sin(ot).

(1)

You can see why the above expression deﬁnes a function of time (t): the sine angle
changes as t increases. So for a given o, the angle will change by that amount every time t
increases by 1.
From trigonometry, we remember that the sine of an angle is the ratio of the length of the
side of the right triangle opposite to it (0 in ﬁgure 5.4) to the hypotenuse H. Conventionally,
we make H ¼ 1, so that the sine becomes 0. The cosine is then the adjacent side A to the
angle. As shown in the ﬁgure, the values of the sines and cosines are effectively the amplitudes of y and x (on the vertical and horizontal axes), corresponding to the plot of the different points in the circle (called a trigonometric circle), as the angle that the line from the
origin to the circle makes with the horizontal axis varies from 0 to 2p radians.2 In other
words, sines and cosines can be seen as plots of rotating wheels. The rate of rotation o is

438

Chapter 5

how fast the angle varies with time, determining the frequency of the sine wave (the number
of revolutions per unit time). If our time is being measured in seconds, the frequency f will
be measured in cycles per second, or hertz. In this case we deﬁne o as 2pf so that we will
make the angle vary from 0 to 2pf times every second. The sinusoid described by equation 1
will have a peak amplitude of 1 (varying from 1 to þ1), so it can be scaled to whatever
amplitude, as in
s(t) ¼ a sin(ot).

(2)

In terms of waveform shape, there will be no distinction between sines and cosines. The
only difference between them is in relation to their starting angle, or phase offset. The sine
wave is delayed by one-fourth of the circle (p/2) in relation to the cosine wave:
a sin(ot) ¼ a cos(ot  p/2).

(3)

In fact, any sinusoid, of whatever amplitude and phase offset, can be described as a sum of
cosine and sine functions:
s(t) ¼ a cos(ot þ f) ¼ m cos(ot) þ n sin(ot).

(4)

We can obtain the amplitude and phase of such sinusoid by looking at the relative
amounts (amplitudes, weights) of cosine and sine components, m and n, in the signal. The
amplitude a of the sinusoid is the square root of the sum of the squares of m and n:
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
(5)
a ¼ m2 þ n2.
The phase offset f can be obtained from m and n as the arctangent of the ratio of n
and m:
f ¼ arctan(n/m).

(6)

In other words, arbitrary sinusoid waves can be seen as a combination of sines and cosines;
these are special cases of sinusoids where either the cosine or the sine amounts (m and n) are
zero. Sinusoids of different frequencies, amplitudes, and phase offsets can be used as building
blocks for other signals.
5.3.1

Digital Sinusoids

So far, we have examined the continuous case of sinusoids. The digital forms of these signals
are very close to what we have already seen. If we consider that a discrete-time signal (such as
a digital signal) has an independent variable n that is discrete and we can obtain such variable from its continuous cousin by sampling the signal at a periodic interval T, then we can
introduce it as
s(n) ¼ a cos(onT þ f),
with the relationship between the sample index n and the continuous time t deﬁned as

(7)

439

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

n ¼ int[t/T ],

(8)

where int[x] means the integer part of x.
Using the sampling rate sr for 1/T, and redeﬁning o as 2pf/sr, we can write our sinusoid in
a more compact form:
s(n) ¼ a cos(on þ f).

(9)

Effectively, this makes the difference between the digital sinusoid in equation 9 and the
analog one in equation 4 a matter of using the sample index n instead of the continuous
time t. However, the digital signal s(n) is deﬁned only for integral values of n. Digital-toanalog conversion can, of course, generate a signal s(t), which is continuous, from it.
Here is a simple C code fragment that will generate a simple, steady-frequency, fullamplitude sinusoidal signal (of length N, or N/sr seconds) with 16-bit precision:
int n;
/* sample index */
short sig[N];
/* 16-bit (2-byte) signal */
float amp = 32767.f, freq = 440.f, sr = 44100.f; /* signal params */
float phase = 0.75;
/* phase, in fractions of a cycle */
double twopi = 8*atan(-1.); /* 2*PI, a constant */
phase *= twopi;
/* phase in radians */
for(n=0; n < N; n++)
/* the signal generation loop */
sig[n]=(short)(amp*cos(twopi*n*freq/sr + phase));
(On the DVD you will ﬁnd a synthesis program that generates sinusoid tones.)
5.3.2

Aliasing

An important point to be made about this type of signal is that not all analog sinusoids can
be successfully represented by a digital version. Returning to the question of sampling, we
remember that, in order to represent a signal in discrete time, we need to sample it at least
twice its frequency. This means that the maximum frequency that our sinusoid can reach is
sr/2. We saw that once this frequency has been exceeded by the analog signal, strange things
start to happen with its discrete representation. In the visual metaphor of ﬁgures 5.1 and 5.2,
we saw that the rotating wheel is misrepresented, making it slower (and rotating backward).
With sinusoids, ‘slower’ means with a lower frequency. This means that a sinusoidal signal
whose frequency is higher than sr/2 will be misrepresented by a sinusoid at a frequency
below sr/2 (ﬁgure 5.5). The exact relationship between the frequency of a digital sinusoid
and its analog original is


2fanalog
 sr.
(10)
fdigital ¼ fanalog  int
sr
The ‘‘rotating backward’’ effect seen in the wheel metaphor is also shown by equation 10,
as the resulting misrepresented frequency will have an inverted sign. For instance, if the

440

Chapter 5

Figure 5.5
Cosine waves at 11,025 (blue) and 33,075 Hz (red), sampled at 44.1 KHz. The ﬁrst is properly sampled;
the second produces an alias that is not distinguishable from the ﬁrst signal.

sampling rate is 44,100 Hz, a sinusoid at 33,075 Hz will appear in the digital signal as
a 11,025-Hz sinusoid. Such signals, with negative frequencies, will sound to us just as if
they had positive frequencies, except that they will, in some cases, have a different phase
offset (unless they are pure cosines, as in ﬁgure 5.5). They are produced by sinusoidal functions whose angles decrease instead of increase (‘‘rotate backward’’).
Misrepresented sinusoidal signals are known as aliases, because they are indistinguishable
from non-aliased signals. In the example above, it is impossible to distinguish an aliased
11,025-Hz signal produced by sampling a 33,075-Hz sinusoid from the one produced by
sampling a 11,025-Hz sinusoid. Aliasing will occur every time a signal whose frequency is
above sr/2 is sampled. It is therefore crucial that the analog-to-digital conversion eliminate
any analog signals above that frequency. Although we might not be able to hear it, highfrequency components might be present in a signal. These would cause aliased components
to be added to the signal, which are generally undesirable.
The solution is to use a low-pass ﬁlter, which would eliminate all frequencies above sr/2.
For a 44,100-Hz conversion, we would expect to set the ﬁlter cutoff frequency at around
20,000 Hz, so that its curve rolls off to eliminate anything above 22,050 Hz. In practice, since
good analog ﬁlters are expensive to make, oversampling is used (effectively sampling at
higher frequencies), so that we can use a simpler analog ﬁlter combined with some digital
ﬁltering (which is cheap).

441

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

Figure 5.6
The real numbers 1, 0.5, and 20.5 .

It is also important to note that the low-pass ﬁltering that is done at the ADC stage is
mirrored by a similar operation at the DAC stage. This has the effect of smoothing the
transitions between the samples in the signal output by the converter (which generate a
staircase-like signal). This produces a continuous signal without frequencies above sr/2,
which were present in the signal as it was converted from the digital form.
5.3.3

Real and Complex Signals

Audio signals, such as the sinusoids we have been looking at, are said to be real-valued. This
means that the signal function will generate a real number, a one-dimensional quantity.
Such numbers can be visualized as always lying on a line (ﬁgure 5.6). In the trigonometric
circle shown in ﬁgure 5.4, the values of a sine function will lie in on the vertical axis, whereas
the values of the cosine function lie in on the horizontal axis. These two functions are realvalued, and each one of them, on its own, will generate a signal that has only one
dimension.
It is possible, however, to have numbers and signals that are two-dimensional, i.e., that
occupy a plane (ﬁgure 5.7). Although time-domain audio signals will not normally be of
this kind, it is worth exploring the concepts of two-dimensional functions, as they will be
useful in certain types of signal processing, such as spectral analysis and ﬁlter theory. These
types of functions are said to be complex-valued, as their output will generate a complex
number. It is possible to combine two real functions to make up a complex one. For instance,
consider the circle that is described by the intersection of the values of a sine and a cosine
function as the angle varies from 0 to 2p (ﬁgure 5.8). This is a typical example of a twodimensional, complex-valued signal generated by a combination of two real functions. A
special point about the way these two functions are combined is that they are evaluated on
axes that are at right angles to each other, making it possible to combine them to generate
a signal that lies on the plane. So in order to make the right-angle combination explicit, we
include a symbol, j,3 which labels the function that is to be evaluated on the vertical axis.
Such a complex (digital) signal then can be deﬁned as

442

Chapter 5

Figure 5.7
The complex (bi-dimensional) number a þ jb.

Figure 5.8
A complex signal c(n), which plots a rotating circle on a plane.

c(n) ¼ a[cos(on) þ j sin(on)]

(11)

and its output is the ﬁgure of a circle with radius a in the complex plane. The symbol j can
have more than one interpretation. In algebra, it is deﬁned as the square root of 1, which is
not possible to deﬁne in real-number terms. Here, it is more useful to think of it as a 90
rotating operator. When we multiply a quantity by it, we rotate it by 90 . Take for instance
the real number 1, which can be said to lie on the horizontal axis. Multiplying it by j puts it
on the vertical axis (making it complex). Multiplying it twice by j puts it back on the horizontal axis, but on the negative side, as j 2 ¼ 1, and so on.
The signal c(n) deﬁned above is a complex sinusoid, which is going to be a very useful
signal for many types of signal-processing operations. It can be represented in different

443

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

ways. The form introduced above uses a rectangular combination of cosine and sines, deﬁning its x and y coordinates, or its real and imaginary parts. We could alternatively deﬁne it
using the length of the line from the rim of the circle to the origin (the radius) and the angle
that the line makes with the horizontal axis. This second form is known as a polar representation of the signal, wherein the length of the line is also known as the magnitude or modulus:
c(n) ¼ aJon,

(12)

where J means ‘‘at an angle.’’ The magnitude is obtained by taking the square root of the
sum of the squares of the real and imaginary part. The angle is obtained by the arctangent
of the ratio of the imaginary and real parts:
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
(13)
a ¼ real[c(n)] 2 þ imag[c(n)] 2 .
on ¼ arctan

imag[c(n)]
.
(real[c(n)])

A third representation links the two previous ones together in a very compact form. This is
based on the Euler’s famous formula
c(n) ¼ a[cos(on) þ j sin(on)] ¼ a  e jon .

(14)

So a complex sinusoid is also a complex exponential. A rotating circle is effectively described
by the number e raised to increasing powers. It does not really matter to us what e is exactly,
but we can think of it simply as a constant value (also known as the natural base of
logarithms).
It was mentioned previously that audio signals are real-valued, so at ﬁrst it might appear
that this study of complex signals is not relevant to the present discussion. In fact, it is true
to say that this area will only really come to play a signiﬁcant role in audio signal processing
in more advanced topics. However, there is one basic and crucial aspect of audio signals that
should be highlighted here: connecting real-valued and complex sinusoids.
Two complex sinusoids of the same amplitude and same positive and negative frequencies
can be combined to make up a real-valued sinusoid. This is because sine waves with negative
frequencies (or phases) are equivalent to negative sines with positive frequencies, sin(ot) ¼
sin(ot), making the sine an odd function. Equally, cosine waves of the same positive and
negative frequencies are the same signal, cos(ot) ¼ cos(ot), making the cosine an even
function. Thus, if we call these two sinusoids the signals c(n) and d(n), their sum is
c(n) þ d(n) ¼ a[cos(on) þ j sin(on)] þ a[cos(on) þ j sin(on)]
¼ a[cos(on) þ j sin(on) þ cos(on)  j sin(on)] ¼ 2a cos(on).

(15)

Summing these two complex sinusoids, we end up with a (real-valued) cosine wave. The
reason why we obtained a cosine and not a sine is that the complex sinusoid had a phase
offset of 0. (See equation 4.) It is also important to bear in mind the following relationship,
inferred from equation 14:

444

Chapter 5

a cos(on) ¼ 12 a(e jon þ e jon ).

(16)

Conversely, it is possible to say that a real sinusoid is actually composed of a pair of positive
and negative complex sinusoids. The relationship between these two complex sinusoids is
called complex conjugation. A complex number is said to be the complex conjugate of
another when they only differ in the sign of the imaginary part. Because of this relationship,
it can be said that real signals will actually be made up of positive and negative frequencies.
This will have very important implications for many areas of signal processing, two of
which, ring modulation and delays, will be discussed in the next section.
We can generate a complex digital sinusoid if we are careful to keep the real and imaginary
parts separate. This can actually be used in some signal-processing operations, such as singlesideband modulation. This is a complex version of the real-valued sinusoid code fragment
shown above. Here, the signal is now a complex number represented by the C structure4
_cmplx_ and we will generate a signal in the e1.0 range:
int n;
/*
struct _cmplx_ {
float re;
float im;
} sig[N];
/*
float amp = 1.f, freq = 440.f, sr = 44100.f; /*
float phase = 0.75;
/*
double twopi = 8*atan(-1.);
phase *= twopi;
for(n=0; n < N; n++){

/*
/*
/*

sig[n].re =(float)(amp*cos(twopi*n*freq/sr +
sig[n].im =(float)(amp*sin(twopi*n*freq/sr +

sample index */

complex signal */
signal params */
phase, in fractions of
a cycle */
2*PI, a constant */
phase in radians */
the signal generation
loop */
phase));
phase));

}
(The DVD examples for this chapter include a demonstration of how complex sinusoids can
be used in sound synthesis and processing.)
5.4

Basic Operations on Digital Signals
Now that we have some idea of what simple digital signals are, it would be interesting to
examine the basic operations that can be applied to them. These will lay the foundation for
all the more advanced signal processing that will be discussed in this book. Four of the six
processes that we will explore here will be directly concerned with two arithmetic operations
only, addition and multiplication. The ﬁfth one will involve both, and the sixth, although
not apparently using it, can also be represented by a multiplication (by a complex number).

445

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

As you will see, it is quite an accomplishment that we can get such signal-processing mileage
from two such simple mathematical operations.
5.4.1

Mixing Signals

The ﬁrst basic operation we will introduce is one of the most used of all signal processing:
mixing signals. It is very simple in essence: the addition of two or more signals, as in
mix(n) ¼ s1(n) þ s2(n).

(17)

What this operation does is sum, sample by sample, the signals involved. It is important to
stress this so that we can understand why sometimes we can get unexpected results. Consider for instance the mixing of these two signals:
mix(n) ¼ sin(on) þ sin(on þ p).

(18)

The output of this mix will be a muted signal; all samples will be zero. At ﬁrst it might puzzle
us as to why this has happened, but a look at the two signals will tell us why. Both of them
are sinusoids, the ﬁrst in the sine phase and the second with a shift of p, or half a cycle. This
means that whenever the ﬁrst signal is positive, the second is negative, and the mixed signal
is the result of a destructive interference between the signals. If the signals were in the same
phase, we would experience a doubling in amplitude (constructive interference). This phenomenon can be used musically with a lot of effect. Consider, for instance, summing two
arbitrary waveform signals with a very small frequency difference. Because of the minimal
difference, the result will be that the waveforms will start to drift apart and the interference
will vary from a constructive to a destructive one (when the two signals are in opposite
phase). If the two signals are sinusoids, we will hear a very slow amplitude ﬂuctuation; if
they are any other type of periodic wave, we will hear a phasing effect, similar to the one
used by Risset in Inharmonique. The second case is explained by the fact that the harmonics
will drift in and out of phase, each at a different time.
Mixing can be effected in C code by a loop that sums every sample of one signal to its
corresponding sample of the other signal:
for(n=0; n < N; n++)
mix[n]= sig1[n] + sig2[n];

/* mixing loop */

(A simple mixing program in the DVD examples folder for this chapter demonstrates the
principle.)
5.4.2

Scaling Signals

Scaling is another basic operation that involves a signal and a constant (or a slowly varying
control signal, such as an envelope). It is performed by multiplying the signal by a constant;
and the effect is to change its peak amplitude:

446

Chapter 5

scaled(n) ¼ s(n)  g.

(19)

In fact, the scaling factor has already been introduced in this chapter; the amplitude a of
a sinusoidal signal (equation 4) is basically the scaling factor. Another name given to it is
the gain constant, and scaling is also known as gain adjustment.
Scaling is used in all sorts of operations. In fact a basic mixer is made up of a scaling operation followed by mixing as deﬁned above. Another important use of scaling is to ensure
that our signals are in the right range for PCM quantization at the right precision. Generally,
signal-processing operations, such as the synthesis of sound, are performed using numbers
with decimal points, which in computers are called ﬂoating-point numbers. These numbers can
have a wider range than certain integer formats, such as 8-bit and 16-bit precision numbers.
So it is possible to generate a signal that exceeds the range of a certain quantizer’s precision.
Scaling is then necessary to reduce the amplitude by multiplying the signal by a scaling
factor between 0 and 1.
Furthermore, certain synthesis and processing systems, such as Pure Data, conventionally
work with ﬂoating-point signals in the range of e1.0, which are then scaled to the right
quantizer range before conversion. When programming applications in these systems, it is
sometimes necessary to scale signals down to that range, if they are originally, say, in the
16-bit range. They also might need scaling up if they are supposed to be in a different
range (to be written to a soundﬁle, for instance). A signal in the range of e1.0 is said to be
normalized.
Scaling can be done using a constant or a control signal. By the latter, we mean a slowly
varying signal, such as envelope or a low-frequency (sub-audio) modulation. If, however, the
scaling signal is at audio frequencies (generally above 20 Hz), then the multiplication operation is not going to be performing signal scaling; but rather, ring modulation, which will be
discussed below.
Some C code for scaling would loop through a signal multiplying every sample by a gain
variable:
for(n=0; n < N; n++)
scaled[n] = sig[n]*gain;

/* scaling loop */

(The DVD examples for this chapter include a programming example implementing gain
adjustment for soundﬁles that demonstrates this concept.)
5.4.3

Offset

The arithmetic operation of sum, when applied to a signal and a constant, will not perform
mixing, but will result in signal offsetting (more speciﬁcally, DC offsetting). The term DC,
which comes from ‘‘direct curren,’’ is related to what is described as a 0-Hz signal, one that
does not vary with time. By adding a constant value to a signal, we will raise or lower its

447

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

mean value. For instance, consider a sinusoid sin(n) that has a peak amplitude of 1.0 and is a
bipolar signal with a mean value of 0. If we offset it by a, as in
offset(n) ¼ s(n) þ a,

(20)

its mean value will now be a (also known as the DC component of the signal), and the signal
will vary from a  1 to a þ 1.
Typically, offsetting is used when we need to make a bipolar signal positive-only, in order,
for instance, to modulate a parameter such as frequency or amplitude. In this case we generally combine an offset value with a scaling factor, so that the range of values is correct. For
example, if we need to place the output of a sinusoid in the range of 0–1, we will need to
offset it by 1 and scale it by 0.5.
The so-called Hanning window, used to envelope sounds prior to spectral analysis, is generated by offsetting and scaling one cycle of a cosine wave:


2pn
,
0 a n 5 N.
(21)
hanning(n) ¼ 0.5  0.5 cos
N
The following C code fragment creates a Hanning window in a ﬂoat array:
for(n=0; n < N; n++)
/* hanning window generation */
hanning[n]= 0.5—0.5*cos(n*twopi/N);
5.4.4

Ring Modulation

As was hinted above, the multiplication of two audio-frequency signals does not result in
scaling, but in what is called ring modulation. The net effect of this process is that a signal
will be generated containing components with frequencies equivalent to the sum and difference of the frequencies of all components of the two inputs. It is easier to see what is happening if we consider simple signals such as sinusoids, which contain only one component.
If we multiply two sinusoids, as in
ring(n) ¼ cos(o1 n)  cos(o2 n) ¼ 0.5[cos([o1  o2 ]n) þ cos([o1 þ o2 ]n)],

(22)

we get the two components mixed and scaled at half of the original component amplitudes.
This is based on a well-known trigonometric identity. This principle then can be expanded
to an arbitrary waveform with any number of components.
The general-purpose ring modulator is then implemented as a multiplication of two
signals, such as shown in the C code fragment below:
for(n=0; n < N; n++)
mix[n]= sig1[n]*sig2[n];

/* ring modulation */

(You will ﬁnd an example program on DVD that implements a general-purpose ring modulation effect applied to two input soundﬁles.)

448

Chapter 5

Another way of understanding what happens here is through the concepts developed for
complex sinusoids. Since a complex sinusoid is also a complex exponential, a multiplication
of signals can also be seen as an addition of their frequencies:
cring(n) ¼ (cos(o1 n) þ j sin(o1 n))  (cos(o2 n) þ j sin(o2 n))

(23)

¼ e jo1 n e jo2 n
¼ e j(o1 þo2 )n .
Since a real sinusoid can be seen as two complex sinusoids with opposite signs for their
frequencies, we can infer that when we multiply two such signals, we will have a result
which will have components at the sum (frequencies having the same sign) and difference
(frequencies having opposite sign) of the two sinusoid frequencies. In addition, we can
expect that the resulting real-valued signal with two components will also be a mixture of
four complex sinusoids, two with positive frequencies and two with negative frequencies.
In fact, equation 22 shows two of these, with positive frequencies; for a real signal, there
would also be two negative ones (the sinusoids will differ only by the imaginary sign). Apart
from providing some musically interesting transformations, used in many works of contemporary music, ring modulation is also the basis for a very useful operation on signals, called
heterodyning. This operation is used in some important spectral analysis processes, such as
the phase vocoder.
5.4.5

The Fourier Series

The next operation we will explore is fundamental to many synthesis techniques. It will use
the two arithmetic operations of addition and multiplication to generate an arbitrary waveform signal from elementary ones, the sinusoids. From the work of Fourier, and later Helmholtz, we learn that periodic waveforms can be deconstructed as a series of weighted
sinusoids. Periodic waveforms are a very useful musical signal, because of one of its basic
characteristics: at the right frequency range, they produce a sensation of pitch. It is therefore
possible to recompose such waveforms by adding up (mixing) weighted (scaled) sinusoids of
different frequencies. We only need to know what frequencies to chose, which is a simple
matter, as we are told that they will be integer multiples of the fundamental frequency
(which is generally the one that conveys the pitch height).
How many of these sinusoids will we need? That will depend on the type of waveform we
are creating, but since we are generating a digital signal, the absolute maximum must have a
frequency that is less than or equal to sr/2. The Fourier series can be deﬁned, then, as this
operation of mixing weighted sinusoids, as in
s(n) ¼

N
X
ak cos(kon þ fk ),
k¼1

(24)

449

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

Figure 5.9
Fourier-series operation: the plot of a sawtooth wave (in light gray) against its eight component sinusoids, also known as harmonics.

where ak and fk are the weight and the phase offset of each sinusoid.
The fundamental frequency is deﬁned by o (or f, in Hz, as we are using the convention of
o ¼ 2pf/sr), and the highest-frequency component, N, cannot have a frequency higher than
sr/2 if we want to avoid aliasing. The sum operator mixes all the sinusoids together to provide the output (ﬁgure 5.9). We usually call each of these integer-related sinusoidal components a harmonic.
From very basic recipes, a number of standard waveforms can be generated with this
operation:
A sawtooth wave is generated by setting ak ¼ 1/k (and, for its characteristic shape, we
should use a phase offset fk ¼ p/2 for each component, i.e. sines instead of cosines)
n
A square wave recipe is (also with fk ¼ p/2)

1/k for k odd
ak ¼
0
for k even
n

n
n

A pulse waveform (buzz) has ak ¼ 1.
A triangle wave can be obtained with


ak ¼

1/k2

for k odd

0

for k even

450

Chapter 5

The following two C functions implement the generation of arbitrary wavetables using the
Fourier series:
#define TWOPI 6.283185307
/* this takes the number of harmonics, an array of harmonic weights,
the table length and a phase offset in fractions of a cycle */
float* fourier_table(int harms, float *amps,
int length, float phase){
int i,n;
/* harmonic index, sample index */
float a;
/* amplitude */
double w;
/* freq in rads of each harmonic */
float *table = (float *) malloc(length*sizeof(float));
phase *= (float)PI*2;
memset(table,0,(length)*sizeof(float));
for(i=0; i < harms; i++)
for(n=0; n < length; n++){
a = amps ? amps[i] : 1.f;
/* use 1, if amps not supplied */
w = (i+1)*(n*TWOPI/length); /* freq of each harmonic */
table[n] += (float) (a*cos(w+phase)); /* scale and mix */
}
normalize_table(table, length); /* normalize the table */
return table;
}
/* this takes a table and normalizes it */
void normalize_table(float *table, int length,
float scale){
int n;
float max = 0.f;
for(n=0; n < length; n++) /* find the peak value */
max = table[n] > max ? table[n] : max;
if(max) for(n=0; n < length; n++) table[n] /= max;
}
(An example of the application of such function tables can be found in a simple synthesis
program on the DVD.)
The Fourier series is a basic operation for simple additive synthesis.5 A little modiﬁcation
of the formula will transform it into a general description for an additive synthesizer:
additive(n) ¼

N
X

a(n)k cos(o(n)k þ fk ),

(25)

k¼1

where now it is not necessary to restrict the sinusoid frequencies to multiples of a fundamental frequency. In addition, the amplitude and phase of each component, a(n)k and

451

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

o(n)k , are themselves functions of time, so we can synthesize signals whose timbres change
dynamically change (as all interesting and musical sounds do).
5.4.6

Delays

Last, but not least, I would like to introduce the operation of signal delay. This, at ﬁrst, seems
to be disconnected from what we have previously seen, but in fact, it can be explained as
a particular type of scaling. As the name implies, a signal delay means modifying the time
coordinate of a signal, ‘holding’ it for a certain time. In a general sense, a delay operation
can be described as
delayed(n) ¼ s(n  d),

(26)

where d is the delay in samples.
Delays are used everywhere in signal processing, from ﬁlters to echo and reverberation. For
instance, we can use this operation to generate a slap-back echo effect on a signal, using this
simple C code fragment:
d = delaytime*sr;
/* delaytime is the delay in secs */
for(n=0; n < N, n++)
/* we'll make the echo 1/2 amp */
echo[n] = sig[n] + (n >= d ? 0.5*sig[n-d] : 0.f);
An important insight into what is actually happening when we delay a signal can be given
using a complex number description (actually using a complex sinusoid as an input). With
it, it is simpler to demonstrate the point, which can be then be extrapolated for all signals.
Starting with a complex signal, such as a sinusoid cos(on) þ j sin(on), we can generate a
delayed (by one sample) version as follows:
s(n  1) ¼ cos(o(n  1)) þ j sin(o(n  1)).

(27)

We can rewrite this as a complex exponential:
cos(o(n  1)) þ j sin(o(n  1)) ¼ e jo[n1] .

(28)

Changing from a sum of exponents to a multiplication of exponentials, we have
e jonjo ¼ e jon ejo ¼ ejo s(n).

(29)

Effectively, what we have is
s(n  1) ¼ ejo s(n),

(30)

which means that here the one-sample delay is equivalent to a multiplication by the
complex exponential ejo . Similarly, a delay of d samples will be equivalent to the multiplication by ejdo . This complex number is so common in signal processing that it is given
the shorthand

452

Chapter 5

ejo ¼ z1 .

(31)

The multiplication by z is a special one, normally occurring in what is called the z-domain,
where time-domain signals such as s(n) are represented by their z-transforms.6 An alternative
view is to see z as an operator that acts on the signal as a whole. We can generalize the ideas
above for all signals employing this concept. For instance, if we want to represent the mix of
two signals in the slap-back echo example above, we can notate it, using this operator, as
Y ¼ S þ 0.5zd S,

(32)

where Y represents the output and S the input (in fact, these are the z-transforms of the timedomain signals y(n) and s(n)).7 So, we can see now that all the basic operations with signals
are in one way or another based on addition and multiplication.
5.5

Some Applications of Signal Processing
Complementing the study of basic signal operations are two examples of applications that
use the ideas discussed above. The ﬁrst demonstrates a method of signal transformation; the
second is a classic technique of sound synthesis.
5.5.1

Transforming Signals with Filters

Filtering is a signal-processing operation that is designed to transform sounds in different
ways. The most common application of ﬁlters is to boost, attenuate, or block out certain
components of an input sound, i.e. to change the amplitude of its different sinusoidal components. Other ﬁlter applications involve modifying the phase offsets of different components. These two types of processes correspond to the two aspects of the action of a ﬁlter:
its amplitude and phase responses, respectively. In most music signal-processing applications, we tend to be more interested in the ﬁlter amplitude response, as this is generally the
most directly perceived effect. However, in certain cases, the phase response might play an
important part in the signal transformation.
Filters are built by combining an input signal with scaled and delayed signals, which can
be of two forms:
input delays: delayed copies of the input signals
output delays, i.e. delayed copies of the ﬁlter input signal, which can be seen as a form of
feedback (plugging the output back into the input of the ﬁlter).

n
n

These two forms of delays give rise to two distinct classes of ﬁlters: ﬁnite impulse response
(FIR), when using only input delays, and inﬁnite impulse response (IIR), when using output
delays (with or without input delays). These two ﬁlter classes are also known as feedforward
or non-recursive ﬁlters and feedback or recursive ﬁlters, respectively.

453

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

In order to understand these concepts, we will examine a simple FIR ﬁlter and study
its characteristics. One of the simplest such ﬁlters is obtained by combining a signal with its
one-sample delay copy and scaling both signals by 0.5, as in
y(n) ¼ 0.5x(n) þ 0.5x(n  1),

(33)

where we conventionally notate the ﬁlter output as y(n) and its input as x(n). Equation 33
is what is called a ﬁlter equation.
The scaling values of 0.5 are known as the ﬁlter coefﬁcients, which in this case are the
same for the input and one-sample delay terms of the ﬁlter. This particular ﬁlter is also
known as an averaging ﬁrst-order ﬁlter, because it takes the average of the current input and
its previous value and because it uses only a delay of one sample; a ﬁlter with a delay of N
samples is an Nth-order ﬁlter. This ﬁlter can be implemented in C with the following code
fragment:
for(n=0; n < N; n++){
out[n] = (in[n] + delayed)*0.5; /* filter equation */
delayed = in[n];
/* keep previous input */
}
To examine the effects of this ﬁlter,8 we need to ﬁnd what its amplitude and its phase
response are. We can do this ﬁrst by rewriting the ﬁlter using a complex exponential as its
input. (See equation 31.) This will give us (with x(n) ¼ e jon and z ¼ e jo )
y(n) ¼ 0.5[x(n) þ z1 x(n)].

(34)

We moved the scaling by 0.5, and we can, for simplicity, ignore it for the moment (it is
only equivalent to turning the output volume down by half). What this expression gives us
is the possibility of evaluating what the ﬁlter will do to different sinusoids of different frequencies by re-interpreting z1 as a complex exponential:
y(n) ¼ x(n) þ z1 x(n) ¼ x(n) þ ejo x(n) ¼ x(n)[1 þ ejo ].

(35)

This complex expression shows ﬁltering as yet another use of scaling in signal processing, as
we are effectively multiplying the signal x(n) (¼ e jon ) by the complex function F(o) ¼
1 þ ejo . The result of this multiplication is that the output will be the input signal with a
modiﬁed amplitude and phase.
What is the amplitude of the output going to be? As we vary the frequency of the input
sinusoid, the amplitude of the output will vary. This demonstrates the action of the ﬁlter;
in this case, attenuation of the different frequency components of the input signal. How
this attenuation varies with frequency can be found by plotting the amplitude of the signal
in equation 34 for different values of the frequency o.
As the ﬁlter expression is a complex one, we have to ﬁnd its magnitude (see equation 13,
which is indicated by j1 þ ejo j and is equivalent to the amplitude response of the ﬁlter9:

454

Chapter 5

Figure 5.10
Amplitude response of an averaging ﬁrst-order ﬁlter, with sr ¼ 44.1 KHz.

A(o) ¼ j1 þ ejo j
¼ j1 þ cos(o)  j sin(o)j
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
¼ [1 þ cos(o)]2  [ j sin(o)]2
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
¼ 1 þ 2 cos(o) þ cos2 (o)  [sin2 (o)]
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
¼ 1 þ 2 cos(o) þ cos2 (o) þ sin2 (o)
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
¼ 2 þ 2 cos(o) ¼ 4 cos2 (o/2) ¼ 2 cos(o/2).

(36)

Now, remembering that we had omitted scaling the signal by 0.5, we can plot the amplitude response of the ﬁlter (ﬁgure 5.10). This is done by re-casting o as 2pf/sr (with f now the
frequency in Hz), which gives us the expression cos(pf/sr) for the ﬁlter amplitude response,
the ﬁrst one-fourth of a cosine wave, from 0 Hz to sr/2. The shape of the ﬁlter makes it a lowpass ﬁlter, i.e. one that attenuates high-frequencies, letting low-frequencies pass more or less
unaltered.
The second aspect of the ﬁlter complex scaling action on the signal is the fact that it will
alter the phase offsets of the different sinusoidal components of an input signal. This means
that a certain time delay will be imposed on the signal, which is expected, since we are using
a delay operation. Similarly to the amplitude response, the phase response will vary with fre-

455

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

Figure 5.11
Phase response of ﬁrst-order averaging ﬁlter, with sr ¼ 44.1 KHz.

quency, so we can also evaluate it using the same principles above, except that we will now
have to extract the angle of the complex scaling function F(o) ¼ 1 þ ejo . This is done, as
shown in equation 13, by taking the arctangent of the ratio of its imaginary and real parts:
PH(o) ¼ J(1 þ ejo )
¼ J(1 þ cos(o)  j sin(o))


sin(o)
¼ arctan
1 þ cos(o)
¼ o/2.

(37)

In other words, the phase offset varies linearly with frequency, as ﬁgure 5.11 demonstrates. A
delay of o/2 or pf/sr represents a delay of half a sample, since a sinusoidal signal with such
delay, cos(on  o/2), would be equivalent to cos(o[n  0.5]).
In fact, we could predict the phase response of this ﬁlter, because FIR ﬁlters, with coefﬁcients that are symmetrical about a central point have exhibit a linear phase response, with
a delay of N/2 samples, where N is the order of the ﬁlter. In this case, the coefﬁcients are 0.5
and 0.5, meeting the pre-requisite for linear phase response and its delay is predictably half a
sample. Not all ﬁlters will be linear-phase, some in fact can have very complicated phase
responses, but an FIR can be made so by carefully choosing its coefﬁcients.

456

Chapter 5

The complex function F(o) ¼ 1 þ ejo , which we have been using to obtain the amplitude
and phase responses, is also called the frequency response of the ﬁlter. It is actually a special
case of a more general expression called the transfer function.10 The action of a ﬁlter is a multiplication11 of a signal by its transfer function. The combination of the amplitude and phase
responses of a ﬁlter is called its frequency response. The general form for a transfer function of
a ﬁrst-order FIR ﬁlter y(n) ¼ a 0 x(n) þ a1 x(n  1) is H(o) ¼ a 0 þ a1 ejo , and its amplitude
response A(o) is
qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
(38)
A(o) ¼ a20 þ 2a 0 a1 cos(o) þ a21 .
Different values for coefﬁcients will yield different amplitude responses for the same ﬁlter
design. For instance high-pass response can be obtained from the above ﬁlter by setting the
coefﬁcient a1 to a negative value.
The type of ﬁlter discussed above is, as mentioned, very simple, and it provides only a gentle transformation of the input signal. However, the concepts introduced here can be applied
to more complicated types of ﬁlters. For musical uses, we often choose to use feedback ﬁlters,
as they provide a more dramatic effect. Although they exhibit a more involved amplitude
and phase response description, they can be studied with the same principles explored
above. The main difference is that we will use delayed copies of the ﬁlter output, as shown
by the equation below, describing a ﬁrst-order feedback ﬁlter, with coefﬁcients a and b:
y(n) ¼ ax(n)  by(n  1).

(39)

Using the same tools and deﬁnitions as before, we can derive the complex frequency
response for this ﬁlter, using some extra manipulations of the equation:
y(n) ¼ ax(n)  bz1 y(n)
¼ y(n) þ bz1 y(n) ¼ ax(n)
¼ y(n)[1 þ bz1 ] ¼ ax(n)
¼ y(n) ¼ x(n)

a
.
1 þ bz1

(40)

Its frequency response is
F(o) ¼

a
.
1 þ bejo

(41)

The main difference in the transfer functions of a feedback and feedforward ﬁlter is that in
the latter case the variable z1 ends up in the denominator.
For the amplitude response, which is what interests us the most, this expression indicates
that for frequencies that make the modulus of the 1 þ bejo expression zero, the scaling
factor will be inﬁnite. In the case of feedback ﬁlters, we have the inverse situation: for those
frequencies, the scaling would be zero. The name given to a frequency that makes a transfer

457

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

function inﬁnite is a pole, whereas the name for a frequency that makes it zero is, of course,
a zero.
Generally, we do not want ﬁlters to have an inﬁnite value anywhere in their amplitude
response, because that would make it unstable. So with feedback ﬁlters, we will have to be
careful in designing our coefﬁcients so that we avoid such situations. Ideally, we will try to
choose coefﬁcients that make the denominator close to, but never, zero. In the case of the
simple feedback ﬁlter shown above, this will be reduced to making sure that b is close to,
but not equal to or bigger than, 1 (also not equal to or smaller than 1). The amplitude
response A(o) of the above ﬁlter, derived similarly to equation 35, will be
a
A(o) ¼ jF(o)j ¼ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ .
2
1 þ b þ 2b cos(o)

(42)

First-order ﬁlters, such as the ones discussed above, will only be able to implement either
low-pass or high-pass responses, because they only have one zero and/or one pole. For other
shapes, we will have to use more delays, in order to be able to create more poles or zeros. For
instance, a second-order ﬁlter can implement band-pass ﬁlters, and higher-order ﬁlters can
implement more complicated shapes.
5.5.2

Synthesizing Sound with FM and PM

The additive synthesis algorithm outlined by equation 25 is very powerful and general. However, it uses a little too much brute force to achieve its goals. In doing so, it is very demanding in terms of computation. Alternative techniques have been sought to provide similar
possibilities with less computation effort. One such technique is frequency modulation
(FM), developed in the late 1960s by John Chowning. The main advantage of FM is its compactness, allowing for interesting time-evolving sounds with the use of only a few operations. In order to understand FM, we will describe ﬁrst a variant form of it, called phase
modulation (PM), which produces similar results. This technique is in fact used in many
hardware-based FM implementations, such as Yamaha’s DX series of synthesizers. In certain
situations, it is actually better to use the PM form rather than FM. The term ‘phase’ used here
in relation to this technique is a little more general than the one we were using before, relating to phase offset. So in the sinusoid below, the term y(n) is what we call the phase of the
sinusoid, i.e. its angle:
s(n) ¼ a cos(y(n)).

(43)

We have the phase of a cosine function of (discrete) time n, in order to make explicit the
fact that it will be changing in time. Modulating it means to apply a periodic signal that will
time-vary it. We can use another sinusoid to do that. The sinusoid angle will then be deﬁned
as
y(n) ¼ oc n þ I sin(om n)

(44)

458

Chapter 5

Figure 5.12
Bessel functions of orders 0–5 plotted against index of modulation I.

and so the PM signal is generated by
pm(n) ¼ a cos(oc n þ I sin(om n)).

(45)

The expression above implements the PM technique. The peak amplitude I of the modulating signal is called the index of modulation. It controls how much modulation is inserted
in the signal, so that if it is set to zero, the output is the original sinusoid. The resulting signal s(n) will have components at the sum and differences of k integer multiples of om , the
modulator signal frequency, and oc , the carrier signal frequency. The signal resulting from
PM synthesis is equivalent to the (additive synthesis) expression
cos(oc n þ I sin(om n)) ¼

l
X

Jk (I ) cos([oc þ kom ]n).

(46)

k¼l

The scaling functions used for each pair of components (called a sideband), Jk (I ), are a
well-known family of functions called Bessel functions of the ﬁrst kind. The best way of understanding how they work is by looking at their plots in ﬁgure 5.12. The negative-order Bessel
functions can be obtained from the positive ones using the identity
Jk (I ) ¼ (1)k Jk (I ).

(47)

As can be seen in ﬁgure 5.12, as the index of modulation rises, the amplitude of the signal
gets more spread between the different components. With I ¼ 0, all Bessel functions have the

459

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

value 0, except for the order-zero one. This means that the output signal has only one component, at the carrier frequency. As I rises, the other Bessel functions kick in and the amplitude of the different components ﬂuctuates between positive and negative values (which
result in inverted-phase signals). So it is possible to generate time-varying timbres by varying
the value of I. This is one of the most important aspects of the technique.
Another important point of PM (and FM) is that the frequencies of signal components will
depend on the ratio of the carrier and modulator frequencies, oc : om . Because of this, it is
possible to generate a variety of sounds, with or without pitch, from drums and bells to
woodwind and brass emulations. Many of these sounds would have a very complicated
description in terms of additive synthesis parameters, as shown by equation 46, but can be
created very easily with two sound-generating sinusoidal functions, by equation 45 instead.
PM has some similarities with ring modulation. However, here, instead of a simple multiplication of two signals, we use a complex exponentiation of one of the signals. To show
this, we can deﬁne it in terms of a complex signal expression (by taking only its real part):
pm(n) ¼ cos(oc n þ I sin(om n))
¼ real[e j(oc nþI sin(om )) ]
¼ real[e joc n e jI sin(om n) ].

(48)

Now we can see where the Bessel functions come from. They arise from the expansion of the
exponential expression
e jI sin(om n) ¼




p
jk Jk (I ) cos k om n þ
2
k¼l
l
X

¼ J0 (I ) þ 2

l
X

J2k (I ) cos(2kom n) þ jJ2k1 (I ) sin([2k  1]om n).

(49)

k¼1

So in fact the result of PM of two sinusoids is the ring modulation of a sinusoid by a signal
with several components. We can compare the equations above to equation 23 to spot the
differences and similarities. From equation 49 we can see how it is possible to arrive at equation 46, the additive expression for the signal.
Frequency modulation is very similar to PM,12 but generally easier to implement in software systems, such as Csound. The main difference is that the signal being modulated is
not the phase angle, but the instantaneous frequency, its time derivative. As we are now
modulating a different parameter, a few adjustments have to be made to the PM formula.
The basic difference is that, for FM, the scaling gain of the modulation signal is not the index
of modulation anymore, but a frequency deviation, an amount of absolute change in the
carrier signal frequency. This parameter, d, is deﬁned as
d ¼ I  fm ,

(50)

460

Chapter 5

where fm is the modulating frequency and I is the index of modulation. With this change, we
can adapt the PM formula as deﬁned above for FM synthesis. Using Ifm for the modulation
signal amplitude, and remembering that oc ¼ 2pnfc /sr and om ¼ 2pnfm /sr, we will modulate
the carrier frequency fc , instead of the phase. In this case the varying (modulated) frequency
f (n) of the carrier oscillator becomes


2pnfm
.
(51)
f (n) ¼ fc þ Ifm cos
sr
(The DVD examples include some comparative implementations of PM and FM in Csound.)
In order to implement FM, one last important consideration has to be made. If we are
implementing the sinusoidal signal generation as in equation 43, we have to be careful to
generate the varying phase angle y(n) using the update expression
y(n þ 1) ¼ y(n) þ Dy,

(52)

where Dy, the difference between two consecutive phase values, is the instantaneous radian
frequency 2pf/sr. This is because of the fact that the instantaneous frequency is the derivative of the phase, as mentioned above. If the frequency f is constant, the expression is simpler: y(n) ¼ 2pnf/sr. With FM, however, the instantaneous carrier frequency will not be
constant, so we have to use the expression above for updating the phase of the carrier signal.
With that in mind, we can apply the FM formula more or less directly to the following C
code fragment:
for(n=0; n < N; n++) {
s[n] = amp*cos(pha);
/* tpisr is 2pi/sr, ndx is I and the rest is self-explanatory */
pha = pha + tpisr*(fc+ndx*fm*cos(tpisr*n*fm));
}
It is important to note that in signal-processing systems, such as Csound, FM is implemented using table-lookup oscillators. This is a more efﬁcient way to implement synthesis
than using a direct evaluation of a cosine (or sine) function as in the code examples shown
in this text. In addition, FM synthesis is generally described and implemented using sine
functions instead of cosines. Although there will be a number of important differences in
the generated signal, all the principles explored in this text also apply to sine-wave PM/FM.
Conclusion
We have seen in this chapter a number of basic concepts relating to signals, in general, and
digital audio signals, in particular. These form the foundation of the discipline of digital signal processing, which is itself the basis for audio programming. A number of more advanced
topics, such as spectral analysis and advanced synthesis and ﬁlter theory, were not discussed
here, but will be introduced in other chapters. However, it is important to note that the ideas

461

Introduction to Digital Audio Signals

explored here will be very useful in understanding even the more complex aspects of audio
signal processing to come.
Notes
1. Some will argue that we hear quantization noise as a continuous noise, so that our perception of it
will be deﬁned by its average power, which is less than its peak value. The average power of the max
quantization error 0.5 is 120.5 . In that case, the SNR will be 2 n1 /120:5 , or 30.5 2 n , giving us a
SNR dB ¼ 4.77 þ 6.02n.
2. In signal processing, angles are more likely to be deﬁned in radians. The reason for this is that the
radian ‘scale’ is deﬁned in relation to the radius of a circle. So for a circle of radius 1, it actually givens
the length of the circle’s circumference (the outer line that makes up the circle boundary). For that reason, angles need no conversion to linear measurements. The ratio of a circle’s circumference (c) and its
diameter (d) (which is twice the radius), is described by p ¼ c/d. This relationship is then used to deﬁne
an angle in radians: the whole circumference is pd, or 2pr (r standing for radius), giving that angle (360 )
the value of 2p radians. Other angles then are measured as fractions of this amount: p/2 (90 ), p (180 ),
3p/2 (270 ), etc.
3. This is also commonly written as i instead of j, depending on the name of other variables in the
expression (so not to be confused with them).
4. C structures are very useful programming devices for creating new data types that do not exist in the
language. As there are no types for complex numbers (as there are for integers and real numbers), we
need to create one. So, by deﬁning a structure with two separate slots for real and imaginary parts we
can do just that. This facility allows us to manipulate this type in a more controlled fashion. In fact, C
structures are so useful that in the Cþþ language, they are expanded to hold functions (known in that
context as methods) as well as data types, to support a way of programming known as object-oriented.)
5. Additive synthesis is one of the most powerful techniques of synthesis. It can be implemented by
using a bank of oscillators, each one with different amplitude and frequency envelopes. The data for
such envelopes can get quite large if we want to create more realistic sounds. To help with this, analysissynthesis techniques are used, where real sounds are analyzed and data for amplitude and frequency
envelopes are extracted, which is then used to drive oscillator banks. One popular technique for analysissynthesis is the phase vocoder, which will be discussed in detail in later chapters.
6. The z-transform is used to obtain a frequency domain representation of a discrete-time signal. This
means that what we have then is a function of frequency (which in this particular case is a complex variable, so the z-domain is a complex frequency domain), rather than time. There are other ways of obtaining other frequency-domain representations of signals, such the Fourier Transform and the Discrete
Fourier Transform, which are closely related to the z-transform. The details of this are beyond the scope
of the this text, but one of the applications of the z-transform is to obtain the transfer function of a
system.
7. You can think of the z-transform of the signal as representing all of it, instead of individual samples.
So when we use an operator such as zd we are acting on the whole signal.

462

Chapter 5

8. Filters present perhaps the best illustration of the usefulness of complex numbers. So far with the
simple processing of waveforms we have been studying, we really had no need for the extra complication of complex arithmetic. However, when we look at ﬁlters, we see that they have two effects on an
input signal. They change the signal’s amplitude as well as delay the signal (change its phase). These
two effects are independent of each other, but the same ﬁlter causes them. So, to measure them it is
handy to use a number that has two components: a complex number. This measurement is called the
ﬁlter frequency response and it contains two independent values. One of the numbers will tell us how
the ﬁlter changes the amplitude of the signal at a certain frequency, the magnitude of the ﬁlter frequency response. The other number gives the amount of delay, or phase change, that the ﬁlter effects,
the phase of the ﬁlter frequency response. The complex frequency response in this case is in polar
form, but it can also be written in Cartesian form, which is the more usual way we see complex numbers
(with ‘‘real’’ and ‘‘imaginary’’ parts).
9. The following derivation uses the fact that j 2 ¼ 1 and two trigonometric identities: cos2 x þ
sin2 x ¼ 1 and 0.5 þ 0.5 cos(2x) ¼ cos2 (x).
10. The transfer function is generally notated H(z) ¼ 1 þ zn , to indicate that it is a function of z, a
complex-valued variable; the frequency response is obtained when we set z to e jo , as in the example
above. For that ﬁlter, the transfer function would be H(z) ¼ 1 þ z1 . The z-transform of the impulse
response of a system (i.e. the time-domain signal obtained by feeding it with a single impulse) is equivalent to its transfer function.
11. Here we mean the whole signal, as in its z-transform, so actually this is the ‘‘special type of multiplication’’ seen in equation 32.
12. FM and PM yield effectively very similar results, although for the same parameters of modulation frequency, carrier frequency and index of modulation, they can result in different spectra. The initial
phases of the modulator and carrier signals will also be inﬂuential, as say using sines instead of cosines
will yield slightly different results. In general, FM is simpler to implement in software systems such as
Csound, because it only requires oscillators. To implement PM, we need to break an oscillator apart
into its constituent components, so it is slightly more involved. However, in hardware synthesizers,
such as Yamaha’s DX7, PM is the technique actually implemented. The reason is that PM is more resilient to rounding errors, allowing for the implementation of stacked modulation (modulators connected
in series) and feedback (the carrier signal being fed back into itself as a modulator). These effects cannot
be implemented using FM synthesis.

6

Time-Domain Audio Programming

Victor Lazzarini

This chapter will provide an overview of audio programming for time-domain signal processing (i.e. sound waveforms1). We will look at the essential and basic recipes for synthesis and
effects, from wavetable synthesis to delay lines. All concepts will be discussed in terms of
Cþþ examples, with fully working programs as a demonstration of each component studied.
We will assume the reader is generally ﬂuent in C and Cþþ (although examples are compliant with the latter language, most of them are written in a style that is very close the former).
6.1

Synthesis: Table-Lookup Oscillators
6.1.1

Before We Start: A Soundﬁle Interface

Before we study components for synthesis, such as the table-lookup oscillator, we would perhaps want to deﬁne a simple soundﬁle interface for sound output (and later we will add
sound input). We could use the libsndﬁle library2 as it is, but perhaps we can simplify it
even further. We’ll add a function interface to open a ﬁle for output, to write to it and to
close it. This can be done taking the advantage of default parameters, and using libsndﬁle
for its implementation:
SNDFILE *soundout_open(char* name, int chans=def_chans,
float sr=def_sr);
/** close output soundfile.
*/
void soundout_close(SNDFILE *psf_out);
/** soundfile output.
psf_out: soundfile handle
buffer: signal buffer, interleaved if multichannel
vecsize: signal vector size in frames
returns: number of frames output to file
*/
int soundout(SNDFILE *psf_out, float *buffer, int vecsize=def_vsize);

464

Chapter 6

With this interface in place, we do not need to worry about the output anymore, we can just
treat it as a ‘‘black box.’’ An implementation of these functions is easily done using libsndﬁle
or another similar library.
6.1.2

Oscillators: Some Important Issues

Frequency and Phase Increment
The ﬁrst component we will look at is the oscillator. These are used primarily to generate
periodic signals, such as a sine wave. If we start with this type of signal, we can discuss
some important issues about oscillator implementation. Sine waves can be synthesized with
a simple call to the sin() function:
a[n] = sin(n*2*pi*f/sr).
This will generate a sine wave signal with the frequency f at the sampling rate sr. This is a
simple implementation that will work for limited cases, but not for all applications. The basic
issue with this code is that, whereas it allows ﬁxed values of frequency, it will fail when the
frequency vary, as in a glissando. The reason for this is that the sin() function expects an
angle, i.e. a phase angle, as its input. So when we supply with an expression that depends on
a frequency value, we will have to transform that frequency value into a phase angle. That is
in fact what is being done in the ﬁrst example above. The phase angle changes with time
(n, in samples) and is calculated by the expression n*2*pi*f/sr. However, if we change
the frequency, the phase angle will not be calculated properly. We will have to update the
phase using the fact that the frequency is equivalent to the phase difference between two
calls of the sin() function. In other words, we will generate a new phase angle each time
we call sin(), based on an increment according to the expression 2*pi*f/sr:
a[n] = sin(pha);
pha += 2*pi*f/sr;
For the ﬁxed frequency case, the two examples are equivalent. However, this example will
work even it the frequency varies, whereas the ﬁrst example will not.
Generality and Efﬁciency
The example above would work perfectly well to generate sine waves. However, in most
applications, we would like to generate more than sine waves, and we would like to do it
efﬁciently. One way of generating waveforms other than sines is to perform additive synthesis, based on the Fourier principles. This would mean calling sin() several times, once
for each harmonic that we try to generate. This would be in many cases very slow and inefﬁcient. Even for sine waves, a better method exists for signal generation.
Instead of calling sin() or any other periodic function for each sound sample, we could
pre-calculate the function used, store it in memory and look it up whenever we want to get

465

Time-Domain Audio Programming

the value off the function. This is the table-lookup method of function evaluation and the
basis for the table-lookup oscillator.
6.1.3

Table-Lookup Oscillator Basics

Wavetables
Wavetables will contain one cycle of a waveshape that is going to be used in synthesis. They
will have a certain length and will usually be normalized (with values ranging from 1 to 1).
In Cþþ terms, wavetables are arrays of ﬂoats of any size. The size of the wavetable will determine the precision of the function evaluation. A sine wave table can be created as follows:
for(int i=0; i < length; i++) table[i] = sin(i*2*pi/length);
Table Lookup
The output of the oscillator is based primarily on the table-lookup procedure, which is, in its
simplest form, based on obtaining a value from the table array and scaling it with an amplitude value:
out[n] = a*table[(int)index];
The casting operation is needed because we will have to use a ﬂoating-point index (for precision) and array indices can only be integral.
Frequency Control
The fundamental frequency of the oscillator will depend on the increment of the phase
index, as discussed above. This increment, called sampling increment, will depend on the
user-deﬁned frequency, the size of the table, and the sampling rate:
incr = f*length/sr;
index += incr;
For instance, if the table length is the same as the sampling rate, then for a frequency of 1 Hz
the increment is 1. In this case we will reach the end of the table only after 1 second.
Modulus Operation
In order to make the lookup operation loop around the wavetable, we will have to check the
index and apply a generalized modulus operation if it is beyond the required range. We are
using the generalized modulus because we want to allow for negative frequencies, i.e. decrementing the phase index (looping backward). This is how we implement it:
while(index >= length) index -= length;
while(index < 0) index += length;
(See ﬁgure 6.1.)

466

Chapter 6

Figure 6.1
The elements of a table-lookup oscillator.

6.1.4

A Truncating Table-Lookup Oscillator

The basic elements discussed above can be put together to make a Cþþ function implementation of an oscillator. The simplest form will be the truncating oscillator, which truncates the ﬂoating-point index to obtain a value from the wavetable. One important point
here is that we will need to provide some ‘permanent’ external memory for the phase index,
as we will be calculating the next index position based on the previous one (and it is important to create a separate variable to hold this for each oscillator, if we want to have more
than one, otherwise we will get in tangle).3 Here is a basic prototype for such function:
float oscil(float amp, float freq, float* table, float* index,
int len=1024, float sr=44100);
This function has as parameters the amplitude, the frequency, the wavetable, the index (an
external variable), the table length, and the sampling rate. For simplicity, we will be using a
single-precision ﬂoat for the index, but in more robust implementations double precision is
preferred. Here is the implementation:
float oscil(float amp, float freq, float* table, float* index,
int len, float sr){
float out;
out = amp*table[(int) *index];
*index += freq*len/sr;
while (index >= len) index -= len;
while (index < 0 ) index += len;
return out;
}

467

Time-Domain Audio Programming

Such a function could be used to generate a signal, when called in a processing loop:
for(int i=0; i < durs; i++) out[i] = oscil(0.5f, 440.f, wtab, &ndx);
Here we are using a normalized amplitude (in the range from 1.0 to þ1.0) to facilitate
things. The external variable ndx has been declared and initialized to 0 (notice how we
have to pass it indirectly, by its address). The wavetable wtab[] has been allocated and ﬁlled
with an arbitrary waveshape.
6.2

Oscillators: Implementation Issues
6.2.1

Processing Audio Vectors

The version of oscillator we have presented so far is simple conceptually, but still requires
one more addition. At the moment, we are outputting one sample at a time, so for each
sample we have to do a function call. For simple applications, this is not a problem. However, for larger systems using several such oscillators, the overhead involved in the function
call might be problematic. Instead what can be done is to process audio in blocks, or vectors,
of samples. In this case, our function will implement a loop that will process one vector of
samples at a time. The function will only be called once for a number of output samples,
which will increase efﬁciency. As a consequence, we will be splitting the processing into
two rates: an audio sampling rate and a control rate. The latter is the rate at which we are
calling the oscillator function, whereas the former is the inverse of the number of samples
we will be expected to produce in one second.
The new-look oscillator will have the following interface:
/** truncating table-lookup oscillator.
output: output signal vector \n
amp: amplitude \n
freq: frequency \n
table: function table \n
index: lookup index \n
length: function table length \n
vecsize: signal vector size\n
sr: sampling rate\n
\n
returns: first output sample
*/
float osc(float *output, float amp, float freq,
float *table, float *index,
int length=def_len, int vecsize=def_vsize,
long sr=def_sr);

468

Chapter 6

The constants def_len, def_vecsize, and def_sr are previously deﬁned (e.g. as
1,024,256 and 44,100). The implementation of the oscillator will then include a signalgenerating loop:
float osc(float *output, float amp, float freq,
float *table, float *index,
int length, int vecsize, long sr)
{
// increment
float incr = freq*length/sr;
// processing loop
for(int i=0; i < vecsize; i++){
// truncated lookup
output[i] = amp*table[(int)(*index)];
*index += incr;
while(*index >= length) *index -= length;
while(*index < 0) *index += length;
}
return *output;
}
Instead of just returning the output sample, we are ﬁlling an input buffer with the output
signal. In fact, we are also returning the ﬁrst output sample, for convenient use of this function with vectors of 1. The osc function will be called in a control loop, as in (here, dur is
the total duration in control samples):
for(int i=0; i < dur; i++){
osc(buffer,amp,freq,wave,&ndx);
soundout(psf,buffer);
}
6.2.2

Control Rate

The preceding subsection introduced the concept of control rate, as well as, indirectly, control period (its inverse), control samples (the components of a control signal), and vector size
(the number of audio samples in a control period). For efﬁciency reasons, we can have some
synthesis components running at the control rate (cr) and others at the sampling rate (sr).
For example, if we want to modulate the frequency or amplitude of an oscillator at sub-audio
rates, we can generate a control signal from an oscillator and insert it at the right place, as in
the following:

469

Time-Domain Audio Programming

for(int i=0; i < dur; i++){
osc(buffer,amp,
freq+osc(&cs,10.f,5.f,wave,&ndx2,def_len,1,def_cr),
wave,&ndx);
soundout(psf,buffer);
}
Here we are using two oscillators: one that is running at the audio rate and another that is
running at the control rate (notice also that we have to use two separate phase index variables). You can see that the latter has an output vector of one sample and it has the sampling
rate of def_cr (def_sr/def_vecsize). Sub-audio modulation is one of the examples of
the use of control-rate oscillators. However, if we are modulating a signal at audio ranges,
then we will need control-rate oscillators (i.e. both oscillators at the same rate and with the
same vector size).
6.2.3

Wavetable Generation

The best method for generating waveshapes to be used with oscillators for sound generation
is by Fourier addition. Here we will generate and add the partials, which are integral multiples of a fundamental, scaled according to a certain principle, to the wavetable:
float* Fourier table(int harms, float *amps,
int length, float phase){
float a;
float *table = new float[length+2];
double w;
phase *= (float)pi*2;
memes(table,0,(length+2)*size of(float));
for(int i=0; i < harms; i++)
for(int n=0; n < length+2; n++){
a = amps ? amps[i] : 1.f;
w = (i+1)*(n*2*pi/length);
table[n] += (float) (a*cos(w+phase));
}
normalize_table(table, length);
return table;
}
The function allocates the table, resets it to 0, and then, if an array exists with the amplitudes, it uses the array values as the weights of each harmonic, otherwise it assumes all harmonics have the same amplitude. All harmonics are summed into the table and then the
table is normalized. This function can be called to construct a series of standard shapes,

470

Chapter 6

such as sawtooth, square, and triangle (note that the ﬁrst two use sums of sines, whereas the
third uses cosines):
float* saw_table(int harms, int length){
float *amps = new float[harms];
for(int i=0; i < harms; i++) amps[i] = 1.f/(i+1);
float *table = fourier_table(harms,amps,length, -0.25);
delete[] amps;
return table;
}
float* sqr_table(int harms, int length){
float *amps = new float[harms];
memset(amps, 0, sizeof(float)*harms);
for(int i=0; i < harms; i+=2) amps[i] = 1.f/(i+1);
float *table = fourier_table(harms,amps,length, -0.25);
delete[] amps;
return table;
}
float* triang_table(int harms, int length){
float *amps = new float[harms];
memset(amps, 0, sizeof(float)*harms);
for(int i=0; i < harms; i+=2) amps[i] = 1.f/((i+1)*(i+1));
float *table = fourier_table(harms,amps,length);
delete[] amps;
return table;
}
6.2.4

A Simple Example

Here is an example program using a sine-wave oscillator with vibrato:
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <snd_defs.h>
/** Simple synthesis program.
Generates a sine-wave sound. This program shows the use of
truncating oscillators.\n
\n
oscillator sndfile.wav amp freq(Hz) dur(secs)
*/
int main(int argc, char** argv) {

471

Time-Domain Audio Programming

SNDFILE *psf;
float *buffer;
int dur;
float amp, freq, *wave, cs, ndx=0, ndx2=0;
if(argc == 5){
amp = (float) atof(argv[2]);
freq = (float) atof(argv[3]);
dur = (int) (atof(argv[4])*def_cr);
// allocate buffer & table memory
buffer = new float[def_vsize];
wave = sinus_table();
// now we open the file
if(!(psf = soundout_open(argv[1]))){
printf("error opening output file\n");
exit(-1);
}
for(int i=0; i < dur; i++){
osc(buffer,amp,
freq+osc(&cs,10.f,5.f,wave,&ndx2,
def_len,1, def_cr),
wave,&ndx);
soundout(psf,buffer);
}
// close file & free memory
soundout_close(psf);
delete[] buffer;
delete[] wave;
return 0;
}
else {
printf("usage: oscillator sndfile.wav "
"amp freq(hz) dur(s)\n");
return 1;
}
}
6.3

Interpolation
Interpolation is an operation that is used in many applications in digital audio. Its basic use
is to ‘‘ﬁll in the gaps’’ when needed. For instance, if we decide to obtain a sample from a

472

Chapter 6

wavetable, fractionally between two table positions, we can interpolate between the two
values to obtain the result. This is the basis for the interpolating oscillator.4 Also, if we want
to generate a curve between two points, we will be using interpolation to obtain the values
for the curve.
6.3.1

Interpolating Oscillators

The simplest type of interpolation, which will be enough for most of the typical oscillator
applications, is linear interpolation. If an index pos p falls between points x1 and x2 , whose
table values are y1 and y2 , then, by linear interpolation we have
y ¼ y1 þ ( y2  y1 )  (p  x1 ).

(1)

Here x1 and x2 are consecutive integral indexes and p is the ﬂoating-point index. Linear interpolation is nothing more than a ﬁrst-order function, a very simple mathematical device,
with the general deﬁnition:
y ¼ cx þ d,

(2)

where d ¼ y1 and c ¼ y1  y2 (x being the fractional index position p  x1 ).
A more complex but also more accurate interpolation for table-lookup oscillators is provided by cubic interpolation, where instead of taking just two points around the target
position we will use four points by including the two outside values, y0 and y3 . Cubic interpolation uses a third-order polynomial function of the form
y ¼ ax3 þ bx2 þ cx þ d.

(3)

Here we have a heavier computational load than the simple linear interpolation. Cubic
(sometimes also called four-point) interpolation can use the following coefﬁcients:
a ¼ 0.5[y1  y2 ] þ [y3  y0 ],
b ¼ [y0 þ y2 ]0.5  y1 ,
c ¼ y2  0.333y0  0.5y1  0.166y3 ,

(4)

d ¼ y1 .
Another important fact relating to interpolating oscillators is that we will need extra
points at the end of the table for the mechanism to work. For linear interpolation, we will
need one extra point at the end. For cubic interpolation, we will need two points at the
end, plus we will have to take care when the index is below 1, so that the point equivalent
to x 0 is read from the end of the table.
The following code implements linear interpolation. It expects the wavetable to have one
extra point (at least) at its end:

473

Time-Domain Audio Programming

float osci(float *output, float amp, float freq,
float *table, float *index, float phase,
int length, int vecsize, float sr)
{
// increment
float incr = freq*length/sr, frac, pos,a ,b;
phase = phase < 0 ? 1+phase : phase;
int offset = (int)(phase*length)%length;
// processing loop
for(int i=0; i < vecsize; i++){
pos = *index + offset;
// linear interpolation
frac = pos - (int)pos;
a = table[(int)pos];
b = table[(int)pos+1];
output[i] = amp*(a + frac*(b - a));
*index += incr;
while(*index >= length) *index -= length;
while(*index < 0) *index += length;
}
return *output;
}
The next function implements cubic interpolation, as discussed above, and expects two extra
points at the end of the table:
float oscc(float *output, float amp, float freq,
float *table, float *index, float phase,
int length, int vecsize, float sr)
{
// increment
float incr = freq*length/sr, frac, fracsq, fracb;
float pos,y0,y1,y2,y3, tmp;
phase = phase < 0 ? 1+phase : phase;
int offset = (int)(phase*length)%length;
// processing loop
for(int i=0; i < vecsize; i++){
pos = *index + offset;

474

Chapter 6

// cubic interpolation
frac = pos - (int)pos;
y0 = (int) pos > 0 ? table[(int)pos-1] : table[length-1];
y1 = table[(int)pos];
y2 = table[(int)pos+1];
y3 = table[(int)pos+2];
tmp = y3 + 3.f*y1;
fracsq = frac*frac;
fracb = frac*fracsq;
output[i] = amp*(fracb*(- y0 - 3.f*y2 + tmp)/6.f +
fracsq*((y0+y2)/2.f—y1) +
frac*(y2 + (-2.f*y0 - tmp)/6.f) + y1);
*index += incr;
while(*index >= length) *index -= (length);
while(*index < 0) *index += length;
}
return *output;
}
6.4

Envelopes
Envelopes can be generated in several ways. The basic principle is to have a certain curve,
which will shape the amplitude (or any other parameter) of the sound. Curves can be created
during processing by an interpolating function, or can be drawn into tables to be accessed by
oscillators.
6.4.1

Envelope Tables

Interpolating linearly between two points generates the simplest envelope table, using basically the same principles outlined in subsection 6.3.1. For instance, to generate an N-point
table, with linear interpolation, between 0 and 1, we can use the following code:
for(int i =0; i < N; i++)
table[i] = (float)i/N;
More generally, we have
table[i] = start + i*(end—start)/N;
which can also be implemented as

475

Time-Domain Audio Programming

tmp = start;
incr = (end—start)/N;
for(int i =0; i < N; i++) {
table[i] = tmp;
tmp += incr;
}
This will generate a single line segment. Multi-section envelopes can be built by splitting the
table into similar sections. Linear envelopes can be enhanced by adding the concept of a
curve coefﬁcient. A curve coefﬁcient can be used to bend the linear shape in two ways: (a)
making it change quickly to start with and the straighten out; (b) the reverse, starting with
small changes and increasing the rate of change as it reaches the end of the line segment
y(x) ¼ y1 þ ( y2  y1 )xa ,

(5)

where x is the position in the range 0–1. The curve coefﬁcient a determines the shape of the
curve: if a 5 1, we have (a) ; if a 4 1, we have (b); if a ¼ 1, we have a linear segment.
Equation 5 will yield the following modiﬁcation to the code:
table[i] = start + (end—start)*(pow((double)i/N, alpha);
6.4.2

Exponential Interpolation

Linear envelopes work well with simple controls, but for perceptually accurate envelopes it
sometimes is necessary to use exponential interpolation. For instance, a constant-interval
glissando requires this type of interpolation, because intervals are frequency ratios. The
expression for exponential interpolation is
y(x) ¼ y1  ( y2 /y1 )x .

(6)

This type of interpolation requires that the values of y1 and y2 be non-zero and positive.
Exponential interpolation can be used instead of linear interpolation for cases where the
rate of a parameter change does not match what is expected, as in the case of continuous
glissando.
The implementation of the exponential interpolation is quite simple:
for(int i =0; i< N; i++)
table[i] = start*pow(end/start, (double) i/N);
Alternatively, it can be implemented as
tmp = start;
mult = pow(end/start, 1./N);
for(int i=0; i < N; i++){
table[i] = tmp;
tmp *= mult;
}

476

Chapter 6

6.4.3

Examples of Envelope-Table Generators

Here are two examples of functions that can generate tables containing envelopes made up
of segments of linear and exponential curves. A linear envelope-table generator can look like
this:
float* line_table(int brkpts, float* pts, int length){
float start,end,incr,*table = new float[length+2];
for(int n=2; n < brkpts*2; n+=2){
start = pts[n-1];
end = pts[n+1];
incr = (end - start)*1.f/(pts[n]-pts[n-2]);
for(int i=(int)pts[n-2]; i < pts[n] && i < length+2; i++)
{
table[i] = start;
start += incr;
}
}
normalize_table(table, length);
return table;
}
The following generator builds a table with exponential segments:
float* exp_table(int brkpts, float* pts, int length){
float mult,*table = new float[length+2];
double start, end;
for(int n=2; n < brkpts*2; n+=2){
start = pts[n-1] + 0.00000001;
end = pts[n+1] + 0.00000001;
mult = (float) pow(end/start,1./(pts[n]-pts[n-2]));
for(int i=(int)pts[n-2]; i < pts[n] && i < length+2; i++)
{
table[i] = (float) start;
start *= mult;
}
}
normalize_table(table, length);
return table;
}
These tables can be used with oscillators for envelope generation. Here is an example:
float pts[6] = {0,0,100.f, 1.f, 400.f, 0.f};
env = line_table(3, pts, 400);

477

Time-Domain Audio Programming

Figure 6.2
Linear (solid line) and exponential (dotted line) envelope segments.

This builds a table with three segments, from 0 to 1 (at pos 100) and back to 0 at the end of
the table (400). Now we can use it in an oscillator by reading it with another oscillator:
oscc(buffer,
osc(&out,amp,1/dur,env,&ndx2,400,1,def_cr),
freq,wave,&ndx);
The oscillator is made to read once through the table (notice that its frequency is deﬁned as
1/dur, where dur is the duration of the sound in seconds). Also note, and this is very important, that we have used separate variables to hold the indexes for each oscillator (don’t mix
them up).5 See ﬁgure 6.2.
6.5

Envelope Generators
One of the disadvantages of using tables and oscillators as envelopes is that the size of each
envelope segment will be stretched or compressed as the total duration of the sound
changes. A solution for this is to employ ﬁxed-length envelope generators. These generators
can be used to provide controls for any parameter. Since they are producing control signals,
we can implement them to run at the control rate. This means that they will always output a
single sample, instead of a vector, and that they will take the control rate as their sampling
rate. They will also have to keep track of the time, so an external time index (a sample count)
will have to be supplied to them in the form of an integer variable address.

478

Chapter 6

6.5.1

Linear

A linear generator is the simplest of these types of control-signal generators. It will draw a
line between two points for a certain duration. What happens after that is not deﬁned, but
we can limit the output to the maximum value:
float line(float pos1, float dur, float pos2, int *cnt
float cr){
int durs = (int) (dur*cr);
if((*cnt)++ < durs)
return pos1 + *cnt*(pos2-pos1)/durs;
else return pos2;
}
6.5.2

Exponential

An exponential generator can be built on the same principle, using the following code:
float expon(float pos1, float dur, float pos2, int *cnt,
float cr){
int durs = (int) (dur*cr);
if((*cnt)++ < durs)
return (float)(pos1*pow((double)pos2/pos1,(double)*cnt/durs));
else return pos2;
}
6.5.3

Using Curve Coefﬁcients

A linear envelope with a curve coefﬁcient control can be a very ﬂexible generator:
float interp(float pos1, float dur, float pos2, double alpha,
int *cnt, float cr){
int durs = (int) (dur*cr);
if((*cnt)++ < durs)
return (float) (pos1 + (pos2-pos1)*pow((double) *cnt/durs, alpha));
else return pos2;
}
6.5.4

An ADSR Envelope

The typical envelope generator used to control the amplitude of synthesized sounds is the
ADSR envelope. This is a four-stage envelope, comprising an attack (A) or rise period, a decay
period (D), a sustain(S) portion, and a release (R) segment. Typically, in synthesizers, the
ADSR t kicks into action in response to an external ‘‘trigger.’’ The release stage is entered after

479

Time-Domain Audio Programming

Figure 6.3
The ADSR envelope and its parameters.

a ‘‘note release’’ trigger (often a MIDI NOTE OFF command), so the overall length of the
envelope is indeterminate.
Here, since we are not using controls of the aforementioned kind, we will run the ADSR
from the start with a set total duration. We will then ﬁt the different stages as portions of
this total duration. The sustain period does not have a duration of its own, but it lasts for
the amount of time that is left between the ﬁrst two stages and the release period. This one
is calculated backward from the end. The basic design problem that has to be solved is how
to organize these four segments and provide the (linear) interpolation to generate the lines
between the points. (See ﬁgure 6.3.)
The following is the ADSR prototype:
/** adsr envelope.
maxamp: maximum amplitude\n
dur: total duration (s)\n
at: attack time (s)\n
dt: decay time (s)\n
sus: sustain amplitude\n
rt: release time (s)\n
cnt: time index\n
cr: control rate\n
\n
returns: output control sample

480

Chapter 6

*/
float adsr(float maxamp, float dur, float at, float dt,
float sus, float rt, int* cnt, float cr=def_cr);
Durations are in seconds, so we will have to convert them all to be in (control) samples. The
attack period comes ﬁrst:
// attack period
if(*cnt <= at) a = *cnt * (maxamp/at);
It goes from 0 to maxamp in at samples. Then the code moves into the rest of the envelope,
starting with the decay period:
// decay period
else if(*cnt <= (at+dt))
a = ((sus - maxamp)/dt)*(*cnt - at) + maxamp;
The counter cnt is incremented every sample, so now we check to see if there is any time left
for the sustain period:
// sustain period
else if(*cnt <= (dur - rt))
a = sus;
Otherwise we just move into the release period, which brings the amplitude back to zero:
// release period
else if(*cnt > (dur - rt))
a = -(sus/rt)*(*cnt - (dur - rt)) + sus;
The complete ADSR envelope function is as follows:
float adsr(float maxamp, float dur, float at, float dt,
float sus, float rt, int *cnt, float cr)
{
float a;
// convert to time in samples
at = at*cr;
dt = dt*cr;
rt = rt*cr;
dur = dur*cr;
if(*cnt < dur) { // if time < total duration
// attack period
if(*cnt <= at) a = *cnt * (maxamp/at);
// decay period
else if(*cnt <= (at+dt))
a = ((sus - maxamp)/dt)*(*cnt - at) + maxamp;
// sustain period

481

Time-Domain Audio Programming

else if(*cnt <= (dur - rt))
a = sus;
// release period
else if(*cnt > (dur - rt))
a = -(sus/rt)*(*cnt - (dur - rt)) + sus;
}
else a = 0.f;
// update time counter
(*cnt)++;
return a;
}
6.5.5

An Example Program

The following example shows the use of envelopes to control amplitude and frequency of
an oscillator:
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <snd_defs.h>
/** simple synthesis program with envelopes.
Generates a sawtooth sound with frequency and amplitude
envelopes. This program also shows the use of
interpolating oscillators.\n
\n
envelope sndfile.wav amp freq(Hz) dur(secs)
*/
int main(int argc, char** argv) {
SNDFILE *psf;
float *buffer;
int smps, cnt1=0, cnt2=0;
float dur, amp, freq, *wave, ndx=0;
if(argc == 5){
amp = (float) atof(argv[2]);
freq = (float) atof(argv[3]);
dur = (float)atof(argv[4]);
smps = (int) (dur*def_cr);
// allocate buffer & table memory
buffer = new float[def_vsize];
wave = sinus_table();

482

Chapter 6

// now we open the file
if(!(psf = soundout_open(argv[1]))){
printf("error opening output file\n");
exit(-1);
}
for(int i=0; i < smps; i++){
oscc(buffer,
amp*adsr(1.f,dur,0.05f, 0.1f, 0.7f, 0.2f, &cnt1),
expon(freq,dur/2,freq*2, &cnt2),
wave,&ndx);
soundout(psf,buffer);
}
// close file & free memory
soundout_close(psf);
delete[] buffer;
delete[] wave;
return 0;
}
else {
printf("usage: envelope sndfile.wav amp freq(hz) dur(s)\n");
return 1;
}
}
6.6

Filters
6.6.1

Filter Basics

Filters are implemented by combining signals with their delayed copies, in different ways.
There are two basic families of ﬁlters: ﬁlters that use delayed copies of their input, called feedforward or ﬁnite impulse response (FIR), and ﬁlters that use delayed outputs, called feedback
or inﬁnite impulse response (IIR). Filters of the second kind can also include feedforward
elements.
In some digital ﬁlters, delays will be as small as one sample. The order of the ﬁlter is determined by the order of the delays used. If a ﬁlter uses a max of two-sample delays, it is classed
as second-order. Filters are deﬁned by their equations. These will show the delays used in the
ﬁlter and the coefﬁcients (gain multipliers) associated with each delay.
Here is an example of a second-order ﬁlter equation:
y(n) ¼ a 0 x(n) þ a2 x(n  2)  b1 y(n  1)  b2 y(n  2),

(6)

483

Time-Domain Audio Programming

where n is the current sample of a signal, y(n) is the output, x(n) is the input, with its coefﬁcient a 0 , a2 is the coefﬁcient associated with a two-sample delay of the input, and b1 and b2
are the coefﬁcients associated with one-sample and two-sample delays of the ﬁlter output.
The frequency response is how a ﬁlter alters an input signal’s amplitude and phase at different frequencies. The amplitude response is the part of the frequency response that has to
do with boosting or attenuating the different input frequencies. The phase response determines the timing delays imposed on different frequencies. It can be linear (the same phase
change at all frequencies) or non-linear. From the ﬁlter equation (and coefﬁcients) we can
determine the frequency response, and vice versa.
IIR ﬁlters are generally simple to implement but complex to design. One way around this
is that they are generally offered in ‘‘pre-packed’’ formats—resonators, Butterworth ﬁlters,
ellipticals, and so on. Their cutoff frequencies and bandwidths can be made time-varying,
which is an important characteristic for musical applications.
FIR ﬁlters are simpler to design and can offer linear-phase characteristics, so they are often
preferred by engineers. Implementing them is also easy; however, they can be computationally intensive, and time-varying can be difﬁcult.
6.6.2

Resonators and Other IIR Filters

Resonators are basic general-purpose ﬁlters. They are well understood and provide good
results for most applications. Resonators are feedback ﬁlters; that is, they use a combination
of previous output samples with the current input sample. The basic resonator equation is
y(n) ¼ x(n)  b1 y(n  1)  b2 y(n  2).

(7)

This equation deﬁnes a second-order ﬁlter, with coefﬁcients b1 , and b2 . The frequency
response of the ﬁlter will be determined by its coefﬁcients. Conversely, we can determine
the coefﬁcients according to the ﬁlter characteristics we require.
The resonator will be deﬁned by two main characteristics: center frequency and bandwidth. The coefﬁcients b1 and b2 will be determined according to these parameters (f is the
ﬁlter center frequency, BW is the ﬁlter’s bandwidth, and sr is the sampling rate, all in hertz):
R ¼ 1  p(BW/sr),

(8)

b1 ¼ [4R2 /(1 þ R2 )]*(2pf/sr),

(9)

b2 ¼ R2 .

(10)

The output of the resonator will tend to vary with the center frequency and bandwidth,
depending also on the input signal. With sharp resonances, it is possible that the ﬁlter will
cause clipping distortion in most systems. To avoid that, we set a scaling factor to be applied
to the input signal. To scale a signal at the center frequency to 1, we can use
scaling ¼ (1  R2 ) sin(2pf/sr).

(11)

484

Chapter 6

Table 6.1
The second-order Butterworth coefﬁcients.
l
LP
HP

f

1=tanðpf=srÞ
tanðpf=srÞ

—
—

a1

a0
2

1=ð1 þ 2l þ l Þ
2

1=ð1 þ 2l þ l Þ

a2

b1

b2

a0

2a0 ð1  l Þ

a0 ð1  2l þ l 2 Þ

2a0

a0

2

2a0 ðl  1Þ

a0 ð1  2l þ l 2 Þ

2a0

2

BP

1=tanðpBW=srÞ

2 cosð2pf=srÞ

1=ð1 þ lÞ

0

a0

lfa0

a0 ðl  1Þ

BR

tanðpBW=srÞ

2 cosð2pf=srÞ

1=ð1 þ lÞ

fa0

a0

fa0

a0 ðl  1Þ

One of the problems with resonators is that there is a deformation on its amplitude
response curve, when the frequency is close to 0 Hz or the Nyquist limit. The attenuation
below (or above) is not as good in these situations. A proposed solution is to add a twosample feedforward delay to the ﬁlter. This has the effect of creating a ‘‘zero’’ (attenuation)
at 0 Hz and the Nyquist frequencies.6 The tradeoff is that the ﬁlter rolloff at the other side
of the band becomes less steep:
y(n) ¼ x(n)  a2 x(n  2)  b1 y(n  1)  b2 y(n  2),

(12)

where a2 can either be set to 1 or to the value of R.
There are a number of other ‘‘ready-made’’ digital ﬁlter designs, based on analog ﬁlters of
particular characteristics.7 A typical example of these is found in the Butterworth design.
Butterworth ﬁlters offer a maximally ﬂat passband and a good stopband attenuation and
come in BP, LP, HP, and Band-Reject (BR) ﬂavors. They employ both feedback and feedforward delays and are realized in second-order sections, as in:
y(n) ¼ a 0 x(n) þ a1 x(n  1) þ a2 x(n  2)  b1 y(n  1)  b2 y(n  2).

(13)

It is possible to have a basic ﬁlter ‘‘engine’’ for a second-order Butterworth section, which
can be made into any amplitude response shape by just modifying how its coefﬁcients are
calculated. The ‘‘recipes’’ for LP, HP, BP, and BR are shown in table 6.1 (f is the ﬁlter centre
or cutoff frequency, BW its bandwidth, and sr the sampling rate, all in hertz).
6.7

Filters: Implementation
6.7.1

Direct Forms

A ﬁlter equation can be implemented in two basic ways:
(a) direct form I: using separate delays for feedback and feedforward sections (see ﬁgure 6.4):
y(n) ¼ a 0 x(n) þ a1 x(n  1) þ a2 x(n  2)  b1 y(n  1)  b2 y(n  2)

(14)

(b) direct form II: the ﬁlter equation is re-arranged in two separate equations and the same
delays can be used for feedforward and feedback signal paths (see ﬁgure 6.5):

485

Time-Domain Audio Programming

Figure 6.4
Direct Form I ﬁlter ﬂow chart.

Figure 6.5
Direct Form II ﬁlter ﬂow chart.

w(n) ¼ x(n)  b1 w(n  1)  b2 w(n  2)
y(n) ¼ a 0 w(n) þ a1 w(n  1) þ a2 w(n  2)
6.7.2

[feedback],
[feedforward].

(15)
(16)

Low-Pass and High-Pass Filters: First Order

Simple tone-control-type ﬁlters, which provide a gentle low-pass or high-pass amplitude
response, can be implemented with a basic ﬁrst-order recursive (or feedback) ﬁlter based on
the equation
y(n) ¼ ax(n)  by(n  1).

(17)

486

Chapter 6

Table 6.2
First-order IIR coefﬁcients.
a
LP

1þb

HP

1b

b
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
½2  cosð2pf=srÞ 2  1  2 þ cosð2pf=srÞ
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2  cosð2pf=srÞ  ½2  cosð2pf=srÞ 2  1

The coefﬁcients a and b can be calculated as shown in table 6.2 (f is the ﬁlter cutoff frequency and sr the sampling rate, both in hertz).
As can be seen from the above, changing the low-pass response to a high-pass one is just a
matter of multiplying the b coefﬁcient by 1 while keeping a unchanged.
Here is the Cþþ code for these two ﬁlters. We will use an externally allocated memory
variable to hold the one-sample feedback delay.
float lowpass(float* sig, float freq, float *del,
int vecsize, float sr){
double costh, coef;
costh = 2. - cos(2*pi*freq/sr);
coef = sqrt(costh*costh - 1.) - costh;
for(int i =0; i < vecsize; i++){
sig[i] = (float) (sig[i]*(1 + coef) - *del*coef);
*del = sig[i];
}
return *sig;
}
float highpass(float* sig, float freq, float *del,
int vecsize, float sr){
double costh, coef;
costh = 2. - cos(2*pi*freq/sr);
coef = costh - sqrt(costh*costh - 1.);
for(int i =0; i < vecsize; i++){
sig[i] = (float) (sig[i]*(1 - coef) - *del*coef);
*del = sig[i];
}
return *sig;
}

487

Time-Domain Audio Programming

6.7.3

Resonators

The resonator ﬁlter uses one-sample and two-sample feedback delays. The resonator ﬁlter
expression and coefﬁcients have already been discussed. Here is a Cþþ function that implements this ﬁlter:
float resonator(float* sig, float freq, float bw, float *del,
int vecsize,float sr){
double r, rsq, rr, costh, scal;
rr = 2*(r = 1. - pi*(bw/sr));
rsq = r*r;
costh = (rr/(1.+rsq))*cos(2*pi*freq/sr);
scal = (1 - rsq)*sin(acos(costh));
for(int i=0;
sig[i] =
del[1] =
del[0] =
}
return *sig;

i < vecsize; i++){
(float)(sig[i]*scal + rr*costh*del[0] - rsq*del[1]);
del[0];
sig[i];

}
The improved version of the resonator ﬁlter, using a two-sample feedforward delay, can be
implemented using the basic resonator coefﬁcients, but modifying the scaling factor and
adding the a2 term as follows:
scaling ¼ 1  R,

(18)

a2 ¼ R,

(19)

where R is the ﬁlter radius, calculated from the bandwidth. Since we are using feedback and
feedforward delays, we will use direct form II as discussed above, separating the ﬁlter into
two equations:
float bandpass(float* sig, float freq, float bw, float *del,
int vecsize,float sr){
double r, rsq, rr, costh, scal, w;
rr = 2*(r = 1. - pi*(bw/sr));
rsq = r*r;
costh = (rr/(1.+rsq))*cos(2*pi*freq/sr);
scal = (1 - r);
for(int i=0; i < vecsize; i++){
w = scal*sig[i] + rr*costh*del[0] - rsq*del[1];
sig[i] = (float)(w - r*del[1]);

488

Chapter 6

del[1] = del[0];
del[0] = (float) w;
}
return *sig;
}
Note that in this design we will scale the signal as it enters the ﬁlter, as the scaling factor here
is not the a 0 coefﬁcient. For general-purpose second-order sections (such as those used in
Butterworth ﬁlters), we would apply the a 0 coefﬁcient to the feedforward section of the
equation.
6.7.4

RMS Estimation and Signal Balancing

When using ﬁlters, sometimes it is necessary to provide a signal-rescaling facility, as the overall amplitude of the output might be very different from the input. This is often the case
when a cascading connection of ﬁlters is used. If we estimate the root-mean-square (RMS) of
the ﬁlter output and the RMS of a comparator signal, we can rescale the output to match the
amplitude of the comparator. This is the basis of the balance or envelope follower processor.
The RMS is estimated by rectifying the signal (taking its absolute values) and low-pass ﬁltering it (also, instead of rectiﬁcation, we could have taken its square root). The scaling gain
to be applied will be the ratio of the comparator RMS to the input RMS. Here is the code for
the balance processor:
float balance(float *sig, float *cmp, float* del, float freq,
int vecsize, float sr){
double costh, coef;
costh = 2. - cos(2*pi*freq/sr);
coef = sqrt(costh*costh - 1.) - costh;
for(int i=0; i < vecsize; i++){
del[0] = (float)((sig[i] < 0 ? -sig[i] : sig[i])*(1+coef)
- del[0]*coef);
del[1] = (float)((cmp[i] < 0 ? -cmp[i] : cmp[i])*(1+coef)
- del[1]*coef);
sig[i] *= (float)(del[0] ? del[1]/del[0] : del[1]);
}
return *sig;
}
Notice that the LP design used is the basic ﬁrst-order feedback low-pass ﬁlter discussed
above. The rectiﬁcation is combined with the ﬁlter equation in one single expression. Two
delays are used, one for each ﬁlter and the input is scaled by the RMS ratio of the two signals.

489

Time-Domain Audio Programming

6.7.5

A Programming Example

Here is a simple program employing an oscillator, a ﬁlter, and a balance processor:
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <snd_defs.h>
/** subtractive synthesis program with envelopes.
Generates a filtered sawtooth sound with amplitude
and filter cf envelopes. This program also shows the use
of interpolating oscillators.\n
\n
envelope sndfile.wav amp freq(Hz) dur(secs)
*/
int main(int argc, char** argv) {
SNDFILE *psf;
float *buffer;
int smps, bytes = sizeof(float)*def_vsize, cnt1=0, cnt2=0;
float dur, amp, freq, *wave, *comp, ndx=0;
if(argc == 5){
amp = (float) atof(argv[2]);
freq = (float) atof(argv[3]);
dur = (float)atof(argv[4]);
smps = (int) (dur*def_cr);
// allocate buffer, delay & table memory
buffer = new float[def_vsize];
comp = new float[def_vsize];
float del[2]={0.f, 0.f}, del1[2]={0.f,0.f};
wave = saw_table(30);
// now we open the file
if(!(psf = soundout_open(argv[1]))){
printf("error opening output file\n");
exit(-1);
}
for(int i=0; i < smps; i++){
oscc(buffer,
adsr(amp,dur,0.05f, 0.1f, amp*0.7f, 0.2f, &cnt1),
freq,
wave,&ndx);

490

Chapter 6

memcpy(comp, buffer, bytes);
resonator(buffer, expon(freq*8,dur,freq*4, &cnt2), 50, del);
balance(buffer, comp, del1);
soundout(psf,buffer);
}
// close file & free memory
soundout_close(psf);
[] buffer;
delete[] comp;
delete[] wave;
return 0;
}
else {
printf("usage: filter sndfile.wav amp freq(hz) dur(s)\n");
return 1;
}
}
6.8

Delay-Based Sound Processing
The majority of the classic techniques of time-domain signal processing involve the use of
signal delays. These uses range from the use small delays already discussed examples of IIR
ﬁlters to longer delays in reverberation and variable delays in ﬂanging, pitch effects, etc.
6.8.1

Soundﬁle Input

Before examining the use of delays in processing techniques and their implementation, we
will have to introduce some means of signal input. Here we will deﬁne a simple soundﬁle
interface for sound input, similarly to what we have already done with output. We will add
a function interface to open a ﬁle for input, to read from it and to close it. This can be done
using libsndfile for its implementation (or a similar library; in any case, we can treat this
as a ‘‘black box’’):
SNDFILE *soundin_open(char* name, int *chans, float *sr);
/** close output soundfile.
*/
void soundin_close(SNDFILE *psf_in);
/** soundfile output.
psf_out: soundfile handle
buffer: signal buffer, interleaved if multichannel

491

Time-Domain Audio Programming

Figure 6.6
Conceptual view of a delay line.

vecsize: signal vector size in frames
returns: number of frames output to file
*/
int soundin(SNDFILE *psf_out, float *buffer, int vecsize=def_vsize);
The basic difference from the soundout() interface is that, since we are reading from a ﬁle,
the basic parameters relating to number of channels and sampling rate can be obtained from
the ﬁle (or at least checked for consistency). These parameters are copied into the *chans
and *sr variables by the soundin_open() function.
6.8.2

Delay Lines

Delay lines are the basic component of all the processing techniques discussed here. Their
basic function is to delay a signal by a certain amount of time, which can be set in seconds,
milliseconds, or samples (taking the sampling rate in consideration).
The amount of actual time delay in ﬁgure 6.6 will be determined by the sampling rate as
well as the size of the delay line in samples. For a ten-sample delay at 44,100 hertz, this will
be 10/44,100 seconds, or 0.227 millisecond.
6.8.3

Circular Buffers

Small delays, in the case of the ones used in second-order ﬁlters, are implemented by a ﬁrstin ﬁrst-out (FIFO) structure, where samples are copied from one memory location to the
next, as in the conceptual example above. However, for larger delays, this will mean an
unnecessary number of sample shifts, because the same thing can be implemented more
efﬁciently without moving any samples in the delay line. In this case, we will use a programming construct called a circular buffer.
A circular buffer works by keeping the samples in place and moving the reading and writing positions along the buffer, wrapping around when at the end of the buffer. (See ﬁgure
6.7.) In this case, all we need do is keep track of the writing pointers. Moreover, in the simplest cases, we need to keep track of only one pointer, as the writing operation can be preceded by the reading operation on the same memory position. In order to effect a certain

492

Chapter 6

Figure 6.7
The circular buffer.

time delay, we will allocate the necessary number of samples and then, using an index, read
and write to memory, incrementing the pointer after the writing operation. Nothing could
be simpler.
6.8.4

Fixed Delays

Here is an example of a ﬁxed-delay implementation, based on a circular buffer. The function
will require the delay buffer to be allocated externally and the index (pointer) also to exist as
an externally allocated variable. Three basic actions will have to be implemented, in the following order:
1. Read the delay buffer at the current position to generate the output.
2. Write the input signal that position.
3. Increment the position index (r/w pointer), checking if we have not reached the end of
the buffer.
This can be done as follows:
float delay(float *sig, float dtime, float *del,
int *p, int vecsize, float sr){
int dt;

493

Time-Domain Audio Programming

Figure 6.8
Comb-ﬁlter ﬂow chart.

float out;
dt = (int) (dtime*sr);
for(int i=0; i < vecsize; i++){
out = del[*p];
del[*p] = sig[i];
sig[i] = out;
*p = (*p != dt-1 ? *p+1 : 0);
}
return *sig;
}
This function, if combined with the input signal, will create a single slap-back echo. The
amount of delay will be dependent on the delay time parameter (in seconds, generally set
to the size of the delay buffer, possibly less but never exceeding it).
Reverberation and echo are examples of effects that employ ﬁxed delays. Reverberators can
be constructed quite efﬁciently by connecting together small units such as comb ﬁlters and
allpass ﬁlters.8 These can be also used on their own for a variety of effects.
6.8.5

Comb Filters

Comb ﬁlters are based on a ﬁxed delay line with a feedback circuit inserted into it. The
amount of feedback is controlled by the parameter
g ¼ 0.001t/RVT ,

(19)

where t is the delay time and RVT is the total reverb time of the comb ﬁlter. (See ﬁgure 6.8.)
The reverb time is deﬁned as the time it takes for the output of the comb ﬁlter to fall to
1/1,000 of its original amplitude (60 dB) once its input has stopped. A simple modiﬁcation
of the above code for ﬁxed delays will implement a comb ﬁlter:
float comb(float *sig, float dtime, float gain,
float *delay, int *p, int vecsize, float sr){
int dt;
float out;

494

Chapter 6

dt = (int) (dtime*sr);
for(int i=0; i < vecsize; i++){
out = delay[*p];
delay[*p] = sig[i] + out*gain;
sig[i] = out;
*p = (*p != dt-1 ? *p+1 : 0);
}
return *sig;
}
Comb ﬁlters can be used in a variety of applications. On their own they can be employed
for echo effects and as resonating chambers (with very short delays and high feedback gain
values). In reverberators, they are usually connected in parallel, their output feeding one or
more allpass ﬁlters in series.
6.8.6

Allpass Filters

These component reverberators are very similar to comb ﬁlters, but they also include a feedforward section in addition to the feedback. Here is the code:
float allpass(float *sig, float dtime, float gain,
float *delay, int *p, int vecsize, float sr){
int dt;
float dlout;
dt = (int) (dtime*sr);
for(int i=0; i < vecsize; i++){
dlout = delay[*p];
delay[*p] = sig[i] + dlout*gain;
sig[i] = dlout - gain*sig[i];
*p = (*p != dt-1 ? *p+1 : 0);
}
return *sig;
}
(See ﬁgure 6.9.)
This type of allpass ﬁlter is often employed in series connections to create thick reverberation effects.
6.9

Variable and Multitap Delays
So far we have only discussed the aspects relating to delays that are ﬁxed, or at least, that
change only occasionally. The possibility of modulating the delay time will open the doors
for a variety of effects, including ﬂanging, chorusing, vibrato, doppler, and pitch shifting.

495

Time-Domain Audio Programming

Figure 6.9
Allpass-ﬁlter ﬂow chart.

6.9.1

Implementing a Variable Delay Line

In order to implement variable delays using circular buffers, we should consider these four
points:
1. Since the writing to the delay line will always proceed sample by sample, we will have to
calculate our delay in relation to the writer pointer position, in order to obtain a reading
position index.
2. The reading position, when calculated as an offset from the writing position, might fall
beyond the delay buffer memory; in this case we will have to provide a modulus operation
to bring it to the right range.
3. The reading position index might fall between buffer positions, if we are to calculate precise delays. To get a good result, we will have to interpolate to generate the output.
4. When interpolating linearly, we need the next sample to our truncated read-position. A
special case arises when this position is the last sample in the delay buffer; in this case we
will read the ﬁrst position of the array as the next point.
Once these points are considered, all we need is a little editing of the ﬁxed-delay code.
6.9.2

Flanger

As an example of the use of variable delay lines, we can implement a simple ﬂanger effect.
First, we introduce a variable delay implementation, which is based on a variation of the
code in subsection 6.8.4:
float vdelay(float *sig, float vdtime, float maxdel,
float *delay, int *p, int vecsize, float sr){
int mdt,rpi;
float out, rp, vdt, frac, next;
vdt = vdtime*sr;

496

Chapter 6

mdt = (int) (maxdel*sr);
if(vdt > mdt) vdt = (float) mdt;
for(int i=0; i < vecsize; i++){
rp = *p - vdt;
rp = (rp >= 0 ? (rp < mdt ? rp : rp - mdt) : rp + mdt);
rpi = (int) rp;
frac = rp - rpi;
next = (rpi != mdt-1 ? delay[rpi+1] : delay[0]);
out = delay[rpi] + frac*(next - delay[rpi]);
delay[*p] = sig[i];
sig[i] = out;
*p = (*p != mdt-1 ? *p+1 : 0);
}
return *sig;
}
The delay time can be modulated by a periodic source or an envelope. In the programming
example below, we are using a simple envelope to change the delay time. The actual
flanger() function used in the programming example is a variation on the vdelay()
function that includes a feedback path (as in the comb ﬁlter), with the following prototype:
float flanger(float *sig, float vdtime, float fdb,
float maxdel,float *delay, int *p,
int vecsize=def_vsize, float sr=def_sr);
The feedback path is created by modifying one line from the vdelay() code, writing the
delay as follows:
delay[*p] = sig[i] + out*fdb;
Here is the full program code for our ﬂanger effect:
/** flanging program with envelopes.
Flanges an input sound with a delay time envelope.
\n
delay infile.* outfile.wav maxdelay(s) env_dur(s)
*/
int main(int argc, char** argv) {
SNDFILE *psfo, *psfi;
float *buffer;
int chans, bytes = sizeof(float)*def_vsize, cnt=0, pt=0, ts=0;
float sr, dur, dtime, *comp, *del, del1[2]={0.f, 0.f};
if(argc == 5){
dtime = (float) atof(argv[3]);
dur = (float) atof(argv[4]);

497

Time-Domain Audio Programming

// allocate buffer and delay memory
buffer = new float[def_vsize];
comp = new float[def_vsize];
del = new float[(int)(dtime*def_sr)];
memset(del, 0, sizeof(float)*(int)(dtime*def_sr));
// now we open the files
if(!(psfi = soundin_open(argv[1], &chans, &sr))){
printf("error opening input file\n");
exit(-1);
}
if(chans > 1 || sr != def_sr) {
printf("unsupported channels or sr\n");
exit(-1);
}
if(!(psfo = soundout_open(argv[2]))){
printf("error opening output file\n");
exit(-1);
}
do {
cnt = soundin(psfi, buffer);
memcpy(comp, buffer, bytes);
flanger(buffer, line(.0001f, dur, dtime, &ts), 0.8f,
dtime, del, &pt);
balance(buffer, comp, del1);
soundout(psfo,buffer, cnt);
} while(cnt);
// close file & free memory
soundin_close(psfi);
soundout_close(psfo);
delete[] buffer;
delete[] comp;
delete[] del;
return 0;
}
else {
printf("usage: flanger infile.* outf.wav maxdelay(s)
env_dur(s)\n");
return 1;
}
}

498

Chapter 6

6.9.3

Other Effects

The vdelay() function shown above can be used to implement most of the other variable
delay effects. Chorusing can be performed by adding a few delayed signals (without feedback), modulated by an LFO a low-frequency oscillator (LFO). Vibrato can be created by
using an LFO to modulate the delay time (again without feedback). Doppler shift can be
created by calculating a variable delay based on the distance from a moving source.
6.9.4

Multitap Delays and Convolution

In addition to ﬁxed and variable delays, another interesting possibility is that of adding other
‘‘taps’’ to the delay line. Here, instead of only extracting the output at a single point in the
circular buffer (at the end or at variable points), we will get it at more than one position; thus
it is a multitap delay. The typical application of such a unit is to reproduce early reﬂections for
reverberation, where, for instance, each tap models the echo from a surface in a room. In fact
the extreme case of multitap delays is found where we place a tap at each position in a delay
line. This can be used to implement the operation of convolution,9 which is one of the
means used to recreate realistic early reverberation effects.
In this case, we will also apply a gain multiplier to each tap. Each output sample will be a
sum of N taps, where N is the size of the delay line. The sequence of gain values is also N-size
and is often called the impulse response (IR). This is can be seen as a digital signal with N samples, which could be obtained, for instance, by recording the result of a very short burst of
noise played into a room (the noise is the impulse and the recording is of the room’s response
to it). Another way of looking at this is to think of the IR as the amplitude of each individual
reﬂection of the room’s surfaces. Furthermore, the operation can be generalized as a method
of imparting the characteristics of a system into an input sound. It is also a means of implementing FIR ﬁlters, as the IR is effectively a sequence of feedforward ﬁlter coefﬁcients.
The time-domain implementation of convolution is shown schematically in ﬁgure 6.10.
We need two basic components: a circular buffer (seen in the center of the ﬁgure), tapped at
each point, and a table containing the impulse response in positions ranging from 0 to N  1
(the ‘imp’ array in the ﬁgure).
The mechanism is effectively the same seen in ﬁxed delays, the write pointer being incremented for each input sample, except that now we will have to sum up all the scaled outputs
of each tap (so we have N read pointers). This is implemented as an inner loop that cycles
through all positions in the buffer, extracting their samples and scaling them. Here is a function that performs the convolution of an input signal and an impulse response:
float fir(float *sig, float *imp, float *del,
int length, int *p, int vecsize, float sr){
float out=0.f; int rp;

499

Time-Domain Audio Programming

Figure 6.10
Time-domain convolution with a circular buffer.

for(int i=0; i < vecsize; i++){
del[*p] = sig[i];
*p = (*p != length-1 ? *p+1 : 0);
for(int j=0; j < length; j++){
rp = *p+j;
rp = (rp < length ? rp : rp - length);
out += (del[rp]*imp[length-1-j]);
}
sig[i] = out;
out = 0.f;
}
return *sig;
}

500

Chapter 6

This function can then be used in a program that implements time-domain convolution of
two soundﬁles (one the input signal and the other the IR). We allocate the delay buffer and
the impulse table depending on the size of the latter and then apply the process to the
stream of input samples. This process is quite processor intensive and becomes slow with
large IRs (because it does N additions and multiplications per sample), so we might want to
display its progress to inform the impatient user that the program is still running. Also,
depending on the ﬁles used, clipping can occur, so it is good to have a gain control for attenuation or boost of the output signal. Here is an example program:
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <snd_defs.h>
/** convolution program.
Convolution of an input file and an impulse
\n
conv infile.* impulse.* outfile.wav gain
*/
int main(int argc, char** argv) {
SNDFILE *psfo, *psfi[2];
float *buffer, gain;
int chans,i,j=0,cnt=0,pt=0,size;
float sr, *imp, *del;
if(argc == 5){
// allocate buffer, delay & table memory
buffer = new float[def_vsize];
gain = atof(argv[4]);
// now we open the files
if(!(psfi[0] = soundin_open(argv[1], &chans, &sr))){
printf("error opening input file\n");
exit(-1);
}
if(chans > 1 || sr != def_sr) {
printf("unsupported channels or sr\n");
exit(-1);
}
if(!(psfi[1] = soundin_open(argv[2], &chans, &sr))){
printf("error opening impulse file\n");
exit(-1);

501

Time-Domain Audio Programming

}
if(chans > 1 || sr != def_sr) {
printf("unsupported channels or sr\n");
exit(-1);
}
if(!(psfo = soundout_open(argv[3]))){
printf("error opening output file\n");
exit(-1);
}
size = dataframes(psfi[1]);
del = new float[size];
imp = new float[size];
memset(del, 0, sizeof(float)*size);
// copy impulse into table
do {
cnt = soundin(psfi[1],buffer);
for(i=0; i < cnt; i++,j++) imp[j] = buffer[i];
} while(cnt);
printf("Processing (this might take a while). . . \n");
// process
j=0;
do {
cnt = soundin(psfi[0], buffer);
fir(buffer,imp,del,size,&pt);
for(i=0; i < def_vsize; i++) buffer[i] *= gain;
soundout(psfo,buffer);
memset(buffer,0,sizeof(float)*def_vsize);
if(j%(def_vsize*50)==0) printf("%.3f secs..\n", j/def_sr);
j+=def_vsize;
} while(cnt);
// tail (last N-1 samples)
cnt = size - 1;
do {
fir(buffer,imp,del,size,&pt);
(i=0;i < def_vsize; i++) buffer[i] *= gain;
soundout(psfo,buffer);
memset(buffer,0,sizeof(float)*def_vsize);
cnt -= def_vsize;
}
while(cnt >= 0);

502

Chapter 6

// close file & free memory
soundin_close(psfi[0]);
soundin_close(psfi[1]);
soundout_close(psfo);
delete[] buffer;
delete[] imp;
delete[] del;
return 0;
}
else {
printf("usage: conv infile.* impulse.* outfile.wav gain \n");
return 1;
}
}
6.10

An Essential Application: An Audio Effect Plug-in
Audio plug-ins are now so ubiquitous in computer systems that we could consider them the
‘‘essential’’ application for our ‘‘essential’’ components. They have some advantages over full
programs and other types of development, as the work is focused on audio programming
tasks rather than other aspects of making the software work. This section describes the steps
in putting together a plug-in, for which we will choose a popular (albeit proprietary) application programming interface10 called VST.11 Other types of plug-ins, including Audio Units
and Csound opcodes, are discussed elsewhere in the book.
What is a plug-in? First of all, it is different from the full programs developed in our previous examples in an important aspect: it is designed to be a component of an existing
system (i.e. the plug-in host), rather than a stand-alone application. Because of this, it will
not need to implement any of the infrastructures of a program, such as connections to the
soundcards, ﬁle IO, user interfaces,12 and application control.
From the OS point of view, plug-ins are dynamic-loadable modules, a type of software
library that a running program, the host, can load up and use. On Windows these are known
as DLLs and have a *.dll ﬁle extension; on Linux they generally have *.so extension (with
some exceptions); on OSX these types of libraries are known as bundles. In addition, on OSX,
the bundle ﬁle is often hidden under a small directory structure, which might contain some
associated resource ﬁles.
A plug-in API, such as VST, allows developers to create the code elements ( classes, functions, and so on) that the host application expects to see when it loads and runs it. Generally
speaking, a plug-in is a class13 that is instantiated14 (i.e. created in memory, initialized, etc.)
by the host, creating one or more objects of this plug-in type that can be run to process
audio. Some APIs are based on the C language. Others are written in Cþþ, and this is the
case with VST.

503

Time-Domain Audio Programming

Figure 6.11
VST plug-in base and derived classes.

This API offers two base classes, which the developer will specialize15 (i.e. write new classes
derived from them). VST hosts then are able to call methods (functions) of the base class to
run the specialized code we have written. A plugin host developer does not need to know
about the internal details of the process implemented in a plug-in. This is possible because
the host and the plug-in share the same interface provided by the API.
6.10.1

Deriving a Plug-in Class from the VST Base Classes

A VST plug-in is derived from the AudioEffectX class, which in turn is derived from
AudioEffect. Both of these classes provide the interface that our plug-in is expected to
implement (ﬁgure 6.11). They also offer some functionality that we might ﬁnd useful, such
as getting the sampling rate of the host, retrieving parameters, and receiving MIDI. Not all of
this functionality is needed at all times, and we can use and implement only the relevant
parts of the interface.
In our present application, we will be doing the following:
1. initializing: allocating any memory needed, setting initial values for variables and parameters, etc.; also termination (freeing up memory)
2. retrieving parameters from the host, so we can have real-time control of our processes;
this will also include keeping track of programs (which are stored sets of parameter values)
3. processing audio.

504

Chapter 6

We will then implement some of the base class methods that the host will use to perform
them. Let’s go straight to our class deﬁnition, which looks like this (with some bits missing):
class MyPlug : public AudioEffectX
{
protected:
/* our internal variables, we'll leave this for later */
public:
/* initialization and termination */
MyPlug (audioMasterCallback audioMaster);
~MyPlug ();
virtual void resume ();
virtual bool getEffectName (char* name);
virtual bool getVendorString (char* text);
virtual bool getProductString (char* text);
virtual VstInt32 getVendorVersion () { return 1024; }
virtual VstPlugCategory getPlugCategory ()
{ return kPlugCategEffect; }
/* processing */
virtual void processReplacing (float** inputs, float** outputs,
VstInt32 sampleFrames);
/* parameters and programs */
virtual void setParameter (VstInt32 index, float value);
virtual float getParameter (VstInt32 index);
virtual void getParameterLabel (VstInt32 index, char* label);
virtual void getParameterDisplay (VstInt32 index, char* text);
virtual void getParameterName (VstInt32 index, char* text);
virtual void setProgram (VstInt32 program);
virtual void setProgramName (char* name);
virtual void getProgramName (char* name);
virtual bool getProgramNameIndexed (VstInt32 category,
VstInt32 index, char* text);
/* plus any extra methods we might create specially for our
class */
};
As the comments indicate, we have the three tasks clearly laid out in the class deﬁnition.
We will be specializing base-class methods (named ‘‘virtual’’) to implement the functionality
we need. Their names are good indicatives of what they are supposed to do, as we will see
later. Later we will also add any variables we require for our processing and some of our
own methods (to set variables etc.), which we omitted here. Now it is a good time to introduce our effect.

505

Time-Domain Audio Programming

6.10.2

A Pitch Shifter

A notable side effect of the variable delays introduced above can be used to create pitch
effects. When delays increase, we have an upward change in pitch; when they decrease, a
downward change is noticed. Constantly increasing delays will cause a ﬁxed pitch transposition effect, whereas slowing-down and speeding-up delay changes can create modulation
effects like vibrato.
Let us concentrate on the pitch shifter effect, which is created by increasing or decreasing
the delay by a ﬁxed amount. If we look at this from a different angle, we can think of the
circular delay line as a wavetable that is constantly re-written. The delay reading point then
proceeds through the table at the desired pitch transposition rate. If its position increment
is 1, there is no pitch change (and no delay change—the writing point always has an increment of 1); above 1, we have an upward pitch shift, as we are playing the ‘‘wavetable’’ at a
rate faster than the rate at which it was written; conversely, if the increment is between 0
and 1, the pitch is shifted downward. This appears to be straightforward, but there is one
complication: the delay line is ﬁnite and circular, so at some point either the reading point
will overtake the writing point or vice versa. This will create a nasty click in the signal, as we
go from, say, maximum delay to minimum delay. The best way to avoid the click is to add an
envelope (sometimes called a window) that goes to zero at that discontinuity. This can be a
simple triangle shape, going from 0 at its ends to 1 in the middle.
This is not the end of the story, as we are left with a transposed but amplitude-modulated
signal. In order to reduce this tremolo effect, which is generally undesirable, we can use a
second reading point, or tap, that is offset by half a delay length, and enveloped in the
same way. So when one tap is at the discontinuity point (and thus its amplitude is zero),
the other tap is at its maximum amplitude. This results in a smoother output, with no clicks
and a less intrusive amplitude ﬂuctuation.
That is our pitch shifter effect, illustrated schematically in ﬁgure 6.12. One further addition
to it is a feedback path, which can be used to create arpeggiation effects as we feed the transposed output back to be further shifted. We have all the tools we need to implement this
already in place from previous sections: circular buffer, variable delay readout, multiple taps,
envelopes.
Our effect will have four parameters: pitch transposition ratio, gain, feedback, and delay
time. These parameters and our delay, envelope, writing pointer and reading pointer will
determine what internal variables we will need. We will also include an array of programs
to store our parameters. These make up our class member variables:
protected:
MyPlugProgram* programs; // program storage
float *delay, *env; // circular buffer and envelope arrays
float gain, pitch, rp, fdb, sr; // parameters etc
int taps, dsize, wp; // no of taps, delay size, write-point

506

Chapter 6

Figure 6.12
The pitch-shifter effect.

Program storage is handled by a data structure, which holds the four parameters together.
Each program can also be given a name. Note that delay size is stored in seconds:
struct MyPlugProgram
{
MyPlugProgram (){
gain = 0.5; pitch = 0.5; fdb = 0.0, dsize = 0.045;
strcpy (name, "Init");
}
float gain;
float pitch;
float fdb;
float dsize;
char name[64];
};
6.10.3

Initialization

Now let us focus on the initializing element of our class. Here is the constructor:
MyPlug::MyPlug (audioMasterCallback audioMaster)
: AudioEffectX (audioMaster, PROGS, PARAMS)
{

507

Time-Domain Audio Programming

int i;
// allocate program memory
programs = new MyPlugProgram[numPrograms];
// parameters, initial values
gain = 0.5;
pitch = 1.0;
fdb = 0.0;
taps = 2;
// getSampleRate() returns the host SR
sr = getSampleRate();
dsize = (int) (0.045*sr);
// allocate a 1-sec delay line and envelope
delay = new float[(int)sr];
env = new float[(int)sr];
// write a triangular envelope (ramp up, ramp down)
for(i=0; i < dsize/2; i++) env[i] = i*2./dsize;
for(i=dsize/2; i >= 0; i--) env[dsize-i-1] = i*2./dsize;
// set init program as number 0
if(programs)setProgram(0);
setNumInputs(1);
// 1 channel
setNumOutputs(1);
// input & output
setUniqueID('MpLg'); // this should be unique
resume();
// zero delay etc
}
Most of the lines here are self-explanatory. PROGS and PARAMS are constants holding the
numbers of programs (64) and parameters (4) that have been deﬁned previously. The major
bit of initialization is writing the envelope (made up of up and down ramps, each half the
delay size). The delay and envelopes are created with the maximum allowed delay size
(1 sec), but we can set the delay to be smaller than that (initially it is 45 msec). The ﬁnal
call is to resume():
void MyPlug::resume ()
{
wp = 0;
rp = 0.;
memset (delay, 0, sr * sizeof (float));
AudioEffectX::resume ();
}
This clears the delay line and zeroes the writer and reader point positions. It calls the base
class method for any other initialization implemented in there (which we don’t need to
know about). When the plug-in is closed, a termination method (destructor) is called automatically, where the memory we previously allocated is released:

508

Chapter 6

MyPlug::~MyPlug ()
{
if(delay) delete[] delay;
if(env) delete[] env;
if(programs) delete[] programs;
}
The other initialization-related methods deal with registration and name setting:
bool MyPlug::getEffectName (char* name)
{
strcpy (name, "PitchShift");
return true;
}
bool MyPlug::getProductString (char* text)
{
strcpy (text, "PitchShift");
return true;
}
bool MyPlug::getVendorString (char* text)
{
strcpy (text, "Acme Audio Ltd");
return true;
}
6.10.4

Parameters

VST treats parameters in a very straightforward manner. A parameter is linked to numerical
index, which is used by the host to set and get it from the plug-in. Two methods implement
this. setParameter() is called when a parameter changes in the host (notice how we set
the parameter variables and their corresponding program values):
void MyPlug::setParameter(VstInt32 index, float value)
{
MyPlugProgram &ap = programs[curProgram];
switch (index)
{
case PITCH:
setPitch(ap.pitch = value);
break;
case GAIN:
setGain(ap.gain = value);
break;

509

Time-Domain Audio Programming

case DSIZE:
setDsize(ap.dsize = value);
break;
case FDB:
setFdb(ap.fdb = value);
}
}
getParameter() returns the parameter asked for:
float MyPlug::getParameter(VstInt32 index)
{
float param = 0;
switch (index)
{
case GAIN:
param =
break;
case PITCH:
param =
break;
case FDB:
param =
break;
case DSIZE:
param =
}
return param;

gain;

pitch;

fdb;

dsize/sr;

}
The constants PITCH, GAIN, FDB, and DSIZE are the parameter numerical indexes. To make
matters simple, we deﬁne these in an enumeration (together with the other constants used
before):
enum { PROGS = 64, GAIN = 0, PITCH, FDB, DSIZE, PARAMS };
To set the parameter variables we have previously deﬁned some class functions, which we
employed above. These are
void setGain(float g) { gain = g;}
void setPitch(float p) { pitch = p;}
void setFdb(float f) { fdb = f;}
and the delay setting, which also resets the envelope (because its length is tied to the delay
size):

510

Chapter 6

void MyPlug::setDsize(float d){
dsize = (int)(sr*d);
int i;
for(i=0; i < dsize/2; i++) env[i] = i*2./dsize;
for(i=dsize/2; i >= 0; i--) env[dsize-i-1] = i*2./dsize;
}
In addition, we implement functions to give parameters their names, labels, and display
values:
void MyPlug::getParameterName (VstInt32 index, char *label)
{
switch (index)
{
case GAIN:
strcpy (label, "Gain");
break;
case PITCH:
strcpy (label, "Pitch");
break;
case DSIZE:
strcpy (label, "Delay");
break;
case FDB:
strcpy (label, "Feedback");
}
}
void MyPlug::getParameterLabel (VstInt32 index, char *label)
{
switch (index)
{
case PITCH:
strcpy (label, "ratio");
break;
case GAIN:
strcpy (label, "dB");
break;
case DSIZE:
strcpy (label, "secs");
break;
case FDB:
strcpy (label, "gain");
}
}

511

Time-Domain Audio Programming

void MyPlug::getParameterDisplay (VstInt32 index, char *text)
{
switch (index)
{
case PITCH:
float2string ((pitch*1.5+0.5), text, kVstMaxParamStrLen);
break;
case GAIN:
dB2string (gain, text, kVstMaxParamStrLen);
break;
case DSIZE:
float2string (dsize/sr, text, kVstMaxParamStrLen);
break;
case FDB:
float2string (fdb, text, kVstMaxParamStrLen);
}
}
Notice in this last method that the pitch parameter is stored normalized (0.0–1.0) but displayed in the range it is used (0.5–2.0) using the conversion pitch*1.5+0.5, which is also
used in the processing method to set the read pointer increment. This way, the parameter
value displayed will correspond correctly to its use. VST parameter ranges are normalized, so
we use this as a work-around.
Finally, we also implement some functions to deal with programs, setting their values and
getting or setting their names:
void MyPlug::setProgram (VstInt32 program)
{
MyPlugProgram* ap = &programs[program];
curProgram = program;
setParameter (GAIN,ap->gain);
setParameter (PITCH,ap->pitch);
setParameter (FDB,ap->fdb);
}
void MyPlug::setProgramName (char *name)
{
strcpy (programs[curProgram].name, name);
}
void MyPlug::getProgramName (char *name)
{
if(!strcmp (programs[curProgram].name, "Init"))
sprintf(name, "%s %d", programs[curProgram].name,
curProgram + 1);

512

Chapter 6

else
strcpy(name, programs[curProgram].name);
}
bool MyPlug::getProgramNameIndexed (VstInt32 category,
VstInt32 index, char* text)
{
if (index < PROGS)
{
strcpy(text, programs[index].name);
return true;
}
return false;
}
6.10.5

Processing

The core of the plug-in is implemented by the processReplacing() method. This takes as
parameters two arrays of input and output sample vectors (one per channel each way, but
since we only have one channel, these are arrays of one item) and their sizes as arguments.
We can implement this more or less as in the processing functions of previous sections,
except that we have separate input and output arrays and that our ‘‘permanent’’ variables
(read and write pointers, delay, envelope) are class members, so we can access them directly
(and don’t have to use ‘‘external’’ memory to hold them).
The code is very similar to the variable-delay circular buffer examples, but we will output
from multiple (well, at least two) taps, offsetting the reader pointer positions. We will also
apply the envelope to these taps. The envelope index position is offset against the current
writer pointer position, as this marks where the jump from minimum to maximum delay
(or vice versa) happens:
void MyPlug::processReplacing(float** inputs,
float** outputs, VstInt32 vecframes)
{
float* in = inputs[0];
float* out = outputs[0];
int rpi, ep;
float s=0.f,rpf, frac, next, p = (pitch*1.5) + 0.5;
// processing loop
for(int i=0; i < vecframes; i++){
// taps loop (taps = 2)
for(int j=0; j < taps; j++){
// tap position, offset
rpf = rp + j*dsize/taps;

513

Time-Domain Audio Programming

rpf = rpf < dsize ? rpf : rpf - dsize;
rpi = (int) rpf;
frac = rpf - rpi;
next = (rpi != dsize-1 ? delay[rpi+1] : delay[0]);
// envelope index
ep = rpi - wp;
if(ep < 0) ep += dsize;
s += (delay[rpi] + frac*(next - delay[rpi]))*env[ep];
}
// increment reader pointer and check bounds
rp += p;
rp = rp < dsize ? rp : rp - dsize;
// feed the delay line
delay[wp] = in[i] + s*fdb;
// output the signal
out[i] = (s/taps)*gain;
s = 0.f;
// increment write pointer
wp = (wp < dsize ? wp+1 : 0);
}
}
This method will be called by the host repeatedly to process audio. You can see what I had
to do to transform the function/procedural code of previous sections to the method/objectoriented way of doing things. First, as the key data items are held in the class (delay size,
write and read positions, delay, and envelope buffers: dsize, wp, rp, delay, and env), we
don’t have to pass them as parameters anymore. If the host needs to create another running
pitch shifter effect, all it needs to do is to create a new MyPlug object. Each of these objects
will have its own separate delay buffer, envelope, and so on. There will be no chance of these
being mixed up and shared by different instances of the effect (which is a real possibility in
the function way of doing things). This is a safer and more satisfactory way of doing things.
In fact, object orientation is really an important concept for audio systems programming,
whether it is implemented in C or in Cþþ.
6.10.6

Building a Plug-in

The ﬁnal step is to build the plug-in. We will need some of the source code and header ﬁles
from the VST SDK, which deﬁne and implement the base classes and the plug-in entry
point.16 The host starts a new plug-in effect by invoking this function:
AudioEffect* createEffectInstance(audioMasterCallback audioMaster)
{
return new MyPlug(audioMaster);
}

514

Chapter 6

Figure 6.13
VST host plug-in instantiation.

and passing it an audioMasterCallback object (which we do not need to know much about).
We implement this function somewhere in our source code (e.g. in the same ﬁle as the
MyPlug class), and all it needs to do is to create a new MyPlug object and return it. Note
that the return type is AudioEffect*, which is a VST base class object, as expected by the
host. This small function completes all the code we need to write.
Figure 6.13 illustrates this process schematically. The host calls the entry point function,
which in its turn calls createEffectInstance(). This returns a newly created plug-in
object. VSTPluginMain() in its turn returns an audio effect instance. This is an internal
representation of the plug-in, used by the host, that has access to the newly created MyPlug
object.
Now we are in a position to build our plug-in. If we drop the vstsdk2.4 package17 directory
inside our working directory, we can do this with these commands on the various platforms:
Linux
g++ -shared -o myplug.so myplug.cpp
vstsdk2.4/public.sdk/source/vst2.x/audioeffect.cpp
vstsdk2.4/public.sdk/source/vst2.x/audioeffectx.cpp
vstsdk2.4/public.sdk/source/vst2.x/vstplugmain.cpp
–D__cdecl=""
-I vstsdk2.4/public.sdk/source/vst2.x/ -I vstsdk2.4
Windows
g++ -shared -o myplug.dll myplug.cpp
vstsdk2.4/public.sdk/source/vst2.x/audioeffect.cpp
vstsdk2.4/public.sdk/source/vst2.x/audioeffectx.cpp
vstsdk2.4/public.sdk/source/vst2.x/vstplugmain.cpp
-I vstsdk2.4/public.sdk/source/vst2.x/ -I vstsdk2.4

515

Time-Domain Audio Programming

OSX
g++ -bundle -o myplug myplug.cpp
vstsdk2.4/public.sdk/source/vst2.x/audioeffect.cpp
vstsdk2.4/public.sdk/source/vst2.x/audioeffectx.cpp
vstsdk2.4/public.sdk/source/vst2.x/vstplugmain.cpp
I vstsdk2.4/public.sdk/source/vst2.x/ -I vstsdk2.4
On OSX we have to drop the dynamic module (bundle) inside a certain directory structure
(also called a bundle), together with a couple of ﬁles. The ﬁrst one of them is called info.plist
and is an XML ﬁle that looks like this:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple Computer//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN"
"http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd">
<plist version="1.0">
<dict>
<key>CFBundleDevelopmentRegion</key>
<string>English</string>
<key>CFBundleExecutable</key>
<string>myplug</string>
<key>CFBundleIdentifier</key>
<string>com.apple.carbonbundletemplate</string>
<key>CFBundleInfoDictionaryVersion</key>
<string>6.0</string>
<key>CFBundleName</key>
<string>myplug</string>
<key>CFBundlePackageType</key>
<string>BNDL</string>
<key>CFBundleShortVersionString</key>
<string>1.0</string>
<key>CFBundleSignature</key>
<string>????</string>
<key>CFBundleVersion</key>
<string>1.0</string>
<key>CSResourcesFileMapped</key>
<true/>
</dict>
</plist>
Notice that most of this XML code is self-explanatory. The only important thing here is to
give the correct name of the plug-in bundle (library) ﬁle we compiled (shown above in boldface). The bundle structure is created with the following commands:
mkdir myplug.vst
mkdir myplug.vst/Contents

516

Chapter 6

mkdir myplug.vst/Contents/MacOS
cp myplug myplug.vst/Contents/MacOS
cp info.plist myplug.vst/Contents/
The second ﬁle we need is just a text ﬁle with eight characters BNDL????, which can be
created as follows:
echo "BNDL????" > myplug.vst/Contents/PkgInfo
The complete bundle directory structure looks like this:
myplug.vst
/Contents
/info.plist
/PkgInfo
/MacOS/myplug
It is also possible to add an optional Resources subdirectory (of Contents) to hold any
extra resources (not needed here). Finally, we want to hide the directory structure inside the
bundle, so the Finder sees it as a single ﬁle. We can use the command
/Developer/Tools/SetFile -a B myplug.vst
6.11

Conclusion
This chapter has provided a survey of various time-domain signal processing techniques and
some recipes for their implementation in the Cþþ language. The elements covered in the
text are perhaps the most basic and essential ones for audio programming of synthesis and
effects. I hope that this text has given the reader the background and tools for the discovery
of other, more advanced techniques.

6.12

Exercises
Exercise 6.12.1
Create a command-line subtractive synthesizer program using the components discussed in
this chapter. This can be structured with one oscillator, one ﬁlter, and two envelopes (one
controlling amplitude and the other ﬁlter center frequency). Here are some possibilities
(you can implement each one at a time):
(a) Users might have a choice of waveform and ﬁlter type.
(b) The parameters to the synthesizer can be read from a text ﬁle.
(c) You could also read a separate text ﬁle with frequencies and durations of a sequence of
notes. This will enable the program to become a small full-featured mono-synth sequencer.

517

Time-Domain Audio Programming

Exercise 6.12.2
Using the comb and allpass ﬁlters, implement a Schroeder reverb, made up of four parallel
comb ﬁlters feeding two allpass ﬁlters in series. You will ﬁnd details of this design in some
of the suggested readings cited in the notes.
Exercise 6.12.3
Implement a vibrato effect by modifying the variable delay code discussed in the last section
of this chapter. Note that you will need an LFO to control the delay time, which can be
implemented with one of the oscillators presented in the text. Remember that the vibrato
effect does not use feedback.
Exercise 6.12.4
Adapt one of the ﬁlter functions presented in this text to create a VST plug-in. You can use
the plug-in class presented in section 6.10 as a starting point.
Notes
1. Here time domain refers to signals that are functions of time, such as an acoustic wave from an instrument or the vibration of a loudspeaker cone. This term is also used to distinguish these from frequencydomain or spectral signals, which are functions of frequency (and which are discussed in later chapters).
2. Libsndﬁle is a specialized programming library written by Erik de Castro Lopo for input and output to
soundﬁles. It is available at http://www.mega-nerd.com/libsndﬁle.
3. Keeping indexes and such ‘‘permanent’’ variables separate will happen naturally when we shift to an
object-oriented way of doing things in the last section of this chapter. However, a procedural approach
as used here is more ‘‘to the point’’ in explaining the essential algorithms.
4. One of the reasons for interpolating is precision, which also means a better signal-to-noise ratio. This
topic is covered in some detail in the following article: F. R. Moore, ‘‘Table Lookup Noise for Sinusoidal
Digital Oscillators,’’ Computer Music Journal 1 (1977), no. 2: 26–29.
5. This is another good reason for using object orientation.
6. These ideas can be found in the following articles: J. Smith and J. Angell, ‘‘A Constant-Gain Digital
Resonator Tuned by a Single Coefﬁcient,’’ Computer Music Journal 6 (1982), no. 4: 36–40; K. Steiglitz, ‘‘A
Note on Constant-Gain Digital Resonators,’’ Computer Music Journal 18 (1994), no. 4: 8–10.
7. With the development of DSP theory, techniques were developed to translate analog ﬁlters into digital forms. Two pioneering texts on these ideas are K. Steiglitz, The General Theory of Digital Filters with
Applications to Spectral Analysis (Sc.D. dissertation, New York University, 1963) and J. F. Kaiser, ‘‘Design
Methods for Sampled Data Filters,’’ in Proceedings of the First Allerton Conference on Circuit and System
Theory (University of Illinois, 1963).

518

Chapter 6

8. For some ideas on how to create reverberators out of comb and allpass ﬁlters, see 2000, The Csound
Book, ed. R. Boulanger (MIT Press, 2000) and C. Dodge and T. Jerse 1985, Computer Music (Schirmer
Books, 1985).
9. For further technical details on convolution, see chapter 7.
10. An application programming interface (API) is a collection of code elements (functions, classes, etc.)
that provide an ‘‘interface’’ to a particular software system, in this case the plug-in architecture.
11. VST stands for Virtual Studio Technology. We will be using its 2.4 version, which is at the time of
writing the most commonly supported one. The concepts discussed here can also serve as the basis for
plug-in writing in later versions (as well as for other APIs).
12. Although we don’t need to implement a UI (hosts will generally provide one), many plug-ins offer a
GUI of their own. Since this text is not about computer graphics, we will ignore this aspect.
13. You will recall, from other chapters that discuss programming, that classes are models of things we
want to implement, in this case an audio plug-in. Classes can then be created into computing objects
that will do the actions they model, in this case process audio.
14. This is an important concept of object orientation: classes are the model, ‘‘the kinds’’ of things we
want; objects are their concrete realization, their individual ‘‘instances,’’ of which there can be many,
each one separate and individual from the others. For instance, we have a plug-in class for an effect,
and the host can have many individual and separate effects running in parallel. The plug-in is the model
(the kind of effect) and the running effects are the objects. The object-oriented way of doing things guarantees that the objects will not get entangled with other objects.
15. This works well because the base class will declare methods to do various tasks, and since the host
knows about these, it can call them whenever it needs. If they are implemented in the derived class,
then that code is the one called, rather than the original in the base class (which in most cases does
nothing). The host does not need to know anything about a particular plug-in, because all it expects is
that certain actions are implemented by it. So all we need to do is to specialize, i.e. to provide an implementation for the methods we require.
16. Just as stand-alone programs do, plug-ins have an equivalent ‘‘main’’ function (in the case of VST,
this is called VSTPluginMain()), where its execution starts, which is called an ‘‘entry point.’’ The difference is that, while for a program the entry point is called by the operating system to run the program, in
plug-ins it is called by the host. This function is implemented by the VST SDK, and you do not, in general, need to touch it (just add the relevant ﬁle when building the plug-in).
17. The vstsdk2.4 is available from http://www.steinberg.net.

Spectral Audio Programming

7

Spectral Audio Programming Basics: The DFT, the FFT, and Convolution

Victor Lazzarini

In this chapter we will start looking at techniques that work with frequency-domain or spectral representations of signals. In order to transform the time-domain data into spectral data
and modify it in different ways, we will be using methods of processing based on the Fourier
transform. The discussion of these spectral techniques will be mostly non-mathematical,
focusing on the practical aspects of each technique. However, wherever necessary we will
examine the underlying mathematical concepts and formulations.
7.1

Frequency Analysis: The Discrete Fourier Transform
The discrete Fourier transform (DFT) is an analysis tool that is used to convert a time-domain
digital signal into its frequency-domain representation. It is a variation on the original continuous-time/continuous-frequency Fourier transform, which is adapted for discrete signals,
thus perfectly suited for digital audio applications. The underlying principles of the DFT are
derived from the Fourier transform, which is effectively a theoretical tool. We will concentrate on the DFT and try to explore its potential for audio processing.
The DFT transforms a signal into its frequency representation and a complementary tool,
the IDFT, does the inverse operation. In the process of transforming the spectrum, we start
with a real-valued signal composed of the waveform samples, and we obtain a complexvalued signal composed of the spectrum samples. Each pair of values (that make up a complex number) generated by the transform represents a particular frequency point in the
spectrum. Similarly, each single (real) number that composes the input signal represents a
particular time point. The DFT is said to represent a signal at a particular time, as if it was
a ‘‘snapshot’’ of its frequency components.
One way of understanding the ‘‘magic’’ of the DFT is by looking at its formula and trying
to understand what it does:
DFT(x(n), k) ¼

1
1 NX
x(n)  ej2pkn/N ,
N n¼0

k ¼ 0, 1, 2, . . . , N  1.

(1)

522

Chapter 7

The whole process is one of multiplying an input signal by complex exponentials and adding up the results to obtain a series of complex numbers that make up the spectral signal.
The complex exponentials are nothing more than a series of complex sinusoids made up of
cosine and sine parts:
ej2pkn/N ¼ cos(2pkn/N)  j sin(2pkn/N).

(2)

The exponent j2pkn/N determines the phase angle of the sinusoids, which in turn is
related to its frequency. When k ¼ 1, we have a sinusoid with its phase angle varying as
2pn/N. This will of course complete a whole cycle in N samples, so we can say its frequency
is 1/N. (To obtain a value in hertz, we need only multiply it by the sampling rate.) All other
sinusoids are going to be whole-number multiples of that frequency, for 1 5 k 5 N  1. N is
the number of points in the analysis, or the number of spectral samples (each one a complex
number), also known as the transform size. For each particular frequency point k, we multiply
the input signal by a sinusoid and then we sum all the values obtained (and scale the result
by 1/N). The DFT formula is very simple to program and can give us an insight into how the
calculation is performed1:
const double twopi = 2*acos(-1.);
// dft takes an input signal *in of size N
// outputs spectrum *out with N pairs of
// complex values [real, imag]
void dft(float *in, float *out, int N){
for(int i = 0,k = 0; k<N; i+ = 2, k++){
out[i] = out[i+1] = 0.f;
for(int n = 0; n < N; n++){
out[i] += in[n]*cos(k*n*twopi/N);
out[i+1] -= in[n]*sin(k*n*twopi/N);
}
out[i] / = N;
out[i+1] / = N;
}
}
(A short program that generates one cycle of a waveform and then analyzes it is provided in
the DVD ROM examples for this chapter. It uses the above code for the spectral analysis and
it demonstrates how the process works.)
Consider the simple case where the signal x(n) is a sine wave with a frequency 1/N, deﬁned
by the expression sin(2pn/N). The result of the DFT operation for the frequency point 1 is
DFT(x(n), 1) ¼

X
1 N1
sin(2pn/N)  cos(2pn/N)  j sin2 (2pn/N)
N n¼0

¼ 0.5 j.

(3)

523

Spectral Audio Programming Basics

Figure 7.1
The DFT operation on frequency point 1, showing how a complex sinusoid is used to detect the sine and
cosine phase components of a signal.

Here, what happened was that the complex sinusoid has detected a signal at that frequency
and the DFT has output a complex value [0, 0.5] for that spectral sample (the meaning of
0.5 will be explored later). This complex value is also called the spectral coefﬁcient for frequency 1/N. The real part of this number corresponds to the detected cosine phase component and its imaginary part relates to the sine phase component. The DFT operation for
frequency 1/N is presented graphically in ﬁgure 7.1. If we slide the sinusoid to the next frequency point (k ¼ 2) we will obtain the spectral sample [0, 0], which means that the DFT has
not detected a sinusoid signal at the frequency (2n/N). This shows that the DFT uses the
‘‘sliding’’ complex sinusoid as a detector of spectral components. When a frequency component in the signal matches the frequency of the sinusoid, we obtain a non-zero output. This
is, in a nutshell, how the DFT works (and, by extension, how the Fourier transform works).
Of course, this example shows the analysis of a very simple signal. We will have to develop
our understanding a bit further to get a more general idea of how it can work for any signal
(not just sinusoids at frequency multiples of 1/N). In any case, the frequency 1/N is a special
one, known as the fundamental frequency of analysis. As was mentioned above, the DFT will
analyze a signal as composed of sinusoids at multiples of this frequency.
Consider now a signal that does not contain components at any of these multiple frequencies. How would the DFT cope with this kind of input? It would simply analyze it in terms of
the components it has at hand, namely the multiples of the fundamental frequency of analysis. For instance, take the case of a sine wave at 1.3/N, sin(2p1.3n/N) (ﬁgure 7.2). The result
of the DFT is shown in table 7.1. The transform was performed using the Cþþ code above
with N ¼ 16. Although this result is confusing at ﬁrst, it is what we would expect, since we
have tried to analyze a sine wave with a length of 1.3 cycle. We can, however, observe that
one of the two largest pairs of absolute values is found on point 1. From what we saw in the
ﬁrst example, we might guess that the spectral peak is close to the frequency 1/N, as in fact it
is 1.3/N. Nevertheless, the result shows a large amount of spectral spread, contaminating all

524

Chapter 7

Figure 7.2
Plot of sin(2p3n/N).

Table 7.1
Spectral coefﬁcients for a 16-point DFT of sinð2p1:3n=NÞ.
Point ðkÞ

Real part ðre½XðkÞÞ

Imaginary part ðim½XðkÞÞ

0

0.127

0.000

1

0.359

0.221

2
3

0.151
0.071

0.127
0.056

4

0.053

0.034

5

0.046

0.022

6

0.042

0.013

7

0.041

0.006

8

0.040

0.000

9

0.041

0.006

10
11

0.042
0.046

0.013
0.022

12

0.053

0.034

13

0.071

0.056

14

0.151

0.127

15

0.359

0.221

525

Spectral Audio Programming Basics

Figure 7.3
Magnitude spectrum from a 16-point DFT of sin(2p3n/N). The plot shows the positive half of the spectrum from 0 Hz to the Nyquist frequency (points 0–8), followed by the negative side (8–15).

frequency points (see also ﬁgure 7.3). This has to do with the discontinuity between the last
and ﬁrst points of the waveform, which is clearly visible in ﬁgure 7.2.
7.1.1

Reconstructing the Time-Domain Signal

Table 7.1 can be used to reconstruct the original waveform by applying the inverse operation
to the DFT, the inverse discrete Fourier transform, deﬁned as
IDFT(X(k), n) ¼

N1
X

X(k)  e j2pkn/N ,

n ¼ 0, 1, 2, . . . , N  1.

(4)

k¼0

In other words, the values of X(k) are [complex] coefﬁcients, which are used to multiply a set
of complex sinusoids. These will be added together, point by point, to reconstruct the signal.
This is, basically, a form of additive synthesis that uses complex signals. The coefﬁcients are
the amplitudes of the sinusoids (cosine and sine), and their frequencies are just multiples of
the fundamental frequency of analysis. If we use the coefﬁcients in the table above as input,

526

Chapter 7

we will obtain the original 1.3-cycle sine wave. The IDFT formula yields this very simple
code:
// idft takes an input spectrum *in as N complex pairs
// outputs real signal *out, consisting of N samples
void idft(float *in, float *out, int N){
for(int n = 0; n<N; n++){
out[n] = 0.f;
for(int k = 0, i = 0; k < N; k++, i+ = 2){
out[n] += in[i]*cos(k*n*twopi/N) – in[i+1]*sin(k*n*twopi/N);
}
}
}
We start with a complex spectrum and somehow end up with a real waveform. This is, of
course, because we are concerned only with audio signals that are real-valued. If we started
with such a signal, it will return to its original form when we recompose it. How is that possible? First, I am assuming that the output of the IDFT is real-valued, so its imaginary part is
zero. So I need to program only the real part of the operation. Now, if we check the imaginary part of the IDFT output, we will see that it is, as expected, zero-valued. In addition, by
looking at the coefﬁcients in table 7.1, we see that all absolute values of points 1–7 are mirrored by points 9–15. This is one of the properties of real signals: half of the spectrum will be
a mirror of the other half. This will be understood a bit better when we look at what frequencies the spectral points refer to. We saw above that point 1 refers to the frequency 1/N, and
point 2 to 2/N, and so on. As has been mentioned, the fundamental frequency of analysis
in hertz will depend on how many samples are representing our signal in a second, namely,
the sampling rate (SR). Thus our frequency points will be referring to kSR/N Hz, with
k ¼ 0, 1, 2, . . . , N  1. Because of this, we will be able to quickly determine the frequencies
for points 0 to N/2, ranging from 0 Hz to SR/2 (the Nyquist frequency—the highest possible
frequency for a digital signal).
What about the other half of the coefﬁcients, to which frequencies do they belong? The
answer is inferred by looking at the frequency points in table 7.1, realizing that points 9–15
basically have the same complex values as points 1–7 (in reverse order and except for the
sign of the imaginary part). It is reasonable to assume that they refer to the same frequencies,
which is part of the answer. The sign of the imaginary parts give the rest of the answer away:
since they refer to amplitudes of sine waves, they might refer to negative frequencies. This is
because a negative frequency sine wave is the same as positive one with negative amplitude
(or out-of-phase): sin(x) ¼ sin(x). In addition, cos(x) ¼ cos(x), so the real parts are the
same for negative and positive frequencies.
The conclusion is simple: the second half of the points refer to negative frequencies, from
SR/2 to SR/N. It is important to point out that the point N/2 refers to both SR/2 and SR/2
(these two frequencies are indistinguishable). Also, it is important to note that the coefﬁ-

527

Spectral Audio Programming Basics

cients for 0 Hz and the Nyquist frequency are always purely real (no imaginary part). If our
SR is 32 KHz, then, for N ¼ 16, the points will be at 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, e16, 14, 12,
10, 8, 6, 4, and 2 KHz. We can see that the output of the DFT splits the spectrum of a
digital waveform into equally spaced frequency points, or bands. Looking at this conclusion
and the coefﬁcients above, we note that the negative side of the spectrum can always be
inferred from the positive side, so it is, in a way, redundant.
7.1.2

Rectangular and Polar Formats

In order to understand further the information provided by the DFT, we can convert the representation of the complex coefﬁcients, from real/imaginary pairs to one that is more useful
to us. One of the most interesting aspects of the DFT analysis is that, by breaking a waveform
into components, we can determine how much energy (or, more precisely, amplitude) each
of these components have. This is given by the magnitude of each complex spectral coefﬁcient. The magnitude (or modulus) of a complex number z is
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
(5)
jzj ¼ re[z]2 þ im[z]2 .
This is Pythagoras’ famous formula, which yields a real-valued number. The magnitude will
tell what the amplitudes of each component in the spectrum are. However, because a real
signal is always split into positive and negative frequencies, the amplitude of a point will be
half the ‘‘true’’ value. Recall the ﬁrst example above. Point 1 yields magnitude 0.5, but the
original signal had amplitude 1.0 for the frequency SR/N. If we look at point N  1, we will
see that its coefﬁcient will also have magnitude 0.5. The same can be said for the second
example here, where the magnitudes at the second half of the table mirror the ones in the
ﬁrst half (ﬁgure 7.3). The values obtained by the magnitude conversion are known as the
amplitude spectrum of a signal. The amplitude spectrum of a real signal is always mirrored at
0 Hz. It is a real-valued function of the frequency.
The other conversion that complements the magnitude provides the phase angle of the
coefﬁcient, in relation to a cosine wave. This yields the phase offset of a particular component, and it is expressed by the following relationship:


im[z]
.
(6)
y(z) ¼ arctan
re[z]
This conversion of the DFT output, called the phase spectrum, is also a real-valued function of
frequency. The phase spectrum of real signals is always anti-symmetrical around 0 Hz.
The process of obtaining the magnitude and phase spectrum of the DFT is called Cartesianto-polar conversion, because the original spectral coefﬁcients are the Cartesian coordinates of
complex numbers. The amplitude and phase representation is called the polar form of a
complex number. The amplitude corresponds to the modulus, the length of the line from
the center of a Cartesian plane to the point deﬁned by the coordinates. The phase is the
angle that this line makes with the horizontal axis.

528

Chapter 7

If we take the ﬁrst example and look at the two non-zero coefﬁcients, at points 1 and 15,
we have [0, 0.5] and [0, 0.5]. These two complex pairs tell us that at frequencies SR/N and
SR/N the amplitude is 0.5 and that the phase offset of frequency SR/N is arctan(0.5/0) ¼
p/2  90 ), which means, in relation to a cosine wave, that the wave is in the sine phase
(cos(x  p/2) ¼ sin x). In complement, the phase of frequency SR/N is arctan(0.5/0) ¼ p/2
(90 ), denoting an inverted sine wave. If we add these two components together, we obtain
a sine wave at SR/N with amplitude of 1 (or a sine wave at SR/N with amplitude of 1):
x(n) ¼ 0.5 sin(2pn/N) þ 0.5[sin(2pn/N)]
¼ sin(2pn/N)
¼ sin(2pn/N).
This is, of course, the signal we started with.
Similarly, if we take all the magnitude and phase of all components that were found in the
second example and used these parameters to do an additive synthesis operation as above,
we would obtain the original signal. The additive synthesizer could be deﬁned by the formula
x(n) ¼



2pkn
jX(k)j cos
þ y[X(k)] ,
N
k¼0

N1
X

(7)

with X(k) ¼ DFT(x(n), k), the spectral coefﬁcients of x(n).
We can see from ﬁgure 7.3 that the results are not always clear. In fact, unless the signal
has all its components at multiples of the fundamental frequency of analysis, there will be a
spectral spread over all frequency points. However, if we plot the amplitude spectrum values
of a ﬁner analysis (using more points) and smooth the curve between the points, we will
obtain a better representation of the spectral content. Although this will not reveal the exact
component frequencies of a sound, it will provide an idea of the distribution of energy at the
different frequency bands.
In addition to the problems identiﬁed above, the DFT, in its present form as a one-shot,
single-frame transform, will not be able to track spectral changes. This is because it takes a
single ‘‘picture’’ of the spectrum of a waveform at a certain time. We might conclude that
in the present form, the DFT is almost useless as an analysis tool for real-life applications.
We will, nevertheless, be able to improve considerably on this bare-bones method. However,
before we look into tweaking it, it is important to point out that the single-frame DFT is not
completely useless for audio processing. In fact, there are some interesting sound transformation applications that employ this technique more or less in the format described in this
section.
The above discussion of the DFT tried to focus on the practical aspects of the DFT.2 For this
reason, the scope of the mathematical discussion of the concepts involved in the DFT was
somewhat limited.3

529

7.2

Spectral Audio Programming Basics

Applications of the DFT: Convolution
The single-frame DFT analysis as explored above has one important application, the convolution of time-domain signals through spectral multiplication. Before we proceed to explore
this technique, it is important to note that the DFT is very seldom implemented in the direct
form shown above. More usually, we will ﬁnd optimized algorithms that will calculate the
DFT much more efﬁciently. These are called the fast Fourier transform (FFT). Their result is in
all aspects equivalent to the DFT as described above. The only difference is in the way the
calculation is performed. Also, because the FFT is based on specialized algorithms, they will
only work with a certain number of points (N, the transform size). For instance, the standard
FFT algorithm uses only power-of-2 (2, 4, . . . , 512, 1,024, . . .) sizes. The technique of fast convolution uses the DFT implemented with FFT algorithms, as the direct form calculation does
not provide any advantage to ordinary time-domain convolution. From now on, when we
refer to the DFT, we will imply the use of a fast algorithm for its computation.
Convolution is deﬁned as
w(n) ¼ y(n) * x(n) ¼

n
X

y(m)x(n  m).

(8)

m¼0

The simplest way to look into this operation is to examine some simple examples.
1. Consider the convolution of two signals x(n) and u(n), where u(0) ¼ 1 and u(n) ¼ 0 for all
other values of n. This is sometimes called the unit sample function or the unit impulse. The
result is the original signal x(n), unchanged:
u(n) * x(n) ¼ {1, 0, 0} * {0, 1, 3, 2, 1, 0, 1} ¼ {0, 1, 3, 2, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0}.
2. If we create a third signal, s(n) ¼ u(n  d), a delayed version of u(n), and we convolve it
with x(n), we will obtain x(n  d), a delayed version of x(n):
s(n) * x(n) ¼ {0, 0, 1, 0} * {0, 1, 3, 2, 1, 0, 1} ¼ {0, 0, 0, 1, 3, 2, 1, 0, 1}.
3. If we create a scaled version of u(n), g(n) ¼ au(n), and we convolve it with x(n), we will
obtain a scaled version of it, ax(n):
g(n) * x(n) ¼ {2, 0, 0} * {0, 1, 3, 2, 1, 0, 1} ¼ {0, 2, 6, 4, 2, 0, 2, 0, 0}.
4. Combining examples 2 and 3, f (n) ¼ au(n  d), and convoluting with x(n), we have a
delayed, scaled version of x(n), ax(n  d):
s(n) * x(n) ¼ {0, 0, 0, 3} * {0, 1, 3, 2, 1, 0, 1} ¼ {0, 0, 0, 0, 3, 9, 6, 3, 0, 3}.
5. If we apply these ideas more explicitly, we can consider any arbitrary signal as a sequence
of scaled and delayed unit sample functions added together. We can therefore apply this
method to the convolution of any two signals. Take the example of two signals f (n) ¼ {1, 2, 3}
and g(n) ¼ {5, 9, 6, 2, 3}. The ﬁrst signal can be considered the sum of three functions: (1) unit

530

Chapter 7

sample function u(n) ¼ {1, 0, 0}, scaled by f (0) ¼ 1, {1, 0, 0}; (2) u(n) delayed by one sample
and scaled by f (1) ¼ 2 {0, 2, 0}; and (3) u(n) delayed by two samples and scaled by f (2) ¼ 3.
We can convolve the second signal by scaling it by these three signals separately (generating
three copies) and adding these together (mixing them) to get the result:
5

9
10

5 19

6
2
3
18 12
4
15 27 18
39 41 25

6
6

9

[slide by 0 positions, scale by f (0) ¼ 1]
[slide by 1 position, scale by f (1) ¼ 2]
[slide by 2 positions, scale by f (2) ¼ 3]

12 9

As we can see, in terms of signal processing, convolution can be seen as a tapped delay
line, with a gain multiplier applied to each tap. In fact, direct convolution is achieved by
that method. It is also fair to conclude that one of the applications of convolution is in the
modeling of reverberation.
One important aspect of time-domain convolution is that it is equivalent to the multiplication of spectra (and vice versa). In other words, if y(n) and h(n) are two waveforms whose
Fourier transforms are Y(k) and H(k), then
DFT[y(n) * h(n)] ¼ Y(k)H(k)
and

(9)

DFT[y(n)h(n)] ¼ Y(k) * H(k).
This means that if the DFT is used to transform two signals into their spectral domain and
the two spectra can be multiplied together, the result can be transformed back to the time
domain as the convolution of the two inputs. In this type of operation, we generally have
an arbitrary sound that is convoluted with a shorter signal, called the impulse response. The
latter can be thought of as a mix of scaled and delayed unit sample functions and also as
the list of the gain values in a tapped delay line. The convolution operation will impose the
spectral characteristics of this impulse signal into the other input signal. There are four basic
applications for this technique:
1. Early reverberation: the impulse response is a train of pulses, which can be obtained by
recording room reﬂections in reaction to a short sound
2. Filtering: the impulse response is a series of FIR ﬁlter coefﬁcients, and its amplitude spectrum determines the shape of the ﬁlter
3. Cross-synthesis: the impulse response is an arbitrary sound, whose spectrum will be
multiplied with the other sound; their common features will be emphasized, and the overall
effect will be one of cross-synthesis
4. Sound localization: if we have impulse responses measured at our ears for sounds at different positions, by applying these to sounds using convolution, the illusion of sound localization at different positions can be created for binaural (i.e. headphone) listening.

531

Spectral Audio Programming Basics

Depending on the application, we might use a time-domain impulse response, whose transform is then used in the process. In other situations, we might start with a particular spectrum, which is directly used in the process. The advantage of this is that we can deﬁne the
frequency-domain characteristics that we want to impose on the other sound.
7.2.1

A DFT-based Convolution Application

We can now look at the details of the application of the DFT in convolution, called fast convolution, with some programming examples. The ﬁrst thing to consider is that, since we are
using real signals, there is no reason to use a DFT that outputs both the positive and negative
sides of the spectrum. We know that the negative side can be extracted from the positive, so
we can use FFT algorithms that are optimized for the real signals. The discussion of speciﬁc
aspects of these algorithms is beyond the scope of this text, but whenever we refer to the
DFT, we will imply the use of a real input transform. There are several programming libraries
that provide FFT routines, such as the FFTW library. They will also provide a variety of FFT
algorithms, for different transform sizes. As stated above, the most common of these is the
one for the power-of-2 size. In our discussion, we will assume the use of existing routines
for forward and inverse FFT, which work on the basis of that algorithm with real signals.
We will assume that the spectral output of the forward DFT will be in the form of a sequence
of N/2 pairs of numbers (N values). The ﬁrst pair will contain the real parts of the 0 Hz and
Nyquist frequency points, respectively. The following pairs will be complex numbers (real,
imaginary) for all other frequency points, from 1 to N/2  1.
The inverse DFT will assume its input to be in the same format. Let’s say, then, that our
routines are deﬁned as follows4:
void fft(float *sig, float *spec, int N);
void ifft(float *spec, float *sig, int N);
The time-domain signal is held in the sig vector, the spectrum is placed in the spec
vector, the number of points in the transform is N (always a power of 2). Any real-signal
FFT/IFFT library routines can replace these with a little adaptation.
The central point of the implementation of convolution with the DFT is the use of the
overlap-add method after the inverse transform. Since our impulse response will be of a certain length, this will determine the transform size (we will capture the whole signal in one
DFT). The other input signal can be of arbitrary length, all we will have to do is keep taking
time slices of it that are the size of the impulse response. We know that the resulting length
of the convolution of two signals is the sum of their lengths minus 1. This will determine the
minimum size of the transform, because the IDFT output signal, as a result of the convolution, will have to be of that length.
The need for an overlap-add operation arises as a consequence of the length of the convolution being larger than the original time slice. For this reason, we will have to make sure the

532

Chapter 7

Figure 7.4
Convolution input and output block sizes and the overlap-add operation.

tail part of it is mixed with the next output block. This will align the start of each output
block with the original start of each time slice in the input signal.
If the impulse response size is S, we will slice the input signal in blocks of S samples. The
convolution output size will be 2S  1, and the size of the transform will be the ﬁrst power of
2 not less than that value.
The inputs to the transform will be padded to the required size. After the multiplication
and the IDFT operation, we will have a block of 2S  1 samples containing the signal output
(the zero padding will be discarded). All we need to do is to time-align it with the original
signal by overlapping the ﬁrst S  1 samples of this block with the last S  1 samples of the
previous output. The overlapping samples then are mixed together to form the ﬁnal output.
Figure 7.4 shows the input signal block sizes and the overlap-add operation.
Now it is just a matter of putting these ideas into code. The following example takes two
signals, an impulse response and an arbitrary input, of any sizes (but we expect the impulse
response to be the smaller of the two). It outputs the convolution of these two signals. The
length of the output, as discussed above, will be the sum of the two input sizes minus 1, so
we expect an output vector that is at least of that size.
The code is quite simple and commented throughout. Its main structure is as follows: The
signal vectors are allocated and we take the DFT of the impulse response (which only needs
to be calculated once). In the processing loop, we ﬁrst ﬁll a vector that will hold one time

533

Spectral Audio Programming Basics

slice of the input. When the vector is ready, we copy the overlapping samples from the
output block and we zero-pad the vector holding the input time slice. This is followed by
the DFT of that signal; the complex multiplication of the two spectra; and the IDFT of that
product. As soon as the ﬁrst convolution operation is performed, we start to overlap-add the
signal blocks to obtain the output. The processing loop will run until the last sample of
the convolution is output.
Here is the code:
void convol(float* impulse, float* input, float* output,
int impulse_size, int input_size){
float *impspec, *inspec, *outspec; // spectral vectors
float *insig, *outsig, *overlap; // time-domain vectors
int fftsize = 1, convsize; // transform and convolution sizes
int overlap_size; // overlap size
int count, i, j; // counter and loop variables
overlap_size = impulse_size - 1;
convsize = impulse_size + overlap_size;
while(fftsize < convsize) fftsize * = 2;
impspec = new float[fftsize]; // allocate memory for
inspec = new float[fftsize]; // spectral vectors
outspec = new float[fftsize];
insig = new float[fftsize];
outsig = new float[fftsize];
overlap = new float[overlap_size];
// get the impulse into the FFT input vector
// pad with zeros
for(i = 0; i < fftsize; i++){
if(i < impulse_size) insig[i] = impulse[i];
else insig[i] = 0.f;
}
// Take the DFT of impulse
fft(insig, impspec, fftsize);
// processing loop
for(i = count = 0; i < input_size+convsize; i++, count++){
// if an input block is ready
if(count == impulse_size && i <(input_size+impulse_size)){
// copy overlapping block
for(j = 0; j < overlap_size ; j++)
overlap[j] = outsig[j+impulse_size];

534

Chapter 7

// pad input signal with zeros
for(j = impulse_size; j < fftsize; j++)
insig[j] = 0.f;
// Take the DFT of input signal block
fft(insig, inspec, fftsize);
// complex multiplication
// first pair is re[0Hz] and re[Nyquist]
outspec[0] = inspec[0]*impspec[0];
outspec[1] = inspec[1]*impspec[1];
// (a+ib)*(c+id) = (ac - bd) + (ad + bc)i
for(j = 2; j < fftsize; j+ = 2){
outspec[j] = inspec[j]*impspec[j]
- inspec[j+1]*impspec[j+1];
outspec[j+1] = inspec[j]*impspec[j+1]
+ inspec[j+1]*impspec[j];
}
// IDFT of the spectral product
ifft(outspec, outsig, fftsize);
// zero the sample counter
count = 0;
}
// get the input signal
// stop when the input is finished
if(i < input_size)
insig[count] = input[i];
// overlap-add output starts only
// after the first convolution operation
if(i > = impulse_size)
output[i-impulse_size] = outsig[count] +
(count < overlap_size ? overlap[count] : 0);
}
// de-allocate memory
delete[] overlap;
delete[] outsig;
delete[] insig;
delete[] outspec;
delete[] inspec;
delete[] impspec;
}

535

Spectral Audio Programming Basics

The code expects the impulse, input, and output signal vectors to be allocated externally.
(The DVD examples for this chapter show a complete program that implements the convolution of two soundﬁles, an impulse response and an input sound, using this function.)
This function, in the present format, will not serve for real-time purposes. However, it can
be modiﬁed for this kind of application, by processing one FFT block at a time and leaving
the overlap-add to be performed by the invoking code. The only caveat is that there is an
implicit delay in this process, which is determined by the length of the impulse response. So
with longer responses, the real-time use is somewhat compromised. A further development
of fast convolution, designed to overcome this, is called partitioned convolution. This process
breaks the impulse signal into smaller partitions and applies the FFT-based convolution
using each one of these separately. Then the results of each convolution are re-combined to
provide the output signal.
7.3

Conclusion
The discrete Fourier transform is a cornerstone of modern audio signal processing. Understanding it is very important for any type of spectral processing. Although in its straight
form it is not used in many applications, it provides the basis for many other methods of
analysis and processing, including short-time Fourier transform and the phase vocoder. Its
main application, fast convolution, is an important technique that has many applications,
among them reverberation, ﬁltering, and sound localization.

7.4

Exercises
Exercise 7.4.1
Using the DFT and IDFT functions as deﬁned in section 7.1, create a convolution program
based on the convolution function of section 7.2. Because we are not using the FFT, zeropadding is not necessary. Adjust your code to reﬂect this fact. Compare the computation
time required for this program with the FFT-based example in the DVD-ROM.
Exercise 7.4.2
Modify your program and the convolution example to allow for the timing of the process.
Look for a C function in your system that can obtain the system time. (Tip: In OSX and
Linux, use the ‘man’ command for searching system subroutines.) Compare the timings of
your convolution code with the FFT-based example for different impulse response sizes.
Exercise 7.4.3
Write a program to implement direct convolution by applying equation 8 directly. (Tip: Use
a circular buffer tapped at every sample.) Add the timing functions as in exercise 2 and compare the resulting processing times with the two previous versions.

536

Chapter 7

Notes
1. The best way to look at a summation formula, such as that in the DFT equation, is as a loop. That is
exactly what it means (an example of how programming is effectively mathematics), with the ‘‘looping
variable’’ going from the value stated under the S to the value on the top. In this case, the variable is n
and it goes from 0 to N  1 (increasing by one each time), and N is the DFT size (and also the size of the
input array). This, in the code example, is the inner loop, which uses the variable n as its counter:
for(int n =0; n < N; n++){
out[i] += in[n]*cos(k*n*twopi/N);
out[i+1] -= in[n]*sin(k*n*twopi/N);
}
The other loop in the code, incidentally, is basically a way of applying the DFT function to create all the
output samples and to increment the frequency index (k).
2. The DFT and the FFT are effectively the same thing, as far as their inputs and outputs are concerned
(the same goes for the IDFT and the IFFT). The only difference is that the FFT is implemented differently
than the straight DFT shown above. For large transform sizes, the FFT is much faster than the DFT. The
FFT is a fast algorithm for calculating the DFT, and in fact there are several different FFT algorithms, optimized for different transform sizes. As the DFT is very seldom used directly in applications, we normally
use the term FFT for it, but it is important to make the distinction between the two: DFT is the operation,
FFT is the algorithm.
3. For a further overview of the mathematics of the DFT, a two-part article by David Jaffe is of particular
interest for musical applications: ‘‘Spectrum Analysis Tutorial, Part 1: The Discrete Fourier Transform,’’
Computer Music Journal 11 (1987), no. 2: 9–24; ‘‘Spectrum Analysis Tutorial, Part 2: Properties and Applications of the Discrete Fourier Transform,’’ Computer Music Journal 11 (1987), no. 3: 17–35.
4. The following code adapts the fft() and iff() interface functions to use the FFTW 2.1.3 library
for FFT processing. The only caveat here is that the interface allows for only one set of parameters for
forward and one set of parameters for inverse transform per program, because only two FFTW plans are
used as global static variables. For most applications this should not be problematic. The interface can
also be wrapped in a Cþþ class, if multiple variable FFT parameters are required. The basic job of this
code is to rearrange the FFTW FFT array into the format used in this text, which contains the pair (0 Hz,
Nyquist) followed by (real, imag) of all other bins in ascending order. The FFTW formats the real-fft
frame differently: all real coefﬁcients from 0 to the Nyquist frequency, inclusive, followed by all imaginary coefﬁcients, in descending order from bin N/2  1 to 1. Here is the code:
#include "rfftw.h"
/* these check if the FFTW plan was created */
bool ft=true,ift=true;
static rfftw_plan forward, inverse; /* these are the FFTW plans */
void fft(float *in, float *out, int N){
int i, k;
if(ft){

537

Spectral Audio Programming Basics

/* create the plan only once, first time it is called*/
forward=
rfftw_create_plan(N, FFTW_REAL_TO_COMPLEX, FFTW_ESTIMATE);
ft=false;
}
/* copy input to the output */
for(i =0; i < N; i++) out[i] = in[i];
/* transform array out[] into in[] */
rfftw_one(forward, out, in);
/* move Nyquist to pos 1 */
out[0] = in[0]/N;
out[1] = in[N/2]/N;
/* re-arrange array into [re, im] pairs */
for(i = 2, k=1; i < N; k++, i+=2){
out[i] = in[k]/N;
out[i+1] = in[N-k]/N;
}
}
void ifft(float *in, float *out, int N){
int i, k;
if(ift){
/* create the plan only once, first time it is called*/
inverse=
rfftw_create_plan(N, FFTW_COMPLEX_TO_REAL, FFTW_ESTIMATE);
ift=false;
}
/* re-arrange array into the FFTW format */
for(i = 2, k=1; i < N; k++, i+=2){
out[k] = in[i];
out[N-k] = in[i+1];
}
/* move Nyquist to pos N/2 */
out[0] = in[0];
out[N/2] = in[1];
/* transform array in[] into out[] */
rfftw_one(inverse, out, in);
for(i =0; i < N; i++) out[i] = in[i];
}

8

The STFT and Spectral Processing

Victor Lazzarini

In this chapter we will build on the concepts of the DFT and the FFT to develop a timevarying method of spectral analysis. This will be useful for the processing of any arbitrary
input sound, as we can apply effects that vary in time and change the signal dynamically.
We will start by seeing how the methods introduced in the earlier chapter can be adapted
to provide the time-varying possibilities we are looking for.
8.1

Analyzing Time-Varying Spectra: The Short-Time Fourier Transform
So far we have been using what we described as a single-frame DFT, one ‘‘snapshot’’ of the
spectrum at a speciﬁc time point. In order to track spectral changes, we will have to ﬁnd a
method of taking a sequence of transforms, at different points in time. In a way, this is similar to the process we used in the convolution application: we will be looking at extracting
blocks of samples from a time-domain signal and transforming them with the DFT. This is
known as the short-time Fourier transform. The process of extracting the samples from a portion of the waveform is called windowing. In other words, we are applying a time window to
the signal, outside which all samples are ignored.
8.1.1

Windowing

Time windows can have various shapes. The one we used in the convolution example is
equivalent to a rectangular window, where all the window contents are multiplied by one.
This shape is not very useful in STFT analysis, because it can create discontinuities at the
edges of the window (ﬁgure 8.1). This is the case when the analyzed signal contains components that are not integer multiples of the fundamental frequency of analysis. These discontinuities are responsible for analysis artifacts, such as the ones observed in the previous
chapter on the DFT, which limit its usefulness.
Other shapes that tend toward 0 at the edges will be preferred. As the ends of the analyzed
segment meet, they eliminate any discontinuity (ﬁgure 8.2). In fact, except for the rectangular

540

Chapter 8

Figure 8.1
Rectangular window and discontinuities in the signal.

Figure 8.2
A windowed signal where the ends tend toward 0.

case, the windowing process will always involve the application of an envelope to the
extracted samples.
The effect of a window’s shape can be explained by remembering that (as in equation 9 in
the previous chapter), when we multiply two time-domain functions, the resulting spectrum
will be the convolution of the two spectra. This is of course, the converse case of the convolution of two time-domain functions as seen in the previous chapter.1 The effect of convolution in the amplitude spectrum can be better understood graphically. As we saw before, it is
the shifting and scaling of the samples of one function by every sample of the other. This
operation can be as seen in ﬁgure 8.3, where the spectrum of the ring modulation of two
sinusoids is shown. When we use a window function in the DFT, we are multiplying the
series of complex sinusoids that compose it by that function. Since this process results in
spectral convolution, the resulting amplitude spectrum of the DFT after windowing will

541

The STFT and Spectral Processing

Figure 8.3
A graphic convolution of two amplitude spectra. Thicker lines represent components of spectra.

be imposition of the spectral shape of a window function on every frequency point of the
DFT of the original signal (ﬁgure 8.4). A similar effect will also be introduced in the phase
spectrum.
As I have already said, windowing always happens when we apply the DFT to an arbitrary
segment of a signal. In all our previous cases, since we had only extracted samples from the
signal, a rectangular window was used. The spectral shape of that window is not very suitable
for attenuating analysis artifacts, such as the leakage observed when analyzing non-integral
wave periods. (See the spectral plot of the rectangular window in ﬁgure 8.6.) However, when
we choose a window with an amplitude spectrum that has a peak at 0 Hz and fades away

542

Chapter 8

Figure 8.4
A simpliﬁed view of the amplitude spectrum of a windowed DFT as a convolution of the DFT sinusoids
and the window function. Dotted lines mark positions of DFT frequency points.

quickly to zero as the frequency rises, we will have a more reasonable result. This is case of
the ideal shape in ﬁgure 8.4, where each analysis point will capture components around it
and ignore spurious ones further away from it.2
In practice, several windows with such low-pass characteristics exist. The simplest and
more widely used are the ones based on raised inverted cosine shapes, the Hamming and
Hanning (‘‘Von Hann’’) windows (ﬁgures 8.5 and 8.6), deﬁned as


n
,
0an5N
(1)
w(n) ¼ a  (1  a) cos 2p
N1
where a ¼ 0.5 for the Hanning window and 0.54 for the Hamming window.

Figure 8.5
Time-domain plots of Hanning and Hamming windows.

Figure 8.6
Spectral plots for rectangular, Hamming, and Hanning windows (positive frequencies only).

544

Chapter 8

8.1.2

Performing the STFT

In order to perform the STFT, we will apply a time-dependent window to the signal and take
the DFT of the result. This will mean also that we are making the whole operation a function
of time, as well as frequency. Here is a deﬁnition for the discrete STFT of an arbitrary-length
waveform x(n) at a time point t:
STFT(x(n), k, t) ¼

l
1 X
w(n  t)x(n)ej2pkn/N ,
N n¼l

k ¼ 1, 2, . . . , N  1.

(2)

This of course implies the use of a window function w(n), which is deﬁned in the range
0 a n 5 N and is zero elsewhere. When implementing the STFT as given above, we will be
initially simple-minded, by just using the real-signal DFT (as implemented by the FFT algorithm) on N-size slices of the input signal. This will not be, in reality, the exact implementation of (2). However, it will sufﬁce for the moment.
The STFT provides a full spectral frame for each time point, in the form of overlapped
measurements, so we can view each one of the these as the result of an ordinary DFT applied
to the windowed signal. For each time point, we will generate N values (N/2 complex pairs),
so the amount of data generated by this operation is very large. However, we do not have to
compute the DFT for each sample of a waveform; we can hop the window along a certain
number of samples before extracting the next sample frame. The space between each frame
is referred to as the hopsize and this will determine the time resolution of the analysis. Often
it is possible to take as little as four overlapped transforms (hopsize ¼ N/4) to have a good
resolution. Effectively, when using the STFT output for signal processing, the smallest hopsize will be determined by the type of window used (N/4 is the actual value for Hamming
and Hanning windows). This will guarantee that we are able to reconstruct the original
signal in resynthesis.
The overlapped spectral frames can be transformed back into the time domain by performing an inverse DFT on each signal frame. In order to smooth any possible discontinuities
introduced when processing the signal in the spectral domain, we will also apply a window
to each transformed signal block. The waveform is reconstituted by applying an overlap-add
method that is very similar to the one employed in the convolution example. Here we will
overlap each sample block by hopsize samples, adding them together to get the output signal.
Each sample will be the sum of N/hopsize samples, one from each overlapping block.
With these ideas in mind, we can program the forward and inverse STFT:
int stft(float *input, float *window, float *output,
int input_size, int fftsize, int hopsize){
int posin, posout, i;
float *sigframe, *specframe;
sigframe = new float[fftsize];
specframe = new float[fftsize];

545

The STFT and Spectral Processing

for(posin=posout=0; posin < input_size; posin+=hopsize){
// window a signal frame
for(i=0; i < fftsize; i++)
if(posin+i < input_size)
sigframe[i] = input[posin+i]*window[i];
else sigframe[i] = 0;
// transform it
fft(sigframe, specframe, fftsize);
// output it
for(i=0; i < fftsize; i++, posout++)
output[posout] = specframe[i];
}
delete[] sigframe;
delete[] specframe;
return posout;
}
int istft(float* input, float* window, float* output,
int input_size, int fftsize, int hopsize){
int posin, posout, i, output_size;
float *sigframe, *specframe;
sigframe = new float[fftsize];
specframe = new float[fftsize];
output_size = input_size*hopsize/fftsize;
for(posout=posin=0; posout < output_size; posout+=hopsize){
// load in a spectral frame from input
for(i=0; i < fftsize; i++, posin++)
specframe[i] = input[posin];
// inverse-transform it
ifft(specframe, sigframe, fftsize);
// window it and overlap-add it
for(i=0; i < fftsize; i++)
if(posout+i < output_size)
output[posout+i] += sigframe[i]*window[i];
}
delete[] sigframe;
delete[] specframe;
return output_size;
}
These two example functions show the process again in a non-real-time form, but are easily
adaptable to any application. They use the fft() and ifft() functions used in chapter 7 of
this volume.

546

Chapter 8

The forward short-time transform takes the whole signal and outputs overlapped spectral
frames. The input, output and the window signal vectors are expected to be allocated externally. Every fftsize block of ﬂoats in the output signal composes a spectral frame relative
to consecutive time points. The size of the output is determined by the number of overlaps
(fftsize/hopsize) times the input size, but it can exceed that by a little if the input size is
not an integral multiple the hop period. The function returns the length of the output. The
inverse transform takes a sequence of overlapped frames, transforms them, and overlap-adds
them. In the following sections, we will see these functions in action in small example
programs.
8.2

Spectral Transformations: Manipulating STFT Data
Each spectral frame can be considered as a collection of complex pairs relative to the information found on equally spaced frequency bands at a particular time. These bands are sometimes called DFT (or frequency) bins. They will contain information on the amplitude and
frequency contents detected at that band. The rectangular, or Cartesian, format that is the
output of the transform packs these two aspects of the spectrum in the real and imaginary
parts of each complex coefﬁcient. To separate them, all we need do is convert the output
into a polar representation. The magnitudes will give us the amplitude of each bin, and the
phases will be indicative of the detected frequencies. A single STFT frame can give us the amplitudes for each band, but we will not be able to obtain proper frequency values for them.
This would imply extracting the instantaneous frequency, which is not really possible with one
STFT measurement. Instead, the phases will contain the frequency information in a different
form. Nevertheless, we will be able to transform the amplitude and frequency aspect of a
sound, by manipulating the magnitudes and phase values of each bin.
8.2.1

Cross-Synthesis of Frequencies and Amplitudes

The ﬁrst basic transformation that can be achieved in this way is cross-synthesis. There are different ways of crossing aspects of two spectra. The spectral multiplication made in the convolution example is one. By splitting amplitude and frequency aspects of spectra, we can also
make that type of operation separately on each aspect. Another typical cross-synthesis technique is to combine the amplitudes of one sound with the frequencies of another. This is a
spectral version of the time-domain channel vocoder. Once we have the STFT spectra of two
sounds, there could not be an easier process to implement.
1. Convert the rectangular spectral samples into magnitudes and phases.
2. Take the magnitudes of one input and the phases of the other and make a new spectral
frame, on a frame-by-frame basis.
3. Convert the magnitudes and phases to rectangular format.3 This is done with the following relationships:

547

The STFT and Spectral Processing

re[z] ¼ Magz  cos(Phaz ),
im[z] ¼ Magz  sin(Phaz ).

(3)

The resulting spectral frames in rectangular format can then be transformed back to the time
domain using the ISTFT and the overlap-add method. This three-step procedure yields the
following code, which processes one STFT frame at a time:
void crosspec(float *maginput, float *phasinput, float *output,
int fftsize){
int i;
float mag, phi;
// take care of real-valued points at 0Hz and Nyquist
output[0] = maginput[0];
output[1] = maginput[1];
for(i=2; i< fftsize; i+=2){
// get the magnitudes of one input
mag = (float) sqrt(maginput[i]*maginput[i]
+maginput[i+1]*maginput[i+1]);
// get the phases of the other
phi = (float)
atan2(phasinput[i+1], phasinput[i]);
// combine them and convert to rectangular form
output[i] = (float) (mag*cos(phi));
output[i+1]= (float) (mag*sin(phi));
}
}
The code above (and the code that follows) expects the inputs and outputs to exist externally as N-size arrays of ﬂoats. In fact, the output signal could be the same as one of the
inputs (i.e. an ‘‘in-place’’ process). Here is a short program demonstrating this function:
/** cross-synthesis main program
\b usage: cross infile1 infile2 outfile dur(s) \n
\n
infile1: input1 (magnitudes) filename \n
infile2: input2 (phases) filename \n
outfile: output filename \n
dur: duration of input in seconds \n
\n
all files are supposed to be mono \n
*/

548

Chapter 8

int
main(int argc, char **argv){
SNDFILE *fin, *fin2, *fout;
SF_INFO input_info, input_info2;
float *win, *in, *in2, *out, *spec, *spec2;
int outsize, specsize, fftsize=1024,hopsize=256;
int dataratio=fftsize/hopsize;
int frames, extraframes;
int read=0, written = 0, i,j, dur;
float *buff;
if(argc < 3) {
printf("%s: unsufficient number of
arguments(got %d, needed 2)", argv[0], argc-1);
usage();
exit(-1);
}
if(!(fin = sf_open(argv[1], SFM_READ, &input_info))){
printf("could not open %s \n", argv[1]);
exit(-1);
}
if(!(fin2 = sf_open(argv[2], SFM_READ, &input_info2))){
printf("could not open %s \n", argv[2]);
exit(-1);
}
if(!formats_equal(input_info, input_info2)){
sf_close(fin2);
sf_close(fin);
printf("%s and %s formats are not equal
or files not mono\n",
argv[1], argv[2]);
exit(-1);
}
dur = input_info.frames > input_info2.frames ?
input_info2.frames : input_info.frames;
buff = new float[100];
win = new float[fftsize];
in = new float[dur];
in2 = new float[dur];
/* number of full dataframes */
frames = ((dur*dataratio)/fftsize);
/* extra frames [not completely filled] */
extraframes = 1 +

549

The STFT and Spectral Processing

(frames*fftsize - dur*dataratio)/fftsize;
/* size of spectral data */
specsize = (frames + extraframes)*fftsize;
spec = new float[specsize];
spec2 = new float[specsize];
outsize = specsize/dataratio;
out = new float[outsize];
if(!(fout = sf_open(argv[3], SFM_WRITE, &input_info))){
printf("could not open %s \n", argv[3]);
exit(-1);
}
for(i=0; i< fftsize; i++) win[i] = 0.5f (float)(0.5*cos(i*twopi/fftsize));
for(j=0; j < dur; j+=read){
read = sf_read_float(fin, buff, 100);
for(i=0; i < read; i++) in[i+j] = buff[i];
}
for(j=0; j < dur; j+=read){
read = sf_read_float(fin2, buff, 100);
for(i=0; i < read; i++) in2[i+j] = buff[i];
}
outsize = stft(in, win, spec, dur, fftsize, hopsize);
stft(in2, win, spec2, dur, fftsize, hopsize);
for(i=0; i < outsize; i += fftsize)
crosspec(&spec[i], &spec2[i], &spec[i], fftsize);
dur = istft(spec, win, out, outsize, fftsize, hopsize);
for(j=0; j < dur;j+=written){
for(i=0; i < 100 && j < dur; i++){
if(i+j < dur) buff[i] = out[i+j];
else buff[i] = 0.f;
}
written = sf_write_float(fout, buff, i);
}
delete[]
delete[]
delete[]
delete[]

out;
in;
in2;
spec;

550

Chapter 8

delete[] spec2;
delete[] win;
delete[] buff;
sf_close(fout);
sf_close(fin);
sf_close(fin2);
return 0;
}
void
usage(){
puts("\n\n usage: cross input1 input2 output \n");
}
8.2.2

Spectral-Domain Filtering

If we manipulate the magnitudes separately, we will be able to create some ﬁltering effects by
applying a certain contour to the spectrum. For instance, to generate a simple low-pass ﬁlter
we can use one-fourth of the shape of the cosine wave and apply it to all points from 0 to
N/2. The function used for shaping the magnitude will look like
 
pk
,
0 a k a N/2.
(4)
mag[k] ¼ cos
N
Here is the code for this simple ﬁlter, which, again, processes one frame at a time:
void simplp(float *input, float *output, int fftsize){
int i,k;
float mag, magin, phi;
// The low-pass contour is 1 at 0Hz
// and 0 at the Nyquist
output[0] = 1.f;
output[1] = 0.f;
for(i=2, k=1; i < fftsize; i+=2, k++){
// get the magnitudes of input
magin = (float)
sqrt(input[i]*input[i]+input[i+1]*input[i+1]);
// apply the spectral contour
mag = (float) cos(pi*k/fftsize)*magin;
// get the phases
phi = (float) atan2(input[i+1], input[i]);

551

The STFT and Spectral Processing

// convert to rectangular form
output[i] = (float) (mag*cos(phi));
output[i+1]= (float) (mag*sin(phi));
}
}
This function can be used with the stft() and istft() functions to create a ﬁltering program. (See the DVD examples for the full code, in simpfl_main.c.) A high-pass ﬁlter could
be designed by using a sine function instead of cosine in the example above. In fact, we can
deﬁne any ﬁlter in spectral terms and use it by multiplying its spectrum with the STFT of any
input sound. This leads us back into the convolution territory. Consider a typical two-pole
resonator ﬁlter. Its transfer function is
H(z) ¼

A0
.
1  2R cos yz1 þ R2 z2

(5)

Here y is the pole angle and R is its radius (or magnitude), parameters that are related to the
ﬁlter center frequency and bandwidth, respectively. The scaling constant A0 is used to scale
the ﬁlter output so that it does not run wildly out of range. Now, if we evaluate this function
for evenly spaced frequency points z ¼ e j2pk/N , we will reveal the discrete spectrum of that
ﬁlter. All we need do is perform a complex multiplication of the result with the STFT of an
input sound.4
The mathematical steps used to obtain the spectrum of the ﬁlter are based on Euler’s relationship, which splits the complex sinusoidal e jo into its real and imaginary parts, cos(o)
and j sin(o).5 Once we have the spectral points in the rectangular form A0 (a þ ib)1 , all we
need do is multiply them with the STFT points of the original signal. This will in reality
turn out to be a complex division:
Y[k] ¼ (real{X[k]} þ j  imag{X[k]} þ j  imag{F[k]})1


realfX[k]g þ j  imagfX[k]g
¼ A0
,
realfF[k]g þ j  imagfF[k]g

(6)

where X[k], A0 F[k]1 , and Y[k] are, respectively, the spectra of the input signal, the ﬁlter, and
the output.
Here is some code that takes the pole angle and radius characterizing a resonator and apply
ﬁltering to an input signal. The scaling constant A0 is also taken as an argument. These three
parameters can be calculated from the ﬁlter’s center frequency and bandwidth. This Cþþ
function operates on frame-by-frame basis; thus the ﬁlter parameters can be varied dynamically every hop period.
void specreson(float *input, float *output, float scale,
double angle, double radius, int fftsize) {

552

Chapter 8

int i, k;
double sinw, cosw, cos2w, w, costheta, radsq, rad2;
float re, im, div, rout, imout;
costheta = cos(angle);
radsq = radius*radius;
rad2 = 2*radius;
// 0 Hz and Nyquist taken care of
output[0] = (float)((scale*input[0])/(1. - rad2*costheta + radsq));
output[1] = (float)((scale*input[1])/(1. + rad2*costheta + radsq));
for(i=2, k=1; i <fftsize; i+=2, k++){
w = (twopi*k)/fftsize;
sinw = sin(w);
cosw = cos(w);
cos2w = cos(2*w);
// real and imag parts of filter spectrum
re = (float) (1. - rad2*costheta*cosw + radsq*cos2w);
im = (float) (sinw*(rad2*costheta - 2*radsq*cosw));
// complex division
div = re*re + im*im;
rout = (input[i]*re + input[i+1]*im)/div;
imout = (input[i+1]*re - input[i]*im)/div;
output[i] = scale*rout;
output[i+1] = scale*imout;
}
}
(This function is used in the DVD example program specreson.. The source code for it is
found in specreson_main.c.)
Similarly, we can implement a spectral comb ﬁlter by multiplying the ﬁlter transfer function, evaluated as above, by the input signal. The comb ﬁlter transfer function depends on
the delay D (in samples) and the pole radius R:
H(e j2pk/N ) ¼

ejD2pk/N
,
1  RejD2pk/N

k ¼ 0, 1, 2, . . . , N  1.

(7)

The following code implements the comb ﬁlter, which can be used in ﬂanging and ﬁltering applications. As in the delay-line version, the amplitude spectrum will resemble an
upside-down comb, with the reciprocal of the delay parameter determining the spacing of
the spectral peaks. The maxima and minima of the curve will depend on the pole radius. In
this code, delay is expected to be in seconds.

553

The STFT and Spectral Processing

void specomb(float *input, float *output, float scale, float delay,
double radius, int fftsize, float sr) {
int i, k;
double sinw, cosw, w, radsq, rad2;
float re, im, div;
radsq = radius*radius;
rad2 = 2*radius;
delay *= sr;
// 0 Hz and Nyquist taken care of
output[0] = (float)(input[0]*(1.-radius)/(1. - rad2 +
radsq))*scale;
output[1] = (float)(input[1]*-(1+radius)/(1. + rad2 +
radsq))*scale;
for(i=2, k=1; i <fftsize; i+=2, k++){
w = (delay*twopi*k)/fftsize;
sinw = sin(w);
cosw = cos(w);
// real and imag parts of filter spectrum
div = (float) (1. - rad2*cosw + radsq);
re = (float) (cosw - radius)/div;
im = (float) (sinw - rad2*cosw*sinw)/div;
// complex multiplication
output[i] = (input[i]*re - input[i+1]*im)*scale;
output[i+1]= (input[i+1]*re + input[i]*im)*scale;
}
}
The use of a delay parameter here is somewhat misleading, as the output does not contain
the full length of all of the delayed signals. Since the STFT process effectively cuts off the
decay tail of the sound, this implementation cannot be used for reverb applications. For
these, we would have to use a method similar to the DFT-based convolution discussed previously. In that case, we would use a suitably long transform size to accommodate the
expected impulse response. (This code is the basis of the DVD example program speccomb;
the source code for it is found in speccomb_main.c.)
8.3

Conclusion
There are many more processes that can be devised for transforming the output of the STFT.
Two spectra can be interpolated, for instance, to generate a sound with characteristics that
are midway between the two. Convolution can be performed as the two input sounds evolve

554

Chapter 8

in time. Noise suppression can be implemented by a variety of methods, e.g. by using a
simple amplitude threshold mechanism. The examples given here are only the start. They
represent what we can call the ‘‘classic’’ approach. But several other more radical techniques
could certainly be explored. The STFT is a rich source of very interesting sound effects and a
key to the development of useful spectral processing programs.
8.4

Exercises
Exercise 8.4.1
Design a cross-synthesis function based on the multiplication of two input spectra, using the
structure of the processing functions explained in this chapter. Write a new program (or
modify one of the programming examples) to use this function.
Exercise 8.4.2
Create a version of the cross-synthesis function of exercise 8.4.1 that only multiplies together the magnitudes of the STFT outputs, and uses the phases of the inputs unchanged.
Write a program to use the function.
Exercise 8.4.3
Write a ﬁltering program that ﬁlters out speciﬁc frequency bands, by changing the magnitude of the bins in these bands. Design it so that the user has control over the range of the
band and the amount of ﬁltering (attenuation or boost).

Notes
1. Time-domain (i.e. waveform) multiplication results in frequency-domain (spectral) convolution. Spectral multiplication is the same as waveform convolution. So if we want to ﬁlter a sound, we can do it in
two ways: we can take the ﬁlter spectrum and multiply it by the input sound spectrum or we can take
the ﬁlter impulse response and combine it with the input sound waveform using convolution. The ﬁlter’s spectrum is closely linked to its frequency response. So in polar form the magnitude is how the ﬁlter
changes the input amplitudes at different frequencies and the phase is how the input delays different
frequencies. In many cases, we are only interested in the magnitude effect. In the case of windowing,
what we are doing is multiplying the input by the window, so if we will be performing spectral convolution: the shape of the window magnitude spectrum will be shifted and scaled by every component of the
input sound spectrum. (See the discussion of convolution in chapter 7.)
2. Windows are effectively envelopes. Different window shapes will have an effect on the analysis
because their magnitude spectra will have different shapes. Some windows also do not go all the way to
0 at their ends, so their use can lead to artifacts if the spectral data is modiﬁed in certain ways. There are
a variety of different windows for spectral analysis in addition to the ones shown here. Bartlett, Kaiser,
and Blackman-Harris are the names of other commonly found windows.

555

The STFT and Spectral Processing

3. Spectral data can be represented either in Cartesian (real-imaginary) or in polar (magnitude-phase)
forms. For musical applications, the polar format is probably more meaningful: the magnitudes tell us
how much energy is present at certain bands and the phases are correlated to the frequencies detected
at each bin. If we have the data in that format, we will be able to manipulate these two parameters separately, which is an advantage. If we, for instance, change the magnitudes but do not modify the phases,
we will still get quite a lot of the original sound characteristics, but with some timbral changes. This is a
powerful form of ﬁltering. In fact, the STFT allows for some very interesting ways of changing the timbre
of sounds.
4. Another way of implementing a ﬁlter, not as rigorous as the spectral resonator example, would be to
modify only the spectral magnitudes. We could ﬁrst deﬁne a magnitude shape (or envelope), either by
ﬁnding the magnitude response function of an existing ﬁlter, or by creating an arbitrary curve. Then we
could apply this curve to a signal by multiplying the signal’s magnitudes with our ﬁlter magnitudes and
keeping the phases unchanged. In fact, we could derive this curve from an arbitrary input signal, by
obtaining its magnitudes for the same purpose. In this case, we would be creating a version of the crosssynthesis program presented earlier in the chapter. (See exercise 8.4.2.)
5. By setting z ¼ e jo , with o ¼ 2pk/N, we obtain the DFT of the ﬁlter impulse response:
H(e jo ) ¼

A0
.
1  2R cos yejo þ R2 ej2o

Using Euler’s relationship e jo ¼ cos o þ j sin o, we obtain the spectrum of the ﬁlter in rectangular
format:
H(e jo ) ¼

A0
.
1  2R cos y cos o þ R2 cos o þ j sin o(2R cos y  2R2 cos o)

9

Programming the Phase Vocoder

Victor Lazzarini

The phase vocoder1 (PV) is one of the most frequently used tools in spectral processing. It
produces an output that is simple to understand, to manipulate, and to resynthesize. In this
chapter, I will discuss the details of implementing this technique, starting from the principles explored in chapter 8. I will show how the short-time Fourier transform (STFT) can be
modiﬁed and enhanced to perform PV analyses.
9.1

Tracking the Frequency
Although we can manipulate the frequency content of spectra through their phases, the
STFT does not have enough resolution to tell us what frequencies are present in a sound.
We will have to ﬁnd a way of tracking the instantaneous frequencies in each spectral band.
A well-known technique known as the PV can be employed to do just that. The PV analysis
process is sometimes described in the time domain as the use of a bank of ﬁlters tuned to
equally spaced frequencies, from 0 hertz to the Nyquist frequency. The ﬁlter-bank outputs
are made up of values for amplitudes and frequencies at each band. Here we will take a
frequency-domain approach, starting with the STFT and adapting it to ﬁt the PV output
characteristics.2
The STFT followed by a polar conversion can also be seen as a bank of parallel ﬁlters. Its
output is composed of the values for the magnitudes and phases at every time point or hop
period for each bin. The ﬁrst step in transforming the STFT into a phase vocoder is to generate values that are proportional to the frequencies present in a sound. Ideally, this is done by
the taking the time derivative of the phase; but we can approximate it by computing the difference between the phase value of consecutive frames for each spectral band. This simple
operation, although not yielding the right value for the frequency at a spectral band, will output one that is related to it.
With these small changes we will be able to process sound in a way that was not possible
before. By keeping track of the phase differences, we can time-stretch or compress a sound
without altering its frequency content (or, put simply, its pitch). We can perform this by
repeating or skipping spectral blocks, to stretch or compress the data. Because we are keeping

558

Chapter 9

the phase differences between the frames, when we accumulate them before resynthesis, we
will be able to reconstruct the signal back using the correct relative phase values.
The code below takes a rectangular STFT input and converts it to magnitudes and phase
differences (conversion in place):
const double pi = twopi/2.;
void deltaphi(float *spec, float *lastphs, int fftsize){
int i, k;
float mag, phi;
for(k=0, i=2; i < fftsize; i+=2, k++){
mag = (float) sqrt(spec[i]*spec[i]+spec[i+1]*spec[i+1]);
phi = (float) atan2(spec[i+1], spec[i]);
spec[i] = mag;
spec[i+1] = phi - lastphs[k];
lastphs[k] = phi;
// bring the diffs to the -pi and pi range
while(spec[i+1]> pi) spec[i+1] -= (float) twopi;
while(spec[i+1]< -pi) spec[i+1] += (float) twopi;
}
}
The inverse tangent function outputs the phase in the range of p to p. When the phase
differences are calculated, they might exceed this range. In this case, we have to bring them
down to the expected interval (known as principal values). This process is sometimes called
phase unwrapping.
The next function does the inverse operation, as it integrates the values to calculate the
current phase value for each frequency point. This operation is complemented by a polar to
rectangular conversion:
void sigmaphi(float *spec, float *lastphs, int fftsize) {
int i, k;
float mag, phi;
for(k=0, i=2; i < fftsize; i+=2, k++){
mag = spec[i];
phi = spec[i+1] + lastphs[k];
lastphs[k] = phi;
spec[i] = (float)(mag*cos(phi));
spec[i+1] = (float)(mag*sin(phi));
}
}

559

Programming the Phase Vocoder

This is an improvement on the basic STFT, but it does not provide much ﬂexibility even for
time-scale modiﬁcations, as we have to keep the same hopsize for analysis and resynthesis.
Therefore, depending on the length of the hop period, ﬁne changes in time scale will not
be possible. Nevertheless, much more can be achieved. We can, for instance, scale the phase
difference to match the change in the hopsize from analysis to resynthesis. For instance, if
we start with a hopsize of D samples and resynthesize the sound using a hopsize of I samples,
the ratio I : D will give us the appropriate scaling ﬁgure. This idea will be incorporated in the
implementation of the phase vocoder.
9.1.1

Frequency Estimation

So far we have been working with values that are proportional to the frequencies at every
analysis band. In order to obtain the proper values in hertz, we will have to ﬁrst modify the
input to the STFT slightly. We will rotate the windowed samples inside the analysis frame,
relative to the time point n (in samples, and take modulus N) of the input window. If our
window has 1,024 samples and we are hopping it every 256 samples, the moduli of the successive time points n will be 0, 256, 512, 768, 0, 256, . . . . The rotation will imply that for
time point 256 we will move samples from positions 0–767 into positions 256–1,023. The
last 256 samples will be moved to the ﬁrst locations of the block. A similar process is applied
to the other time points (ﬁgure 9.1). The mathematical reasons for this input rotation are

Figure 9.1
Signal frame rotation, according to input time point.

560

Chapter 9

somewhat complex, but the graphic representation in ﬁgure 9.1 goes some way on helping
us understand the process intuitively. As we can see, the rotation process has the effect of
aligning the phase of the signal in successive frames. This will help us obtain the right frequency values, but we will understand it better after seeing the rest of the process. In fact,
the input rotation renders the STFT formulation mathematically correct. Previously, in
chapter 8, we had been using a non-rigorous and simpler approach (which so far had worked
for us).3
After the rotation, we can take the DFT of the frame as usual and convert the result into
polar form. The phase differences for each band are then calculated. This now tells us how
much each detected frequency deviates from the center frequency of its analysis band. The
center frequencies are effectively the DFT analysis frequencies 2pk/N, in radians. To obtain
the proper detected frequency value, we need only add the phase differences to the center
frequency for each analysis band, scaled by the hopsize. The values in hertz can be obtained
by multiplying the result, which is given in radians per hopsize samples by sr/(2p  hopsize),
where sr is the sampling rate in samples per second.
Now we can go back to the rotation and understand the process. Figure 9.1 shows a very
simple case, a sine wave with the same period as the analysis window. After we rotate the
signal and obtain the phase-aligned result, there is no phase difference between the successive frames. Accordingly, when we take STFT of this signal, we will detect the most energy
on the ﬁrst frequency band, and the phase difference for that band will be null. This is what
we expect, since this particular wave has the same frequency as the ﬁrst frequency point.
Now if we proceed by converting this phase difference in hertz, we will of course obtain
sr/1,024 Hz, the expected result (43.07 Hz at 44.1 KHz). If the input were not rotated, we
would detect a phase difference of p/2, which would result in an 86.14 Hz, twice the right
value. This intuitive understanding can be extrapolated to more complex signals.
Here is a summary of the steps involved in phase vocoder analysis:
1. Extract N samples from a signal and apply an analysis window.
2. Rotate the samples in the signal frame according to input time n mod N.
3. Take the DFT of the signal.
4. Convert rectangular coefﬁcients to polar format.
5. Compute the phase difference and bring the value to the range from p to þp.
6. Add the difference values to 2pkD/N, and multiply the result by sr/2pD, where D is the
hopsize in samples.
7. For each spectral band, the result from step 6 yields its frequency in hertz, and the magnitude value, its peak amplitude.
The following Cþþ code implements the algorithm outlined above. A lot of it was already
in place in the stft() code.

561

Programming the Phase Vocoder

int pva(float *input, float *window, float *output,
int input_size, int fftsize, int hopsize, float sr){
int posin, posout, i, k, mod;
float *sigframe, *specframe, *lastph;
float fac, scal, phi, mag, delta, pi = (float)twopi/2;
sigframe = new float[fftsize];
specframe = new float[fftsize];
lastph = new float[fftsize/2];
memset(lastph, 0, sizeof(float)*fftsize/2);
fac = (float) (sr/(hopsize*twopi));
scal = (float) (twopi*hopsize/fftsize);
for(posin=posout=0; posin < input_size; posin+=hopsize){
mod = posin%fftsize;
// window & rotate a signal frame
for(i=0; i < fftsize; i++)
if(posin+i < input_size)
sigframe[(i+mod)%fftsize]
= input[posin+i]*window[i];
else sigframe[(i+mod)%fftsize] = 0;
// transform it
fft(sigframe, specframe, fftsize);
// convert to PV output
for(i=2,k=1; i < fftsize; i+=2, k++){
// rectangular to polar
mag = (float) sqrt(specframe[i]*specframe[i]
+ specframe[i+1]*specframe[i+1]);
phi = (float) atan2(specframe[i+1], specframe[i]);
// phase diffs
delta = phi - lastph[k];
lastph[k] = phi;
// unwrap the difference, so it lies between -pi and pi
while(delta > pi) delta -= (float) twopi;
while(delta < -pi) delta += (float) twopi;
// construct the amplitude-frequency pairs
specframe[i] = mag;
specframe[i+1] = (delta + k*scal)*fac;
}
// output it

562

Chapter 9

for(i=0; i < fftsize; i++, posout++)
output[posout] = specframe[i];
}
delete[] sigframe;
delete[] specframe;
delete[] lastph;
return posout;
}
9.1.2

Phase Vocoder Resynthesis

Phase vocoder data can be resynthesized using a variety of methods. Since we have blocks of
amplitude and frequency data, we can use some sort of additive synthesis to playback the
spectral frames. However, a more efﬁcient way of converting to time-domain data for arbitrary sounds with many components is to use an overlap-add method similar to the one in
the ISTFT. All we need do is retrace the steps taken in the forward transformation:
1. Convert the frequencies back to phase differences in radians per I samples by subtracting
them from the center frequencies of each channel, in hertz, ksr/N, and multiplying the result
by 2pI/sr, where I is the synthesis hopsize.
2. Accumulate them to compute the current phase values.
3. Perform a polar to rectangular conversion.
4. Take the IDFT of the signal frame.
5. Unrotate the samples and apply a window to the resulting sample block.
6. Overlap-add consecutive frames.
The code is as follows:
int pvs(float* input, float* window, float* output,
int input_size, int fftsize, int hopsize, float sr){
int posin, posout, k, i, output_size, mod;
float *sigframe, *specframe, *lastph;
float fac, scal, phi, mag, delta;
sigframe = new float[fftsize];
specframe = new float[fftsize];
lastph = new float[fftsize/2];
memset(lastph, 0, sizeof(float)*fftsize/2);
output_size = input_size*hopsize/fftsize;
fac = (float) (hopsize*twopi/sr);
scal = sr/fftsize;

563

Programming the Phase Vocoder

for(posout=posin=0; posout < output_size; posout+=hopsize){
// load in a spectral frame from input
for(i=0; i < fftsize; i++, posin++)
specframe[i] = input[posin];
// convert from PV input to DFT coordinates
for(i=2,k=1; i < fftsize; i+=2, k++){
delta = (specframe[i+1] - k*scal)*fac;
phi = lastph[k]+delta;
lastph[k] = phi;
mag = specframe[i];
specframe[i] = (float) (mag*cos(phi));
specframe[i+1] = (float) (mag*sin(phi));
}
// inverse-transform it
ifft(specframe, sigframe, fftsize);
// unrotate and window it and overlap-add it
mod = posout%fftsize;
for(i=0; i < fftsize; i++)
if(posout+i < output_size)
output[posout+i] +=
sigframe[(i+mod)%fftsize]*window[i];
}
delete[] sigframe;
delete[] specframe;
delete[] lastph;
return output_size;
}
PV analysis has several advantages over the straightforward STFT. The ﬁrst advantage is
independence of time scale and frequency scale, already discussed above. Another is the ﬂexibility of the representation, which can be used in many applications. Dealing with amplitude and frequency is more musically meaningful, when compared to the manipulation of
raw spectral coordinates. In addition, all of the already discussed STFT data processing techniques are also available to the PV format, with a little adaptation. This makes the phase
vocoder a more versatile tool for spectral processing than the STFT. However, conversion to
PV format involves a little more computation than straight STFT processing. Thus, for certain
applications, if the STFT is sufﬁcient, there is no need to look beyond it.
All DFT-based algorithms will have some limits in terms of frequency resolution. The analysis will be able to resolve a maximum of one sinusoidal component per frequency band.
If two or more partials fall within one band, the phase vocoder will fail to output the right

564

Chapter 9

values for the amplitudes and frequencies of each of them. Instead, we will have an
amplitude-modulated composite output, in many ways similar to beat frequencies. In addition, because the DFT splits the spectrum in equal-size bands, this problem will mostly affect
lower frequencies, where bands are perceptually larger. This also implies that the phase
vocoder is more suitable to the analysis of harmonic spectra. Nevertheless, there are many
different types of manipulations of phase vocoder data to which these problems are not relevant. In general, the phase vocoder is a powerful tool for transformation of arbitrary signals.
9.1.3

Spectral Morphing

A typical transformation of PV data is spectral interpolation, or morphing. It is a more general version of the spectral cross-synthesis example discussed previously. Here, we interpolate4 between the frequencies and amplitudes of two spectra frame by frame. The code
below implements this operation by interpolating linearly between the frequencies and
exponentially between the frequencies. The arguments morpha and morphfr deﬁne the
amount of interpolation and should be in the range 0–1.
void pvmorph(float* input1, float *input2, float *output,
float morpha, float morphfr, int fftsize, float sr){
int i;
float amp1, amp2, fr1, fr2;
double div;
for(i=0; i< fftsize; i+=2){
amp1 = input1[i];
amp2 = input2[i];
output[i] = amp1 + (amp2-amp1)*morpha;
if(i){
// interpolate frs
fr1 = input1[i+1];
fr2 = input2[i+1];
div = fr1 ? fr2/fr1 : HUGE_VAL;
div = div > 0 ? div : -div;
output[i+1] = (float)(fr1*pow(div, morphfr));
}
else {
// this is the nyquist frequency band
amp1 = input1[i+1];
amp2 = input2[i+1];
output[i+1] = amp1 + (amp2-amp1)*morpha;
}
}
}

565

Programming the Phase Vocoder

Here is the full code of an example program using the above function for a spectral morphing application:
#include <stdio.h>
#include "spec.h"
#include "fourier.h"
/** pv morphing main program
\b usage: pvmorph infile1 infile2 outfile dur(s) \n
\n
infile1: input1 (start sound) filename \n
infile2: input2 (final sounds) filename \n
outfile: output filename \n
dur: duration of input in seconds \n
\n
all files are supposed to be mono \n
*/
int
main(int argc, char **argv){
SNDFILE *fin, *fin2, *fout;
SF_INFO input_info, input_info2;
float *win, *in, *in2, *out, *spec, *spec2;
int outsize, specsize, fftsize=1024,hopsize=256;
int dataratio=fftsize/hopsize;
int frames, extraframes;
int read=0, written = 0, i,j, dur;
float *buff,sr;
if(argc < 3) {
printf("%s: unsufficient number of
arguments(got %d, needed 3)", argv[0], argc-1);
usage();
exit(-1);
}
if(!(fin = sf_open(argv[1], SFM_READ, &input_info))){
printf("could not open %s \n", argv[1]);
exit(-1);
}
if(!(fin2 = sf_open(argv[2], SFM_READ, &input_info2))){
printf("could not open %s \n", argv[2]);
exit(-1);
}

566

Chapter 9

if(!formats_equal(input_info, input_info2)){
sf_close(fin2);
sf_close(fin);
printf("%s and %s formats are not equal
or files not mono\n",
argv[1], argv[2]);
exit(-1);
}
dur = input_info.frames > input_info2.frames ?
input_info2.frames : input_info.frames;
sr = input_info.samplerate;
buff = new float[100];
win = new float[fftsize];
in = new float[dur];
in2 = new float[dur];
/* number of full dataframes */
frames = ((dur*dataratio)/fftsize);
/* extra frames [not completely filled] */
extraframes = 1 +
(frames*fftsize - dur*dataratio)/fftsize;
/* size of spectral data */
specsize = (frames + extraframes)*fftsize;
spec = new float[specsize];
spec2 = new float[specsize];
outsize = specsize/dataratio;
out = new float[outsize];
if(!(fout = sf_open(argv[3], SFM_WRITE, &input_info))){
printf("could not open %s \n", argv[3]);
exit(-1);
}
for(i=0; i< fftsize; i++) win[i] = 0.5f (float)(0.5*cos(i*twopi/fftsize));
for(j=0; j < dur; j+=read){
read = sf_read_float(fin, buff, 100);
for(i=0; i < read; i++) in[i+j] = buff[i];
}
for(j=0; j < dur; j+=read){
read = sf_read_float(fin2, buff, 100);
for(i=0; i < read; i++) in2[i+j] = buff[i];
}
outsize = pva(in, win, spec, dur, fftsize, hopsize, sr);

567

Programming the Phase Vocoder

pva(in2, win, spec2, dur, fftsize, hopsize, sr);
for(i=0; i < specsize; i+=fftsize) {
pvmorph(&spec[i], &spec2[i], &spec[i],
(float)i/outsize, (float)i/outsize, 1024, (float) sr);
}
dur = pvs(spec, win, out, specsize, fftsize, hopsize, sr);
for(j=0; j < dur;j+=written){
for(i=0; i < 100 && j < dur; i++){
if(i+j < dur) buff[i] = out[i+j];
else buff[i] = 0.f;
}
written = sf_write_float(fout, buff, i);
}
delete[]
delete[]
delete[]
delete[]
delete[]
delete[]
delete[]

out;
in;
in2;
spec;
spec2;
win;
buff;

sf_close(fout);
sf_close(fin);
sf_close(fin2);
return 0;
}
void
usage(){
puts("\n\n usage: morph input1 input2 output \n");
}
Spectral morphing can produce interesting results. However, its effectiveness depends very
much on the spectral qualities of the two input sounds. When the spectral data does not
overlap much, interpolating will sound similar to cross-fading, which can be achieved in
the time domain with much less trouble.
There are many more transformations that can be devised for modifying PV data. In fact,
any number of manipulation procedures that generate a spectral frame in the right format
can be seen as valid spectral processes. Whether they will produce a musically useful output
is another question. In general, we should not have any problems with any amplitude data

568

Chapter 9

transformation, but care should be taken with changes in frequency data. If the PV data is to
be resynthesized using the inverse overlap-add operation, we will have to keep the frequencies within the bandwidth of a bin. If the frequency of a bin is modiﬁed so that it is actually
in another bin’s range, then that component (its amplitude and frequency) should be moved
to the right bin. This is the basis of general-purpose frequency scaling of PV data.5 But if
additive synthesis is used, no such restriction applies. Understanding how the spectral data
is generated in analysis is the ﬁrst step in designing transformations that work.
We have explored the phase vocoder from the DFT perspective, as a modiﬁcation of more
basic spectral analysis algorithms. However, it is important to remember that the original
theory also involves a time-domain interpretation of the process, as the use of a bank of overlapping band-pass ﬁlters. Each of these ﬁlters, in that interpretation, is constructed using a
heterodyne algorithm, which consists in the multiplication of the signal by cosine and sine
waves (in parallel), followed by low-pass ﬁltering. This, of course, turns out to be the same
as the STFT operation (windowing works as low-pass ﬁltering). The frequency-domain interpretation of the technique seen here is, nevertheless, very important, as it has more practical
implementations (because of the availability of FFT algorithms).6
9.2

The Instantaneous Frequency Distribution
The instantaneous frequency distribution (IFD) algorithm, proposed by Toshihiko Abe, gives
an alternative method of frequency estimation.7 It uses some of the principles already seen
in the phase vocoder, but its mathematical formulation is more complex. The basic idea,
also present in the PV algorithm, is that the frequency (more precisely, the instantaneous frequency detected at a certain band) is the time derivative of the phase. We saw in chapter 7
how to obtain the phase output from rectangular coordinates. Using Euler’s relationship, we
can also deﬁne the output of the STFT in polar form. This is shown below, using o ¼ 2pk/N:
STFT(x(n), k, t) ¼ R(o, t)  e jy(o,t) .

(1)

The phase detected by band k at time point t is y(2pkn/N, t), and the magnitude is
R(2pkn/N, t). The instantaneous frequency distribution of x(n) at time t is then the time
derivative of the STFT phase output:
IFD(x(n), k, t) ¼

q
y(o, t).
qt

(2)

This can be intuitively understood as the measurement of the rate of rotation of the phase
of a sinusoidal signal. In the phase vocoder, we estimated it by crudely taking the difference
between phase values in successive frames. The IFD actually calculates the time derivative of
the phase directly, from data corresponding to a single time point. The downside is that it
will require the calculation of two DFTs per frame. Also, there is the need for some mathematical muscle in the outlining of the process. We will start by using the STFT, taken as a
series of DFTs of a rotated and windowed input signal:

569

Programming the Phase Vocoder

STFT(x(n), k, t) ¼ ej2pkt/N

X
1 N1
w(m)x(m þ t)ej2pkm/N
N m¼0

¼ ej2pkt/N DFT(xt (m), k).

(3)

Each DFT is taken from xt (m) ¼ w(m)x(m þ t), the windowed input signal at time point t.
The multiplication by the complex exponential can be done in the time domain as a rotation of the input (as demonstrated in ﬁgure 9.1). Now we proceed by isolating the phase
from the magnitude spectrum. This can be done by ﬁrst taking the logarithm of the DFT
output in polar form:
ln[DFT(xt (m), k)] ¼ ln[R(o, t)  e jy(o,t) ]
¼ ln[R(o, t)] þ jy(o, t),

o ¼ 2pk/N.

(4)

It is clear from the above that the phase is the imaginary part of the natural logarithm of
the DFT, imag{ln(DFT )}. This is in fact an alternative way of obtaining the phase output of a
transform, to the one seen in previous chapters. Now we can put the derivative of the phase
in terms of the DFT of the signal:
q
q
y(o, t) ¼ imag{ln[DFT(xt (m), k)]}
qt
qt


q
q
ln[DFT(xt (m), k)]  DFT(xt (m), k)
¼ imag
qt
qt


1
q
¼ imag
 DFT(xt (m), k) .
DFT(xt (m), k) qt

(5)

Now all we have to do is ﬁnd the derivative of the DFT. This can be done by changing the
summation variable of the transform using r ¼ m þ t, so that the only function of the time
variable t left inside the summation is the window:
DFT(xt (m), k) ¼

X
1 N1
x(m þ t)w(m)ejom
N m¼0

¼

X
1 N1
x(r)w(r  t)ejo(rt)
N r¼0

¼ e jwt

1
1 NX
x(r)w(r  t)ejor .
N r¼0

(6)

Now we are left with the simple matter of taking the derivative (with respect to time) of
the above product. This is easier, because the derivative of the complex exponential is trivial
and we are left only with the derivative of the window function:

570

Chapter 9

q
q
DFT(xt (m), k) ¼
qt
qt

(
e

jot

X
1 N1
x(r)w(r  t)ejor
N r¼0

)

X
q
1 N1
q
x(r)w(r  t)ejor þ
¼ e jot 
qt
N r¼0
qt
¼ joe jot

(

X
1 N1
x(r)w(r  t)ejor
N r¼0

)
 e jot



1
1
1 NX
1 NX
q
x(r)w(r  t)ejor þ e jot
x(r)
w(r  t) e jor .
N r¼0
N r¼0
qt

Reverting to the previous formulation of the DFT (using the converse of equation 6, with
m ¼ r  t), we have


1
1
q
jo NX
1 NX
q
x(m þ t)w(m)ejom þ
x(m þ t)
DFT(xt (m), k) ¼
w(m) e jom
qt
N r¼0
N r¼0
q(r  m)
¼ joDFT(xt (m), k) þ DFT(x 0t (m), k),

(8)

where
x 0t (m) ¼ 

q
w(m)x(m þ t).
qm

Substituting this expression for the derivative of the DFT in equation 5, we obtain


q
1
 [ joDFT(xt (m), k) þ DFT(x 0t (m), k)] .
y(o, t) ¼ imag
qt
DFT(xt (m), k)

(9)

Using the deﬁnition of the IFD given in equation 2, we arrive at its ﬁnal formulation, as a
quotient of two DFTs. The top one is taken from the signal windowed by the negative derivative of the window and the bottom one from the ordinarily windowed signal:


DFT(x 0t (m), k)
.
(10)
IFD(x(n), k, t) ¼ o þ imag
DFT(xt (m), k)
The mathematical steps involved in the derivation of the IFD are quite involved. Since
they show a newer alternative to the well-known phase vocoder algorithm, it was important
to spell them out in detail. However, if we want to implement the IFD, all we need is to
employ its deﬁnition in terms of DFTs, as given above. We can use the straight DFT of a windowed frame to obtain the amplitudes and use the IFD to estimate the frequencies. Because
we are using the straight transform of a windowed signal, there is no need to rotate the
input, as in the phase vocoder. If we look back at the DFT as deﬁned in chapter 7, we see
that it, in fact, does not include the multiplication by a complex exponential (as does the
STFT). Finally, computing the differences between its consecutive samples can generate the
derivative of the analysis window.

571

Programming the Phase Vocoder

9.2.1

An IFD Analysis Application

The following steps can be used to implement IFD þ magnitude (amplitude or spectrogram)
analysis from overlapped time-domain signal blocks:
1. On each hop period, take N samples from a signal, multiply them by a window and its
negative derivative. Generate the derivative by taking the differences between its samples.
2. Take the DFT of the two windowed signals.
3. Calculate the magnitude of the rectangular output of the DFT of the windowed signal.
This, as we have seen, is the square root of the sum of the squared real and imaginary parts.
This will give us the output amplitudes.
4. Calculate the frequencies by ﬁrst taking the imaginary part of the quotient of the two
DFTs. This gives the amount of detected frequency deviation (in radians per sample) from
the channel center frequency. Convert this value into hertz by multiplying it by sr/2p. Now
we just add it to the channel center frequency in hertz (osr or 2pksr/N).
Here is the code implementing the IFD in similar fashion to previous analysis algorithms,
with the window, input, and output allocated and deﬁned externally:
int ifd(float *input, float *window, float *output,
int input_size, int fftsize, int hopsize, float sr){
int posin, posout, i, k;
float *sigframe, *specframe1, *specframe2, *diffwin;
double a,b,c,d,powerspec;
float fac = (float)(sr/twopi), fund = sr/fftsize;
sigframe = new float[fftsize];
specframe1 = new float[fftsize];
specframe2 = new float[fftsize];
diffwin = new float[fftsize];
for(i=0; i < fftsize; i++){
diffwin[i] = (i ? window[i-1] : 0.f) - window[i];
}
for(posin=posout=0; posin < input_size; posin+=hopsize){
// multiply an extracted signal frame
// by the derivative of the window
for(i=0; i < fftsize; i++)
if(posin+i < input_size)
sigframe[i] = input[posin+i]*diffwin[i];
else sigframe[i] = 0;
// transform it
fft(sigframe, specframe1, fftsize);
// multiply the same signal frame
// by the window

572

Chapter 9

for(i=0; i < fftsize; i++)
if(posin+i < input_size)
sigframe[i] = input[posin+i]*window[i];
else sigframe[i] = 0;
// transform it
fft(sigframe, specframe2, fftsize);
// take care of 0Hz and Nyquist freqs
output[posout++] = specframe2[i];
output[posout++] = specframe2[i+1];
for(i=2, k=1; i < fftsize; i+=2, k++, ut+=2){
a = specframe1[i];
b = specframe1[i+1];
c = specframe2[i];
d = specframe2[i+1];
powerspec = c*c+d*d;
// compute the amplitudes
output[posout] = (float) sqrt(powerspec);
// compute the IFD
if(powerspec)
output[posout+1] =
(float) ((b*c - a*d)/powerspec)*fac + k*fund;
else output[posout+1] = k*fund;
}
}
delete[] diffwin;
delete[] sigframe;
delete[] specframe2;
delete[] specframe1;
return posout;
}
The output of the IFD is very similar to the phase vocoder. However, a direct inverse transformation is not deﬁned for the IFD. In order to resynthesize the frequency-domain data, we
would ideally use some sort of additive synthesis method, with a bank of oscillators. Alternatively, an ISTFT-based algorithm can be formulated, by integrating the successive frequency
values for each time point and converting them to get the current phases in radians, as outlined above for the phase vocoder.
9.2.2

Additive Resynthesis

The additive synthesis method of signal reconstruction is not always as computationally efﬁcient as the inverse DFT-based algorithms. However, it is a little bit more ﬂexible when
it comes to certain processes, such as pitch-shifting and other frequency modiﬁcations.

573

Programming the Phase Vocoder

Because we are using oscillators8 to produce the sound, we can introduce any changes we
like to bin frequencies before resynthesis. It is very easy to create a program that changes
the pitch of a sound without changing its length. One way of making the resynthesis more
efﬁcient is to employ oscillators to resynthesize only the components that have a signiﬁcant
presence in the spectrum, using a thresholding method.
The following code implements a generalized additive synthesis method, which can be
used with data in real-FFT-based amp-freq format (0 hertz and Nyquist followed by amplitude and frequency pairs in hertz). As with the previous examples, we will expect the spectral
signal to be present in the input array and we will synthesize it into the output array,
which should be allocated externally. The code will use a truncating table oscillator, reading
from a 10,000-point sine-wave table.
The principle of additive synthesis is very straightforward: we will use the amplitudes and
frequencies as control signals to drive a bank of oscillators. In order to provide a smooth
output, we will linearly interpolate these control signals from one time point to the next.
The frequencies will then be used to increment the phase of each oscillator and the amplitudes will scale their output. The signal will be accumulated in the outsum buffer, before it
is sent to the output.
const int tablen = 10000;
int
addsyn(float* input, float *window, float* output, int inputsize,
float thresh, float pitch, float scale,
int fftsize,int hopsize, float sr) {
int n, i, k, posin, posout, output_size, bins, s=1;
float *amp, *freq, *tab, *outsum, ratio;
float ampnext, freqnext, *phase,incra,incrf;
//allocate memory
bins = fftsize/2;
outsum = new float[hopsize];
amp = new float[bins];
phase = new float[bins];
freq = new float[bins];
tab = new float[tablen];
// initialize parameters
output_size = inputsize*hopsize/fftsize;
ratio = (float)tablen/sr;
for(i=0; i <bins; i++){
amp[i] = phase[i] = 0.f;
freq[i] = i*(float)fftsize/sr
}
for(n=0; n<tablen; n++) tab[n] = (float)sin(n*twopi/tablen);

574

Chapter 9

for(posin=0, posout=0; posout < output_size;
posout+=hopsize, posin+=fftsize){
// zero outsum vector
for(n=0; n<hopsize; n++) outsum[n] = 0.f;
// for each bin
for(i=1,k=2; i < bins; i++, k+=2){
// get the amps & freqs from input
ampnext = scale*input[k+posin];
freqnext = pitch*input[k+posin+1];
// calculate the interpolation increment
incra = (ampnext - amp[i])/hopsize;
incrf = (freqnext - freq[i])/hopsize;
// if the amplitude is above a threshold
if(ampnext > thresh){
// synthesize and mix in the partial
for(n=0; n < hopsize; n++){
phase[i] += freq[i]*ratio;
while(phase[i] < 0) phase[i] += tablen;
while(phase[i] >= tablen) phase[i] -= tablen;
[n] += amp[i]*tab[(int)phase[i]];
amp[i] += incra;
freq[i] += incrf;
}
}
// otherwise zero the amplitude
else amp[i] = 0.f;
}
// send the signal to the output
for(n=0; n<hopsize; n++) output[posout+n] = outsum[n];
}
// de-allocate memory
delete[] outsum;
delete[] tab;
[] phase;
delete[] freq;
delete[] amp;
return posout;
}
9.3

Conclusion
As we have seen, there are many applications for spectral processing of audio signals. The use
of the PV techniques for frequency analysis is quite widespread in audio programming. The

575

Programming the Phase Vocoder

availability of fast computation algorithms makes these techniques a very practical proposition for the development of sound processing and synthesis software. In fact, most of the
modern music processing languages, including Csound and Pure Data, provide facilities for
PV-based frequency analysis and resynthesis.
9.4

Exercises
Exercise 9.4.1
Design a ‘‘spectral freeze’ function’’ that holds on to ﬁxed amplitude and/or frequency bin
values for a certain amount of time. Write a program (or modify one of the examples) that
uses the function, creating a freeze-frame application.
Exercise 9.4.2
In two straight analysis-synthesis programs (i.e. no processing of spectral data), one using PV
resynthesis and another using Additive synthesis, implement a way of checking the processing time (using system time functions) and check the difference in efﬁciency of each
method.
Exercise 9.4.3
Modify the additive synthesis function to allow for pitch-shifting. Implement a program that
shifts the pitch of a sound without changing its length.

Notes
1. The original phase vocoder was introduced in J. Flanagan and R. Golden, ‘‘Phase Vocoder,’’ Bell System
Technical Journal 45 (1966): 1493–1509.
2. There are two equally valid ways of interpreting the PV operation. One is to think of it as several ﬁlters working in parallel (i.e. the same input is sent to all ﬁlters), each covering a ﬁxed band and all of
them with the same bandwidth. These ﬁlters cover the entire spectrum, from 0 Hz to the Nyquist frequency, and because they are all of the same bandwidth they will be spaced equally. Each ﬁlter outputs
a pair of time-varying signals, one containing the detected amplitude and the other the detected frequency. The other way of seeing PV analysis is to think of it as a series of spectral analysis frames out of
a STFT operation, containing frequency bins with amplitude and frequency pairs of values. The second
interpretation is more closely related to the way we are implementing it here.
3. The STFT was deﬁned in chapter 8 as
STFT(x(n), k, t) ¼

l
1 X
w(n  t)x(n)ej2pkn/N ,
N n¼l

k ¼ 0, 1, 2, . . . , N  1.

Since the windowed signal is non-zero in the range from 0 to N  1, we can rewrite the STFT expression
as

576

Chapter 9

STFT(x(n), k, t) ¼

X
1 tþN1
w(n  t)x(n)ej2pkn/N .
N n¼t

Now we will change the summation index n, using n ¼ m þ t, so that we can bring the formula into the
0 to N  1 range in the right format for DFT evaluation:
STFT(x(n), k, t) ¼

1
1 NX
w(m)x(m þ t)ej2pk(mþt)/N
N m¼0

¼ ej2pkt/N

X
1 N1
w(m)x(m þ t)ej2pkm/N .
N m¼0

Multiplying by a complex exponential is the same as shifting the input samples circularly according to
the input time t mod N. This is due to the so-called shift theorem of the DFT. Thus, by rotating the input
signal we avoid the complex multiplication in the spectral domain.
4. Interpolation is a way of generating intermediary values between two points. The simplest type, and
generally the one that is more often used, is called linear interpolation. It is possible to see it as making a
straight line between the points and reading the interpolated values off this line. This implies that you
are taking the difference between the values and then scaling it to cover smaller intervals. Say the difference between the ﬁrst and second points is 2 and the interval between these points is 1. Then if we want
to ﬁnd the interpolated values in between, say at 0.1 intervals, we multiply the difference by the ratio of
the target interpolation interval (0.1) and the interval (1), 2 * 0.1 ¼ 0.2. That will give us the differences
at the interpolation intervals, which we just cumulatively add to our initial value to create to interpolate (x, x þ 0.2, x þ 0.2 þ 0.2, . . . , x þ 2). To ﬁnd a speciﬁc value between the two points, multiply the
difference by the interpolated position (between 0 and 1) we want to ﬁnd and add to the value of position 1: y ¼ x1 þ (x2  x1 )  pos. If, on the other hand, we would like to interpolate based on ratios of
values instead of differences, we use exponential interpolation. In this case, all we need do is to exchange
the sums for multiplications, differences for divisions and multiplication for exponentiation: y ¼
x1  (x2 /x1 ) pos .
Exponential interpolation is useful in music because of the way we perceive frequency, pitches, and
musical intervals, which is based on ratios rather than differences. For instance, we perceive the change
from 1,10 Hz to 2,20 Hz (an octave) as being the same as the change from 220 Hz to 440 Hz. These
changes (of octave) are in the ratio 2 : 1.
5. The secret of general-purpose frequency scaling of PV data (for pitch-shifting applications, for instance) is not only to scale the frequencies, but also to scale the bins. So when we want to pitch shift a
sound an octave higher (frequency scaling by 2), we need to scale the bin frequency by 2 and move the
bin frequency and amplitude data to a bin 2 times this bin’s number. Example: say that in bin 3 we have
freq ¼ 110 and amp ¼ 1000. Then we multiply the frequency by 2, and move the data to bin 2 * 3. Bin 6
will then contain freq ¼ 220 and amp ¼ 1,000. This operation has to be performed on all bins for pitch
shifting to occur. Scaling by other factors or other intervals works on the same basis. Note that these frequency modiﬁcations are not artifact-free and can be problematic with certain input sounds and large
amounts of scaling.
6. For a more detailed look at this alternative view of the phase vocoder, see James Flanagan’s original
article on the technique. For other descriptions of the technique, both in terms of its time-domain and

577

Programming the Phase Vocoder

spectral perspectives, see M. Dolson, ‘‘The Phase Vocoder Tutorial,’’ Computer Music Journal 10(1986),
no. 4): 14–27; F. Moore, Elements of Computer Music (Prentice-Hall, 1990).
7. T. Abe, ‘‘The IF spectrogram: a new spectral representation,’’ in Proceedings of ASVA 97: 423–430. The
technique had also been proposed independently by D. Friedman (‘‘Instantaneous-frequency distribution vs. time: An interpretation of the phase structure of speech,’’ in Proceedings of the ICASSP, 1985).
The IFD is related to what elsewhere is called frequency reassignment (because the bin frequencies get
‘‘reassigned’’ other values that might be different from the original bin center frequencies).
8. Oscillators are usually implemented as wrap-around table readers. They have three basic elements:
phase (or index) increment, table lookup, and amplitude scaling. The phase increment makes sure we
read the right table location each time we need to produce a sample of audio. This is based on the fundamental frequency we want to generate, the sampling rate and the size of the table. The amount of increment we need each time is
incr ¼ freq 

table_size
.
sr

We will also have to make sure we wrap around at the ends of the table, so a generalized modulus is applied there too. Table lookup is just a matter of looking up values in an array and scaling is multiplying
those values, which are generally normalized by the correct amplitude. The additive synthesis code has
also an extra bit of code to interpolate between amplitude and frequency values at adjacent frames, so
that the synthesized signal is generated smoothly.

Programming Csound Opcodes

10

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

John fﬁtch

A computing skill which is often mentioned but rarely taught is the ability to read a program
and understand what it does, and how. In cases where there is a design document this can be
a little easier, but in the real world of ﬁfty years of software evolution in many cases such
documentation does not exist, and you must develop reading skills.
It has been said that the teaching of computing concentrates too much on writing programs and too little on reading, unlike the learning of literacy, where reading is usually
afforded the higher place.1 To better understand what we are reading, we begin with a glossary of some Csound terms (table 10.1).
In the spirit of program reading, we are going to consider a few opcode implementations
in Csound, with the intention of understanding how they work, and how they relate to the
main Csound engine. We will take ﬁrst a very simple ﬁlter, where the body of code to be
understood is small, and then a number of increasingly complex opcodes, each of which
introduces new mechanisms.
10.1

The tone Opcode
The ﬁlter opcode we will consider is the tone opcode, an implementation of a ﬁrst-order
recursive low-pass ﬁlter. There are three places where there is code related to this opcode, in
the entry table (Engine/entry1.c), and a header in H/ugens5.h for the type RESON, and
the source code in OOps/ugens5.c.
In entry1.c there is the line
{ "tone", S(TONE), 5, "a", "ako", tonset, NULL, tone },
The header type declaration in H/ugens5.h is
typedef struct {
OPDS h;
MYFLT *ar, *asig, *khp, *istor;
double c1, c2, yt1, prvhp;
} TONE;

582

Chapter 10

Table 10.1
A glossary of some Csound terms.
FL

a C macro to deal with single and double precision ﬂoating-point numbers

MYFLT

a C type that is either float or double

OENTRY

a structure maintained as an array, where each entry deﬁnes an opcode

a rate

audio rate, referring to operations that generate output at the sample-rate

engine

the fundamental Csound control system that starts, maintains, and stops instruments
playing

instrument

a collection (network) of opcodes that together deﬁnes a particular sound or operation;
a ‘‘patch,’’ a ‘‘preset,’’ a ‘‘voice,’’ an effect, or a combination of a voice(s) with effect(s);
a sound generating or processing algorithm

k rate

the control rate, a rate slower that the sample rate at which changes occur

ksmps

the number of samples generated on each control cycle; the sample rate divided by the
control rate

opcodes

the atomic operation from which instruments are built

and the base code in OOps/ugens5.c is
int tonset(CSOUND *csound, TONE *p)
{
double b;
p->prvhp = (double)*p->khp;
b = 2.0 - cos((double)(p->prvhp * csound->tpidsr));
p->c2 = b - sqrt(b * b - 1.0);
p->c1 = 1.0 - p->c2;
if (!(*p->istor))
p->yt1 = 0.0;
return OK;
}
int tone(CSOUND *csound, TONE *p)
{
MYFLT *ar, *asig;
int n, nsmps = csound->ksmps;
double c1 = p->c1, c2 = p->c2;
double yt1 = p->yt1;
if (*p->khp != (MYFLT)p->prvhp) {
double b;
p->prvhp = (double)*p->khp;
b = 2.0 - cos((double)(p->prvhp * csound->tpidsr));
p->c2 = c2 = b - sqrt(b * b - 1.0);
p->c1 = c1 = 1.0 - c2;
}

583

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

ar = p->ar;
asig = p->asig;
for (n=0; n<nsmps; n++) {
yt1 = c1 * (double)(asig[n]) + c2 * yt1;
ar[n] = (MYFLT)yt1;
}
p->yt1 = yt1;
return OK;
}
At ﬁrst sight this may appear frightening, but with basic knowledge of C syntax it ought to
be possible to understand the main local structure. In order to get further in understanding
will require some information on the overall structure on Csound, which in not a small topic.
10.1.1

A Quick Guide to Csound as a Program

At the most basic level, Csound2 is a specialized object-oriented system that arranges to initiate instruments at the time requested by the score, and to continue to play them until
the end of the note. Each instrument consists of a number of opcodes generally obeyed in
sequence, and there is a fairly complex system to pass the arguments to the opcodes (ﬁgure
10.1). Technically the arguments are passed by reference and so each opcode gets the arguments as pointers. This does have some implication for the programming of opcodes, especially if the answer is the same variable as one of the inputs.3
The main purpose of the Csound engine, as the major control system is often called, is to
perform the initiation of the new notes (using a function called insert to be found in the
ﬁle Engine/insert.c), and remove them when their duration has expired. Between these
events each active instrument is called, that is the sequence of opcodes are obeyed and are
expected to generate ksmps of audio results for a-rate opcodes or one k-rate answer for k
rate. In effect for speed Csound generates short vectors of audio before changing any parameters. The out family of opcodes mix these short vectors into the output, whether to ﬁle or
directly to the audio output. The implication of this is that for each k-rate cycle a function is

Figure 10.1
Instruments and opcodes in Csound.

584

Chapter 10

called for each opcode. There is another function associated with the opcode that is called
once to initialize the operation (ﬁgure 10.1). In fact there is provision for a third function
to be called at termination time, but this is not widely used. Above is a very simple sketch
of the Csound engine, and as one gets more expert one discovers many other details, but
this description is sufﬁcient to understand the tone opcode that is our initial task.
In summary, each opcode has two functions, one to initialize the operation and one to
generate a small ksmps vector of audio. Both functions are provided with a pointer to a
structure that holds the pointers to the arguments and to any local state that the opcode
may require.
The association of the opcode name with the structures and functions is done in an
entry, that is, a line in an OENTRY array. Each line has nine ﬁelds: name, size of struct, a
bit pattern to say which combination of init-time, k-rate and a-rate occasions the opcode
needs attention, a string specifying the answer(s) type(s), a string specifying the arguments,
and the possible four functions: one for init-time, one for k-rate, one for a-rate, and one for
deactivation time. For the tone opcode we will see the following line:
{ "tone", S(TONE), 5, "a", "ako", tonset, NULL, tone },
The macro S is just shorthand for sizeof. The third component, 5, should be read as
1 þ 4, or in binary 101. The 001 indicates a function to be called at init time, and the 100
indicates a function at a rate. If this had been a k-rate function then there would have been
a 010 bit. The answer is speciﬁed by ‘‘a’’ which indicates a single a-rate answer. The engine
has to arrange space for the necessary short vector. The arguments of ‘‘ako’’ indicate an
a-rate argument, a k-rate argument, and an optional i-rate argument that defaults to 0 if not
speciﬁed. The coding here is rather arcane, and is extended from time to time, but currently
the possibilities are those listed in table 10.2. The parser and orchestra translation and loading components of Csound read these OENTRY tables to determine the syntax of each
opcode, as well as adding the optional arguments and checking types. The rest of the entry
gives the names of the functions that need to be called. Advocates of object-oriented programming may notice that in effect what we have is an object with up to four methods and
a set of private variables. There are also some inherited members.
10.1.2

The TONE Structure

The TONE structure, which is the representation of the state of the opcode, is declared in the
ﬁle ugens5.h, where
typedef struct {
OPDS h;
MYFLT *ar, *asig, *khp, *istor;
MYFLT c1, c2, yt1, prvhp;
} TONE;

585

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

Table 10.2
Entry codes for opcode speciﬁcation in OENTRY.
i

initialization

k

k rate

a

a rate

f

frequency variable

w

spectral variable

x
S

k-rate scalar or a-rate vector
string

T

string or i rate

U

string or i/k rate

B

Boolean

l

label

m

begins an indeﬁnite list of iargs (any count)

M

begins an indeﬁnite list of args (any count or rate)

n
N

begins an indeﬁnite list of iargs (nargs odd)
begins an indeﬁnite list of args (any count/rate i, k, a, S)

y

begins an indeﬁnite list of aargs (any count)

z

begins an indeﬁnite list of kargs (any count)

Z

begins an alternating kakaka . . . list (any count)

h

optional, defaulting to 127

j

optional, defaulting to 1

o

optional, defaulting to 0

p
q

optional, defaulting to 1
optional, defaulting to 10

v

optional, defaulting to 0.5

O

optional k rate, defaulting to 0

P

optional k rate, defaulting to 1

V

optional k rate, defaulting to 0.5

This deﬁnes a structure and also makes it into a type for C.4 The ﬁrst member of the structure
is a variable of type OPDS. This is the inherited component; all opcode structures must begin
with this. It is used by the engine to maintain information about progress; to decide on what
to do after; and other housekeeping information. It is not necessary to understand this part
of Csound to understand the opcodes, or to understand how to read them and eventually
how to write them. Just remember that it must be present.
The second line of the struct declares four members, all of type MYFLT: *ar, asig, khp,
and istor. This type is a pointer to a ﬂoating-point number. Because Csound exists in both
single and double precision forms, we use this type, which is actually float or double, but
we do not need to know or care which it is in any compilation. The only time we need to be
careful about this is when printing, which is a minor problem. Examples of this problem can
be found in Engine/rdscor.c, where the code reads

586

Chapter 10

if (sizeof(MYFLT)==4)
fscanf(scfp, "%f", pfld);
else
fscanf(scfp, "%lf", pfld);
These four variables are the answer and three arguments to the opcode. If you check the
Csound manual, you will see that the opcode is deﬁned as
ar tone asig, khp [, iskip]
so the structure members ar, asig, khp, and istor correspond directly to the user’s parameter. The two a-rate entities will be pointers to a ksmps vector; the others will be pointers to
single ﬂoating-point5 values. The rest of the structure is entirely decided by the programmer,
and is used for values that we wish to be preserved between the initialization and the execution, or from one execution cycle to another. This will become clearer as we read the code.
Now we can read the implementation of this ﬁlter opcode with a good chance of understanding what it is doing.
10.1.3

Initialization of tone

The initialization function, as most functions in Csound, takes as its ﬁrst argument a pointer
to an instance of the CSOUND structure. This structure carries all the constants for the particular run of Csound, as well as pointers to useful functions generally used. The use in the tone
opcode is very slight, but it is always needed.
The initialization function for this particular opcode is quite short. It has three distinct
parts.
The ﬁrst part reads
p->prvhp = (double)*p->khp;
This simply copies the input k-rate value to a variable, ensuring that it is double precision,
which is preserved between execution cycles. This could be seen as a minor speed optimization, saving one indirection, but in fact it is more that that as we will see when we consider
the execution cycle.
The second part reads
b = 2.0 - cos((double)(p->prvhp * csound->tpidsr));
p->c2 = b - sqrt(b * b - 1.0);
p->c1 = 1.0 - p->c2;
It is important to know that csound->tpidsr is a global value in Csound, calculated when
the system starts, and denoting ‘‘two p divided by sample rate’’ (tpidsr), a simple example
of the kinds of values stored in this structure. The code here calculates two ‘‘constants’’ for
the ﬁlter: c1 and c2. They are deﬁned by

587

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

b ¼ 2  cos(2p hp/sr),
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
c 2 ¼ b  b2  1 .

(1)
(2)

and
c1 ¼ 1  c2 .

(3)

If you are an expert in digital signal processing, you may recognize these equations as
the coefﬁcients for a simple inﬁnite impulse response (IIR) low-pass ﬁlter, where hp is the
response amplitude’s half-power point (that is, the frequency displacement in hertz at which
the output falls to half the peak).6 The values of the computed constants are stored in the
TONE structure so they can be used by the execution cycles. This explains the structure
members—c1, c2, and prvhp. They are declared as double to improve the accuracy of the
ﬁlter.
The last part of the initialization reads
if (!(*p->istor))
p->yt1 = 0.0;
Here we are setting another state variable to zero, but only if the last argument to the
opcode, that is the optional one, is zero. Reading the manual for this opcode you will see
that the optional argument, called iskip in the text, is used to control the use of the ﬁlter in
legato cases, when we wish to skip the initialization. The default usage leads to the member
yt1 being initialized to zero. Again with any knowledge of digital ﬁlters the name of the
variable should be suggestive, as the value of the last output, which will be needed in a recursive ﬁlter. If you do not have such detailed knowledge of digital ﬁlters, just wait a short while
until we consider the execution cycle.
In summary, we can see that the initialization is mainly concerned with initializing the
structure state variables. Other more complex initializations may do some checking of argument ranges, or perform some quite complex calculations; commonly they arrange local vectors for the opcode. We will consider that later, as it is another level of complication,
unnecessary until we have understood the simplest opcode, in order to see the structure.
10.1.4

Execution of tone

The a-rate execution function also has four components. They are to some extent interleaved, so the code is given here with the four parts identiﬁed:
int tone(CSOUND *csound, TONE *p)
{
MYFLT
*ar, *asig;
/***organize */
int n, nsmps = csound->ksmps; /***organize*/
double c1 = p->c1, c2 = p->c2;/***organize*/
double yt1 = p->yt1;
/***organize*/

588

Chapter 10

if (*p->khp != (MYFLT)p->prvhp){
/***control*/
double b;
/***control*/
p->prvhp = (double)*p->khp;
/***control*/
b = 2.0 - cos((double)(p->prvhp *
csound->tpidsr));
/***control*/
p->c2 = c2 = b - sqrt(b * b - 1.0);/***control*/
p->c1 = c1 = 1.0 - c2;
/***control*/
}
/***control*/
ar = p->ar;/***organize*/
asig = p->asig;/***organize*/
for (n=0; n<nsmps; n++){/***generate*/
yt1 = c1 * (double)(asig[n]) + c2 * yt1;/***generate*/
ar[n] = (MYFLT)yt1;/***generate*/
}/***generate*/
p->yt1 = yt1; /***tidyup*/
return OK; /***result*/
}
I have labeled a number of lines as organize; these include variable declarations, but one
of the main components is to create local variables copied from the argument structure. This
is largely for performance rather than necessary. If we look at the parts labeled generate
this will become clearer.
When we remember that the value p->asig is a pointer to the input signal, usually
denoted by xt in ﬁlter descriptions, and p->ar is a pointer to the output, the generation
code is just a loop which is repeated ksmps times, that is the length of the audio vector,
which calculates yt ¼ c1 xt þ c2 yt1 and then remembers yt as the variable yt1 for the next
cycle. This is a classic recursive ﬁlter loop. The k rate is stored in csound->ksmps, but this
is read into a local variable nsmps for efﬁciency. The only additional features are the type
coercions from MYFLT to double and back.
The component labeled control may be seen to be substantially the same as the calculations of p->c1 and p->c2 in the initialization. Indeed this is what it is doing; if the value of
khp changes, which it can only do at the k rate, then the constants are recalculated, and in
addition to being used in local variables, they are written to the structure state. Again this is
part of an optimization. We could just calculate the constants on every execution cycle, but
as these tend not to change very often, it would take signiﬁcant additional time.
If we expected the half-power point to change on every cycle, we could instead have a
conceptually simpler implementation:
int slowtonset(CSOUND *csound, SLOWTONE *p)
{
if (!(*p->istor))
p->yt1 = FL(0.0);
return OK;
}

589

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

int slowtone(CSOUND *csound, SLOWTONE *p)
{
MYFLT *ar, *asig;
int n, nsmps = csound->ksmps;
double c1, c2;
double yt1 = p->yt1;
double b;
b = 2.0 - cos((double)(*p->khp * tpidsr));
c2 = b - sqrt(b * b - 1.0);
c1 = 1.0 - c2;
for (n=0; n<nsmps; n++) {
p->yt1 = c1 * (double)p->asig[n] + c2 * p->yt1;
p->ar[n] = (MYFLT)p->yt1;
};
return OK;
}
We still need to remember the previous output, and to remember that between execution
cycles it must be stored in the structure, but this version obviates the need to the other variables. The structure would be simpliﬁed to
typedef struct {
OPDS h;
MYFLT *ar, *asig, *khp, *istor;
MYFLT yt1;
} SLOWTONE;
10.1.5

Conclusions from tone

We have read through the sources that deﬁne the actions of the tone ﬁlter, and used it to get
a ﬁrst understanding of the execution structure of Csound, and hence how the code must be
structured to use this system. This opcode is fairly simple, but it does show the way in which
an opcode is initialized and can pre-calculate values which are saved in a structure for the
execution time. This opcode also has the possibility of varying one parameter between successive cycles.
But the one part of this opcode that can be found in nearly all a-rate opcodes is a loop
structure of the general form
MYFLT
int
n,
. . . .
for (n=0;
. . .

*ar = p->ar;
nsmps = csound->ksmps;
n<nsmps; n++) {
. . .

590

Chapter 10

ar[n] = . . . .
}
that writes ksmps to the output variable-vector. A read through almost any ﬁle of opcode
implementations will ﬁnd this. Some opcodes use a do. . . while loop and pointer arithmetic, but the purpose is the same.7 We have also seen how the line in one of the entry
tables controls the opcode, both for parsing and for execution.
10.2

A k-rate Opcode: rms
In order to understand the way in which a k-rate opcode works let us read the implementation of the rms opcode. I have chosen to look at this opcode as this opcode as it is fairly
simple, but does show how to return a k-rate value.
The algorithm for the rms operation is to use an IIR low-pass ﬁlter on the square of the
signal. One might expect a root-mean-square to average over a short time window, but the
ﬁltering method gives a more useful answer and is incremental.
The speciﬁcation of the opcode (in Engine/entry1.c) is
{ "rms", S(RMS), 3, "k", "aqo", rmsset, rms }
Notice that the third ﬁeld is 3, which in binary is 1 þ 2 and so indicates that there is an initialization function and a k-rate function. Speciﬁed later in the line there is one result, of
type control, and the input arguments are an audio signal and two optional arguments. The
engine handles optional arguments. From the point of view of the implementation there is
no difference between optional and required arguments; they are all present at run time.
Looking at the manual, we can see that the last two arguments are the half-power point
(in hertz) of the internal low-pass ﬁlter, and the initial disposition of internal data space:
typedef struct {
OPDS h;
MYFLT *kr, *asig, *ihp, *istor;
double c1, c2, prvq;
} RMS;
Like the tone example above, this structure, from H/ugens5.h, has local ﬁelds for the ﬁlter
coefﬁcients and the previous output.
The initialization code (from OOps/ugens5.c)
int rmsset(CSOUND *csound, RMS *p)
{
double b;
b = 2.0 - cos((double)(*p->ihp * csound->tpidsr));
p->c2 = b - sqrt(b*b - 1.0);
p->c1 = 1.0 - p->c2;

591

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

if (!*p->istor)
p->prvq = 0.0;
return OK;
}
is very similar to the initialization of tone and should not cause any further problems in
understanding.
The performance function is
int rms(CSOUND *csound, RMS *p)
{
int n, nsmps = csound->ksmps;
MYFLT *asig;
double q;
double c1 = p->c1, c2 = p->c2;
q = p->prvq;
asig = p->asig;
for (n=0; n<nsmps; n++) {
double as = (double)asig[n];
q = c1 * as * as + c2 * q;
}
p->prvq = q;
*p->kr = (MYFLT) sqrt(q); /***result*/
return OK;
}
The structure of rms is very similar to that of the previous opcode, using local variables
as copies of the structure values for speed given that the bandwidth of this ﬁlter is ﬁxed at
initialization time, and so the ﬁlter coefﬁcients cannot change. In effect, the only change
is the line marked result, as this is where it updates the k-rate answer, which is naturally a
single value.
One can also have initialization-time only opcodes, for example seed, which initializes the
pseudo random number generator, or the ﬁlelen opcode, which returns the length of a
soundﬁle.
10.3

Memory Allocation in Opcodes: vdelay
The two opcodes considered above require a small amount of data, but a deﬁnite quantity
only, and these can easily be accommodated within a structure that maintains the state of
each instance. But some opcodes need a variable amount of data, and this needs an additional mechanism. Naturally such an opcode will be more complex that the previous opcodes we have seen. Memory may be needed in either k-rate or a-rate opcodes. The opcode
we will consider is vdelay, which provides a variable length delay line. Naturally such an

592

Chapter 10

opcode needs space to hold the values in the delay. The vdelay opcode also introduces
another variant; it can be used in either a rate or k rate. The deﬁnition is entry is
{ "vdelay", S(VDEL), 5, "a", "axio", vdelset, NULL, vdelay },
so we can tell immediately the name used in the syntax, and that it returns an a-rate (audio
vector) answer. There are initialization (vdelset) and a-rate performance (vdelay) functions. What is different is the speciﬁcation of the arguments, which includes an x (which
can be either an a-rate or a k-rate argument). In some ways there is not much difference, as
all arguments are passed by reference, which is passed as a pointer to them, but the code
needs to be written differently for the cases of the argument is a single value or a vector.
The Csound manual states
ar vdelay asig, xdel, imaxdel [, iskip]
This is an interpolating variable time delay. It is not very different from the alternative implementation (deltapi), but it is easier to use. See also the precision versions of these opcodes.
This opcode’s Csound manual page continues as follows:
INITIALIZATION
imaxdel Maximum value of delay in milliseconds. If xdel gains a value greater than imaxdel it is folded
around imaxdel. This should not happen.
iskip Skip initialization if present and non zero (compare iskip argument of other ﬁlter opcodes).
PERFORMANCE
With this unit generator it is possible to do Doppler effects or chorusing and ﬂanging.
asig Input signal.
xdel Current value of delay in milliseconds. Note that linear functions have no pitch change effects and
that fast changing values of xdel will cause discontinuities in the waveform resulting in noise.

Reading this, one might begin to think about what one expects to ﬁnd in the structure. The
answer and arguments are clear, and of course there will be the standard header. The code is
in H/vdelay.h:
typedef struct {
OPDS
h;
MYFLT *sr, *ain, *adel, *imaxd, *istod;
AUXCH aux;
long
left;
} VDEL;
The new material here is the type AUXCH, and one other member ﬁeld related to the implementation, left. This is used between performance runs to remember where the start point
is in the circular buffer. This will become clearer when we consider the performance implementation. But ﬁrst let us look at the initialization function:

593

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

#define ESR (esr/FL(1000.0))
int vdelset(CSOUND *csound, VDEL *p) /* vdelay set-up */
{
unsigned long n = (long)(*p->imaxd * ESR)+1;
if (!*p->istod){ /* allocate space for delay buffer */
if (p->aux.auxp == NULL ||
(int)(n*sizeof(MYFLT))>p->aux.size)
csound->AuxAlloc(csound,
n * sizeof(MYFLT), &p->aux);
else{ /* make sure buffer is empty */
memset(p->aux.auxp, 0, n*sizeof(MYFLT));
}
p->left = 0;
}
return OK;
}
Notice that the majority of the code is conditional on *p->istod being zero. This
corresponds to the skipping of initialization described in the manual above, so that
should not be a surprise. If there is to be initialization, then the main decision is based
on whether p->aux.auxp is NULL or is already a pointer. The type AUXCH is deﬁned in
H/csoundCore.h as
typedef struct auxch {
struct auxch *nxtchp;
long size;
void *auxp, *endp;
} AUXCH;
This is used to maintain a chain of allocated memory, chained through the ﬁrst ﬁeld. Each
chunk of memory has a length (in bytes) recorded in size and starts at auxp and ends at
endp. The allocation is done by the function csound->AuxAlloc which takes the ubiquitous CSOUND pointer, a size and a pointer to an AUXCH structure. This code, which you can
ﬁnd in the ﬁle Engine/auxfd.c, deals with returning previous space, and maintaining the
necessary housekeeping to control the space. Read the code if you wish, or just accept
the deﬁnition.
The maximum size of the delay line we need is in the variable *p->imaxd, but this is measured in milliseconds. The delay line length has to be in samples, so we need to convert to
seconds and multiply by the sampling rate that is in samples per second. There is a rather
pathological case if the requested maximum delay line is under 1 sample long, and to avoid
the problems this causes the length has 1 added, which deals with the rounding as well. The
length, calculated in the variable n, and then we can check if there already is a buffer, and it

594

Chapter 10

is sufﬁciently large, when we can just reuse it, taking care to zero it. If either of these are not
the case we allocate a new buffer (which would return any old small one to the system). This
is an optimization, and the code would do the same, but at the cost of always reallocating a
buffer which would be slower than the additional tests.
if (!*p->istod) { /* allocate space for delay buffer */
csound->AuxAlloc(csound, n * sizeof(MYFLT), &p->aux);
p->left = 0;
}
Let us now turn to the main performance function, vdelay. The ﬁrst noticeable feature
is that there are two variants based on the value of XINARG2, which is actually a complex
macro. The value is a Boolean taken from a bit-pattern stored in the OPDS structure of each
opcode instance that indicates which arguments are k-rate and which are a-rate. The bit used
is the nth bit being 1 if the nth argument is a-rate. To help with this Csound has introduced
macros XINARG1, XINARG2, XINARG3, XINARG4, and XINARG5 to hide the exact coding.
int vdelay(CSOUND *csound, VDEL *p) /* vdelay routine */
{
long nn, nsmps = csound->ksmps, maxd, indx;
MYFLT *out = p->sr;
/* assign object data to */
MYFLT *in = p->ain;
/* local variables */
MYFLT *del = p->adel;
MYFLT *buf = (MYFLT *)p->aux.auxp;
if (buf==NULL) {
/* RWD fix */
return
csound->PerfError(csound,Str("vdelay: not initialized"));
}
maxd = (unsigned long) (1+*p->imaxd * ESR);
indx = p->left;
if (XINARG2) { /* if delay is a-rate */
for (nn=0; nn<nsmps; nn++) {
MYFLT fv1, fv2;
long v1, v2;
buf[indx] = *in[nn;
fv1 = indx - (del[nn]) * ESR;
/* Make sure Inside the buffer */
/*
* The following has been fixed by adding a cast
* and making a ">=" instead of a ">" comparison.
* The order of the comparisons has been swapped
* as well (a bit of a nit, but comparing a possibly
* negative number to an unsigned isn't a good

595

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

* idea--and broke on Alpha).
* heh 981101
*/
while (fv1 < FL(0.0))
fv1 += (MYFLT)maxd;
while (fv1 >= (MYFLT)maxd)
fv1 -= (MYFLT)maxd;
/* Find next sample for interpolation */
if (fv1 < maxd - 1)
fv2 = fv1 + FL(1.0);
else
fv2 = FL(0.0);
v1 = (long)fv1;
v2 = (long)fv2;
*out++ = buf[v1] + (fv1 - v1)*(buf[v2] - buf[v1]);
/* Advance current pointer */
if (++indx == maxd) indx = 0;
}
}
else {
/* and, if delay is k-rate */
MYFLT fdel=*del;
for (nn=0; nn<nsmps; nn++) {
MYFLT fv1, fv2;
long v1, v2;
buf[indx] = in[nn];
fv1 = indx - fdel * ESR;
/* Make sure inside the buffer */
/*
* See comment above--same fix applied here.
*/
while (fv1 < FL(0.0))
fv1 += (MYFLT)maxd;
while (fv1 >= (MYFLT)maxd)
fv1 -= (MYFLT)maxd;
/* Find next sample for interpolation */
if (fv1 < maxd - 1)
fv2 = fv1 + FL(1.0);
else
fv2 = FL(0.0);
v1 = (long)fv1;
v2 = (long)fv2;

596

Chapter 10

*out++ = buf[v1] + (fv1 - fv1)*( buf[v2] - buf[v1]);
/* Advance current pointer */
if (++indx == maxd) indx = 0;
}
}
p->left = indx; /* and keep track of where you are */
return OK;
}
The code is fairly straightforward. The output is subjected to linear interpolation.8 The new
incoming audio is placed in the delay line and the output value retrieved, with care being
taken to remain inside the buffer. By now the code should be taking on a familiar style.
A few cautionary words should be said about the AUXCH system. In some opcodes there is a
need for more than one ﬂexible buffer. This can be achieved with two or more ﬁelds of type
AUXCH in the structure, or by using one of these and considering it as a collection for the
operation. What you must not do is have an AUXCH object pointed at by a word in another
one. This may seem tempting, and indeed some would-be Csound programmers have done
this, but the effect is to confuse the automatic return mechanism for these ﬂexible arrays,
and usually Csound crashes when this is attempted.
10.4

Polymorphic Opcodes: taninv2 and divz
A particular case of opcodes that is moderately common in Csound is the case where the
same opcode is used in different contexts. We will consider a couple of examples of this,
the taninv2 opcode and the divz opcode.
The taninv2 opcode calculates the inverse tangent (arctangent or tan1 ), and has two
arguments. The problem is that there really are three different but closely related operations:
the inverse tangent of initialization values, k-rate values, and a-rate values. The OENTRY lines
for these operations are as follows:
{
{
{
{

"taninv2", 0xffff },
"taninv2.i",S(AOP), 1, "i", "ii", atan21 },
"taninv2.k",S(AOP), 2, "k", "kk", NULL, atan21 },
"taninv2.a",S(AOP), 4, "a", "aa", NULL, NULL, atan2aa },

The tags .i, .k, and .a refer to the three rates. If for a moment we ignore the tags, it is clear
that the lines correspond to the earlier examples in this chapter. We have an answer type,
argument types, and functions run at initialization time, k-rate or a-rate. The ﬁrst line is the
oddity. What this is doing is declaring that the user can use the opcode taninv2 and
the parser will decide from the type of the answer provided which case is needed, and
add the tag internally. This is a class of polymorphism in which taninv2 has three forms.
If you look at the various OENTRY lines, you will see a number of similar opcodes with this
declaration, each with a structure size of 65535 (0xFFFF).9 This does place an extremely

597

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

minor restriction on what structures can be used, but in reality this is no problem. The code
for adding the tags can be found in the ﬁles Engine/csound_orc_semantics.c in the
function handle_polymorphic_opcode for the new parser, and in Engine/rdorch.c in
the function getoptxt for the older parser.
There are in fact four different cases of polymorphism provided in Csound. The others
provide different forms depending on different criteria. The ﬂag 0xFFFE is used for opcodes
like oscil that have multiple forms depending on the types of the ﬁrst two arguments,
which 0xFFFD is used for opcodes whose form depends on the ﬁrst argument type.
The last case is exempliﬁed by the opcode divz. It uses the ﬂag 0xFFFC, which is a division operation with a speciﬁed value used when the division is by zero, rather than giving a
numerical error at run time.
{
{
{
{
{
{

"divz", 0xfffc },
"divz_ii", S(DIVZ),
"divz_kk", S(DIVZ),
"divz_ak", S(DIVZ),
"divz_ka", S(DIVZ),
"divz_aa", S(DIVZ),

1,
2,
4,
4,
4,

"i",
"k",
"a",
"a",
"a",

"iii",
"kkk",
"akk",
"kak",
"aak",

divzkk, NULL, NULL
NULL, divzkk, NULL
NULL, NULL, divzak
NULL, NULL, divzka
NULL, NULL, divzaa

},
},
},
},
},

The type depends on the ﬁrst two arguments.
10.5

Opcodes That Use f-tables: dconv
A common desire in Csound opcodes is to use an f-table declared in the score and passed to
the opcode by a parameter, and so there is a common code section to access a table. As an
example we will consider the dconv opcode, in the plug-in ﬁle Opcodes/ugmoss.c. The
manual describes the actions as
ar dconv

asig, isize, irfn.

The output is the result of two signals directly convolved together, rather than the spectral
based method of the convolve opcode. Let us look at the Csound manual to see how it
works:
INITIALIZATION
isize the size of the convolution buffer to use. If the buffer size is smaller than the size of irfn, then only
the ﬁrst isize values will be used from the table.
irfn table number of a stored function containing the Impulse Response for convolution.
PERFORMANCE
Rather than the analysis/resynthesis method of the convolve opcode, dconv uses direct convolution to
create the result. For small tables it can do this quite efﬁciently, however larger table require much longer
time to run. The dconv opcode does (isize, ksmps) multiplies on every k-cycle. Therefore, reverb and
delay effects are best done with other opcodes (unless the times are short).

598

Chapter 10

The dconv opcode was designed to be used with time varying tables (using the table write opcodes) to
facilitate new real-time ﬁltering capabilities. In contrast to convolve there is no need for a pre-analyzed
ﬁle, there is no initial delay in output, and the impulse can change over time.

The following diagram demonstrates the operation:
[A]
*
[z]

[B]
*
[y]

[C]
*
[x]]

convolution coefficients
input signal

The incoming signal is multiplied and delayed on every a-time interval. The sum is then
taken to produce the output.
[A]
[B]
[C]
*
*
*
[x]
[0]
[0]
|
\
\
A*x + B*0 + C*0

convolution coefficients
input signal
output signal

On the next sample:
[A]
[B]
[C]
*
*
*
[y]
[x]
[0]
|
\
\
A*y + B*x + C*0

convolution coefficients
input signal
output signal

and so on (see ﬁgure 10.2).
If you put the ﬁlter coefﬁcients in the table, then this opcode will act as a ﬁlter. If you put
in a 1 followed by zeros in the table, then it will spit out whatever comes into it. From this is

Figure 10.2
Schematics of the operation of convolution.

599

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

can be seen that the input signal is convolved with a signal stored in a table, and it is that
aspect of the opcode we will consider in particular.
The OENTRY line is
{ "dconv", S(DCONV), 5, "a", "aii", dconvset, NULL, dconv }
Thus, we can see exactly what we expect; that the table is given at initialization time, and so
we need to look at the dconvset function. The controlling structure is in Opcodes/
ugmoss.h:
typedef struct {
OPDS
MYFLT
MYFLT
FUNC
AUXCH
unsigned int
} DCONV;

h;
*ar, *ain, *isize, *ifn;
*curp;
*ftp;
sigbuf;
len;

It contains familiar components, as well as an AUXCH structure for internal space. The new
element is the pointer to a FUNC type, which is actually a structure. The initialization function does three things; obtains the length of the convolution, locates the table, and allocates
space.
static int dconvset(CSOUND *csound, DCONV *p)
{
FUNC *ftp;
p->len = (int)*p->isize;
if ((ftp = csound->FTFind(csound, p->ifn)) != NULL) {
/* find table */
p->ftp = ftp;
if ((unsigned)ftp->flen < p->len)
p->len = ftp->flen; /* correct len if flen shorter */
}
else {
return csound->InitError(csound, Str("No table for dconv"));
}
if (p->sigbuf.auxp == NULL ||
p->sigbuf.size < (int)(p->len*sizeof(MYFLT)))
auxalloc(p->len*sizeof(MYFLT), &p->sigbuf);
p->curp = (MYFLT *)p->sigbuf.auxp;
return OK;
}

600

Chapter 10

The ﬁrst of these activities is in the line p->len = (int)*p->isize; remember that the
arguments to an opcode are passed as pointers to MYFLT, so this line not only removes one
level of indirection, but also makes an integer, which is what is needed for the convolution.
The new code style is the second action, ﬁnding the table. Again the table number is
passed via a pointed to a MYFLT. The function csound->FTFind, deﬁned in the ﬁle
Engine/fgens.c as ftfind, has a signature of FUNC *(*)(CSOUND*, MYFLT *); it takes
the pointer to the table number, and returns a pointer to a FUNC, which is a small structure
that encodes various aspects of a table, but also checks to see that the table exists. Amongst
the data that is extracted is the actual length of the table (the flen member), and the table
data (in the member ftable).10 If the table does not exist then a null pointer is returned. So
we can see that the initialization function ﬁnds the table, remembers the structure in its local
state, and also corrects the convolution length if the table is too short. We can also see the
use of initialization errors and the Str macro for error messages.
The third component, declaring local memory, follows the pattern described above, and
should not cause you any problems to read and understand.
The performance function depends critically on the algorithm, and while it may be
educational to read it, that is not the purpose of this section. There is one line in the dconv
function where the table is referenced. As part of the initialization a pointer ftp is made
to point to the data in the table. This is in FUNC structure, and is found with ftp =
p->ftp->ftable.
static int dconv(CSOUND *csound, DCONV *p)
{
long i = 0;
int n, nsmps = csound->ksmps;
long len = p->len;
MYFLT *ar, *ain, *ftp, *startp, *endp, *curp;
MYFLT sum;
ain = p->ain;
/* read saved values */
ar = p->ar;
ftp = p->ftp->ftable;
startp = (MYFLT *) p->sigbuf.auxp;
endp = startp + len;
curp = p->curp;
for (n=0; n<nsmps; n++) {
*curp = ain[n];
/* get next input sample */
i = 1, sum = *curp++ * *ftp;
while (curp<endp) /* start the convolution */
sum += (*curp++ * *(ftp + i++));
curp = startp; /* correct the ptr */
while (i<len) /* finish the convolution */

601

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

sum += (*curp++ * *(ftp + i++));
if (--curp < startp)
curp += len; /* correct for last curp++ */
*ar++ = sum;
ar[n] = sum;
}
p->curp = curp; /* save state */
return OK;
}
10.6

General Information about the Csound Process
Inside an opcode there may be a need for knowledge of a general nature about the Csound
process. We have already seen that there is a global value, csound->ksmps, that says how
long the vector of audio is for either input or output. This is actually part of a single global
structure that maintains the state for each instance of Csound. This structure, usually
pointed to by csound of type CSOUND* holds a wide variety of values. It is declared in the
main header ﬁle H/csoundCore.h.
Values that are often used include esr, the sample rate, nchnls for the number of output
channels, but it also gives access to things like the names of the input ﬁles orchname and
scorename. Sometimes useful is the value kcounter, which counts the number of k-rate
cycles that have been performed. It can be used to tell which performance cycle is being
called.
There is a substantial amount of information available inside an opcode, accessed via the
compulsory header component of the instance structure. The OPDS structure, deﬁned in
H/csoundCore.h, is rather complex. There may not be many ﬁelds, but this hides a great
deal.
typedef struct opds {
/** Next opcode in init-time chain */
struct opds * nxti;
/** Next opcode in perf-time chain */
struct opds * nxtp;
/** Initialization (i-time) function pointer */
SUBR iopadr;
/** Perf-time (k- or a-rate) function pointer */
SUBR opadr;
/** Orch file template part for this opcode */
OPTXT *optext;
/** Owner instrument instance data structure */
INSDS *insdshead;
} OPDS;

602

Chapter 10

From this structure we can move through the opcodes that will be done, either at init time or
performance tine; we can see the functions that implement the methods for the opcode also.
These are not particularly useful for writing opcodes, but the last two ﬁelds are useful. They
allow access to the information about the opcode, its arguments type, result type, the strings
passed to the opcode, the rates of the arguments, and with some navigation to the line
number and source of the instrument where it was called; the instrument number in which
this instance of the opcode is use is there, and, more importantly for MIDI operation, the
releasing ﬂag, how long the instrument has to run, and many other things. For a deep understanding of Csound, following the OPTXT and INSDS structures tells most of the profundity.
You can see use of some of this information in the various physical modeling opcodes in particular, but elsewhere as well.
10.7

Writing Your Own Opcode: negate
If you have understood the descriptions above for how existing opcodes are constructed it is
time to consider writing ones own. We know from above that an opcode has the following:
n
n
n
n
n
n

an entry in the OENTRY table
a structure that carries the arguments and locals
an initialization function
a performance function
a function called at note end (rarely found)
user documentation.

The opcode that one writes must conform to this pattern.
Here we will rehearse the stages that are needed to add an opcode to the base system. This
is not the preferred method, which will be described in the next section, but it does serve to
identify the main stages.
As a ﬁrst example let us construct a particularly simple (and quite useless) opcode that negates a signal. It is clear that there must be a single a-rate output and a single a-rate input, and
so we know that the entry in the OENTRY table but be something like
{ "negate", S(???), ?, "a", "a", ???, NULL, ??? }
where the question marks is a placeholder for elements we have not yet determined. There
are some informal rules about the name you choose for your opcode. Opcode names are
made from words starting with a letter and followed by letters and/or digits. Names should
not start with the lower-case letters a, k or i, and preferable not f or w. This is because
these letters introduce Csound types of variables, and so if they are used for opcode names
it might break existing orchestras if this word were to become an opcode. Except in polymorphic opcodes, a period should not be used in the name, as it could confuse the polymorphic
system. Apart from these restrictions, the choice is free. I have used the word negate here,
and that did not break any of these rules.

603

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

Next we need to decide on a name for the structure. A common choice is to use the opcode
name, only in all upper case. Until we have completed the implementation we do not know
if any state variables are needed, but we can write
typedef struct {
OPDS h;
MYFLT *ar, *asig;
} NEGATE;
and add any other variables later.
It is often easier to write the performance function ﬁrst, as it indicates any need for
initialization.
The general layout of the performance function is
int negate(CSOUND *csopund, NEGATE *p)
{
int n, nsmps = csound->ksmps;
. . . .
for (n=0; n<nsmps; n++) {
. . . .
p->ar[n] = ???;
}
return OK;
}
Based on what we now know from above, the implementation is
int negate(CSOUND *csound, NEGATE *p)
{
int n, nsmps = csound->ksmps;
MYFLT *ar = p->ar;
MYFLT *as = p->asig;
for (n=0; n<nsmps; n++) {
ar[n] = - as[n]
}
return OK;
}
and there is no need for any initialization.
We now have the performance and (empty) initialization functions, so we can see that the
ﬁeld in the OENTRY table for when to call the functions will be 4, meaning a-rate performance only. The line can be completed as follows:
{ "negate", S(NEGATE), 4, "a", "a", NULL, NULL, negate }
We now have to add this code into the system. For this purpose, we have to change two
or three ﬁles (depending on your platform). We need to add the OENTRY line above to the

604

Chapter 10

ﬁle Engine/entry1.c, and to give a prototype for the function negate, in the form below
to H/entry1.h:
int negate(CSOUND*, void*);
For a number of reasons, this should be declared with a void * argument instead of a
NEGATE* one. I leave the reasons to you as an exercise; but they are not very easy. If you
cannot work it out, just accept it for the moment, but do it this way.
We also need to ensure that the structure NEGATE is declared. It is best to do this by including (with #include) the header ﬁle that deﬁnes the typedef above. Again the name can
be anything, but a trivial choice would be H/negate.h, and so we would add #include
"negate.h" in the other ﬁle inclusions.
We can similarly place our function in a ﬁle OOps/negate.c, which would read as
follows:
#include "csoundCore.h"
#include "negate.h"
/* Performance a-rate function for negating a signal */
int negate(CSOUND *csound,NEGATE *p)
{
int n, nsmps = csound->ksmps;
MYFLT *ar = p->ar;
MYFLT *as = p->asig;
for (n=0; n<nsmps; n++) {
ar[n] = - as[n]
}
return OK;
}
where we have added the includes for the basic Csound deﬁnitions and the header particular to this code.
We now have to arrange to compile this code. Csound uses a build system called SCons,
which is controlled by a ﬁle called SConstruct. For a section of code in the base system
the name of the code ﬁle must be added to the list called libCsoundSources about a third
of the way down the ﬁle.11
We still need to create documentation for the opcode in the standard format (which is
controlled by XML); that is a line of syntax, and a very short description. This is followed
by descriptions of initialization and performance (as above). The documentation is ﬁnished
with an example of use:
<refentry id="negate">
<indexterm id="IndexNegate"><primary>negate</primary></indexterm>
<refentryinfo><title>Mathematical Operations</title></refentryinfo>

605

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

<refmeta>
<refentrytitle>negate</refentrytitle>
</refmeta>
<refnamediv>
<refname>negate</refname>
<refpurpose>
Negate a signal
</refpurpose>
</refnamediv>
<refsect1>
<title>Description</title>
<para>
Returns the negative of the input signal.
</para>
</refsect1>
<refsect1>
<title>Syntax</title>
<synopsis>ares <command>negate</command> asig</synopsis>
<para>
Returns the negative of the signal
<emphasis>asig</emphasis>.
</para>
</refsect1>
<refsect1>
<title>Performance</title>
<para>
<emphasis>asig</emphasis> -- audio signal input.
</para>
</refsect1>
<refsect1>
<title>Examples</title>
<para>
Here is an example of the negate opcode.
a1 oscil 32000, 440, 1
a2 negate a1
out a1, a2
</para>
</refsect1>
<refsect1>

606

Chapter 10

<title>Credits</title>
<para>
<simplelist>
<member>Author: YOUR NAME</member>
<member>THE DATE WRITTEN</member>
</simplelist>
</para>
</refsect1>
</refentry>
10.8

A k-rate Plug-in Opcode: trigger
The trigger opcode is not your typical opcode; but rather it is a plug-in opcode that is loaded
optionally. Much of the implementation should be familiar if you have followed this chapter, but it does introduce the way in which a plug-in opcode is deﬁned. The manual describes
the trigger opcode as follows:
kout trigger ksig, kthreshold, kmode
DESCRIPTION
Informs when a k-rate signal crosses a threshold.
PERFORMANCE
ksig input signal
kthreshold trigger threshold
kmode can be 0, 1 or 2
Normally trigger outputs zeroes: only each time ksig crosses kthreshold trigger outputs a 1. There are
three modes of using ktrig:
kmode ¼ 0 (down-up) ktrig outputs a 1 when current value of ksig is higher than kthreshold, while old
value of ksig was equal to or lower than kthreshold.

n

n

kmode ¼ 1 (up-down) ktrig outputs a 1 when current value of ksig is lower than kthreshold while old

value of ksig was equal or higher than threshold.
n

kmode ¼ 2 (both) ktrig outputs a 1 in both the two previous cases.

With this description we should be able to predict in many ways what code we will see.
We have a single k-rate answer and three k-rate arguments. It is likely that there will be an
initialization function and a performance function. There will be a structure that carries the
pointers to the arguments and answer space, and possibly additional information. So when
we read in the OENTRY table at the end of the ﬁle Opcodes/uggab.c we see
{ "trigger", S(TRIG), 3, "k", "kkk", trig_set, trig, NULL },
which is not going to be a surprise. We may not have predicted the actual names of the functions, but even they are fairly obvious.

607

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

The next component is the TRIG structure, which can be found in the ﬁle Opcodes/
uggab.h; but before looking at it we can predict what we will ﬁnd, and even guess that the
variable names will follow the documentation. Thus we expect to see
typedef struct {
OPDS h;
MYFLT *kout, *ksig, *kthreshold, *kmode;
. . . .
} TRIG;
Note in particular that kout, *ksig, *kthreshold, and *kmode are all pointers to MYFLT.
It is important that all arguments and answers are of this type. Until we consider the actual
implementation we do not know if there are any more members, but if there are they will be
in the place of the ellipses. In fact if you now look at the real code you will ﬁnd that there
is one ﬂoating-point value, called old_sig, which is an indication of its use, to retain the
signal from the previous cycle. This should come as no surprise, as the documentation for
this opcode is all about a signal changing between successive calls. The actual structure is
typedef struct {
OPDS h;
MYFLT *kout, *ksig, *kthreshold, *kmode;
MYFLT old_sig;
} TRIG;
We can now look at the implementation found in the ﬁle Opcodes/uggab.c. It is a little
easier to read the k-rate function before the initialization.
#include <csdl.h>

/**** 0 */

. . . . . .
static int trig(CSOUND *csound, TRIG *p)
{
switch ((int) (*p->kmode + FL(0.5))) {
case 0:
/* down-up */
if (p->old_sig <= *p->kthreshold &&
*p->ksig > *p->kthreshold)
*p->kout = FL(1.0);
else
*p->kout = FL(0.0);
break;
case 1:
/* up-down */
if (p->old_sig >= *p->kthreshold &&
*p->ksig < *p->kthreshold)
*p->kout = FL(1.0);
else

/**** 1*/

/**** 2*/
/**** 2*/

608

Chapter 10

*p->kout = FL(0.0);
break;
case 2:
/* both */
if ((p->old_sig <= *p->kthreshold &&
*p->ksig > *p->kthreshold) ||
(p->old_sig >= *p->kthreshold &&
*p->ksig < *p->kthreshold) )
*p->kout = FL(1.0);
else
*p->kout = FL(0.0);
break;
default:
return
csound->PerfError(csound,
Str(" bad imode value"));
return;
}
p->old_sig = *p->ksig;
return OK;

/**** 4*/
/**** 4*/
/**** 3*/

}
The basic structure here is a switch statement that deals with the differences between the various kinds of triggering, as controlled by the kmode parameter. This parameter controls
whether we are looking for an event of down-up, up-down or either. Each case is similar, so
we will look at the second case in detail, and the others will be left as an exercise. But there is
some advantage in looking at the line annotated with a 1. The value on which the switch
is made is (int) (*p->kmode + FL(0.5)). Remember that the argument is provided as a
pointer embedded in the TRIG structure, and we are given a pointer to this structure as the
argument to the performance function.
To get the pointer to the argument, we need p->kmode; and we need *p->kmode to get
the value. All arguments and results in Csound are of MYFLT type, and hence the need for a
cast to an integer. The addition of FL(0.5) is to make this a rounded operation rather than
a truncation toward zero. In theory the user would always have provided an integer value,
which has an exact representation in ﬂoating point, but in practice it is usually better to be
safe in cases like this.
In the case of looking for an up-down transition of the ksig, that is case 1, we are interested in the case when the current value is strictly negative12 and the previous one was positive. We have to ensure that one of these is a strict interpretation. The test we ﬁnd in the
code, annotated with a 2 above. Again we need to use the *p->kthreshold form. The previous value is remembered in the TRIG structure in the member old_sig. We can (and
should) remember the value here rather than a pointer to the value, which may well have
changed—indeed that is the purpose of the opcode. We set the answer to 0 or 1 (as ﬂoating

609

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

point) as required based on this test. The last operation that must be done is to remember
the previous value of the signal, which we can ﬁnd in the line labeled with a 3.
Before leaving this function there are a couple of issues left to be explored. You will see
that the function checks that the mode is 0, 1, or 2. The default case is an error. It is good
practice to include checks such as this. The question that immediately arises is what to do
in the case of an error. There are two major actions, to ignore the error, with or without a
message, or to cause the opcode to abort, and hence the instance of the instrument to cease.
To give a warning message the function csound->Warning is provided, with the signature
void (*)(CSOUND*, char *);
This prints the argument to the output if the overriding parameters to Csound want messages to appear.13 You should use this function rather than invent one of your own if you
ever wish to write an opcode. To cause the instrument instance to stop the function
csound->PerfError
int (*)(CSOUND*, char *s);
that not only writes the message but causes the current instrument-instance to be removed
from the chain of active notes, and signals an error to the engine. It should be used as the
value of a return statement.
Another issue is the macro Str. Csound was originally written in American English,
and this can be a problem in some parts of the world where the language can be a barrier.14
The macro Str allows a system for translation of all messages into the language of the user.
There is a possibility for an external database of translated strings being used. If you want
to translate the messages from Csound into an alternative language, then the ﬁrst stage is to
translate the messages in the last of these into your target language, and add them to the
top-level language database.
That completes the consideration of the performance function. It is simple to see that all
that is needed in initialization is to give a value to the last signal:
static int trig_set(CSOUND *csound, TRIG *p)
{
p->old_sig = FL(0.0);
return OK;
}
As this opcode is in a plug-in module, it is acceptable (and usual) to use static functions as
they will not be seen elsewhere. We also need to communicate the OENTRY line to the main
Csound program. This is achieved in the code at the end of the ﬁle Opcodes/uggab.c
where there is a local array localops of opcodes deﬁned in the ﬁle, and formulaic init
function. If you write a new plug-in opcode then you need to copy this code, or the slightly
simpler example at the end of Opcodes/date.c.

610

Chapter 10

We have now considered a simple opcode that operates at the audio rate and a slightly
more complex one that works at control rate. If you have understood this material you
should be able to read and get at least a basic understanding of many of Csound’s opcodes.
There are a number of additional complications that need to be comprehended before one
could pretend to be an expert. These include the allocation of memory in opcodes, and the
creation of opcodes that can work at different rates. We will consider these in the next section with a more complex opcode.
10.8.1

More about Plug-in Opcodes

The alternative to adding our negate opcode to the base system is to provide it as a plug-in
which can be loaded when required. Most of the previous sections still apply, but there are
a few differences, especially since we don’t want to modify the system ﬁles like Engine/
entry1.c. The Csound plugin mechanism is arranged to obviate that need. The idea is to
build a shared library15 that includes not only the initialization and performance code but
also additional code to add the opcode to the syntax tables, and to give the shared library
access to the state and functions of base Csound. This additional communication requires
one of two methods; both require a table and the inclusion of a different header from the
basic csoundCore.h, but differ in the degree of control they provide. As an example of
how this is done we will re-implement the negate opcode but as a loadable library.
#include "csdl.h"
typedef struct {
OPDS h;
MYFLT *ar, *asig;
} NEGATE;
static int negate(CSOUND *csound, NEGATE *p)
{
int n, nsmps = csound->ksmps;
MYFLT *ar = p->ar;
MYFLT *as = p->asig;
for (n=0; n<nsmps; n++) {
ar[n] = - as[nn]
}
return OK;
}
static OENTRY localops[] = {
{ "negate", sizeof(NEGATE), 4, "a", "a", NULL, NULL, negate }
};
LINKAGE

611

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

The macro LINKAGE is a new concept. It provides a couple of functions that the engine
can use to initialize the entry table into the system. The details of how this works is beyond
the current need.
At the start of the ﬁle the header ﬁle csdl.h replaces the base csoundCore.h header in
plug-ins. This adjusts for the way in which certain internal functions and values are accessed.
It is worth emphasizing that a plug-in code segment cannot call other parts of Csound
except through the CSOUND structure, which contains pointers to all relevant functions.
You will also note that in this example the structure is not in a separate header ﬁle. This is
acceptable as there is no inclusion of the header for one of the entry ﬁles. Of course if the
opcode being implemented is of sufﬁcient complexity it could be in a header ﬁle used by a
number of ﬁles. Similarly there is no need for the initialization and performance functions
to be globally visible, so in this example they are declared static. This is an issue of programming style; in general functions should be static unless there is a need for them to
be global. I know that the C language rather encourages the opposite, but that is no reason
to give in to laziness.
Finally we need to build the library. If one is using the Scons system, one needs to add a
line like
makePlugin(pluginEnvironment, 'negate, ['Opcodes/negate.c'])
to the similar lines.16
It is possible to compile a plug-in without the rest of the sources, but then the construction of a suitable Makeﬁle is left to the user.
10.9

Plug-in Table Generators: fgens
Csound provides a number of table generator (fgens) to initialize tables to sines, Gaussians,
envelopes, and similar operations. It is possible to write plug-in code to add new table generators. As an example of this, consider the code in Opcodes/ftest.c:
#include "csdl.h"
#include <math.h>
static int tanhtable(FGDATA *ff, FUNC *ftp)
{
/* CSOUND *csound = ff->csound; */
MYFLT *fp = ftp->ftable;
MYFLT range = ff->e.p[5];
double step = (double) range / (double) ftp->flen;
int i;
double x;
for (i = 0, x = 0.0; i <= (int) ftp->flen; i++, x += step)
fp[i] = (MYFLT) tanh(x);

612

Chapter 10

return OK;
}
static NGFENS localfgens[] = {
{ "tanh", tanhtable },
{ NULL, NULL }
};
FLINKAGE
The function tanhtable is the implementation of a table generator to ﬁll a table with the
hyperbolic tangent function, where the range is zero until the ﬁfth argument to the f score
opcode. When it is called, the second argument is the table structure so all it needs to do is
write the values into the table of MYFLTs.
The static table localfgens is a list of the new generators, with a name and the function;
the table is terminated by a NULL name. The macro FLINKAGE includes the necessary initialization code. It includes creating score macros for the given names so the generators can be
used; the numbers are generator internally and cannot be relied on from one run to the next.
10.10

Localization and Internationalization
Csound is a widely used program, and not all users speak the same language. While it has
become accepted that English is the language of computing this can be a barrier to composers and sound designers who could beneﬁt. In recent years there has been a move in
computing to provide internationalization and localization service within the existing
frameworks. Csound also is moving in this way, ever since the 1999 announcement.17 In
fact there have been three different methods used. The ﬁrst attempt was to wrap every message string in the sources in a function call with two arguments—an index number and the
string. It was possible to create a ﬁle of translations with the index number providing the
linkage. This scheme may be found in some older Csound systems, from version 3.54 until
4.23f02. There are obvious drawbacks to this indexing method when plug-ins are introduced
and the system allows for local, private or commercial plug-in opcodes that would not necessarily have access to the allocation of index numbers.
Starting with Csound5, a new scheme was adopted. The numerical index was removed and
the string itself was used as the index, implemented with hashing. The wrapping of the
strings continued but now the form was that any string that might need a translation at
any time is passed via a macro Str, and it is this format that is used earlier in this chapter.
If you are adding new code it is a very good idea to follow this method, even if you are not
expecting to translate the messages yourself.
The implementation of the translation tables is fairly complex, and can be seen in the ﬁle
Top/getstings.c, together with tools to assist in the creation of translation ﬁles; here we
will not consider the details as a third scheme is in the process of incorporation.

613

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

The GNU project has been faced with this localization problem in many software packages, and they have produced a very general system that is very like the second Csound
method. They wrap the strings with a functions call, gettext, very like Str, but there are
also mechanisms for dealing with plurals and duals, and changing the order of arguments
in printf formats, as word order is not the same in all languages. In addition the GNU
gettext project18 provides a number of tools to assist in the creation and maintenance of
translations. In versions of Csound after 5.07 it is this scheme that will be developed.
From the point of view of the programmer the simple rule is to wrap all strings in the Str
macro. The more complex rule is to look at the recommendations in the GNU gettext
documentation19 about making messages clear and translatable. As in the case in many
long-standing software packages, the error messages in Csound are often terse and written
in jargon. Part of the move to internationalization is to revise all these strings to make the
messages clear; and to this end, all advice is welcome.
10.11

Conclusion
This chapter should assist you in understanding the way in which Csound works, and in particular how to add new opcodes and other operations. Some of the information may seem
rather detailed and almost pernickety, but this is central to programming. One must not
only get the structure correct, but also the details must be correct. Computers are very unforgiving of sloppy details, at both the syntactic and the semantic level.

10.12

Exercises
Exercise 10.12.1
Modify the negate opcode to add more functionality to it.
(a) First try to add an extra parameter, which would be a k-rate variable to control the
‘‘negation’’: when it is zero, the ‘‘effect’’ is bypassed (no negation), when it is non-zero,
the opcode behave as the original version. Make this a plug-in opcode.
(b) Add another parameter, now an i-time one, which controls the gain of the signal (i.e.
a multiplier), so that we can attenuate or boost the signal.
(c) Try to design a third variation on the original opcode by adding another parameter
(i time, k, or a rate).
Exercise 10.12.2
Make a version of the tone opcode (called newtone), where the cutoff frequency parameter
(khp) is now an audio rate parameter. First ﬁgure out what the differences are in terms of the
expected input, then consider how often the ﬁlter coefﬁcients have to be update (and so
where the update code should go). Make this an internal opcode.

614

Chapter 10

Exercise 10.12.3
Create a new plug-in f-table which would tabulate the function f (x) ¼ x3 within a range
deﬁned by the p-ﬁelds 5 and 6 (start and end points).
Notes
1. See Donald E. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming (Addison-Wesley, 1973).
2. Csound can be built from its sources with just a few commands. However, since it is a large system
with several components, it has a number of dependencies (i.e. software on which it depends for its
operation). These will need to be present if you want to build a particular element of Csound. For this
chapter, we might only need one extra component, PortAudio IO module, in addition to the basic
system. In this case, we will require as dependencies the libsndﬁle (for the basic system) and PortAudio
libraries. The former can be downloaded from http://www.mega-nerd.com/libsndﬁle and the latter
from http://portmedia.sourceforge.net. These sites contain full instructions for the installation of these
libraries.
Csound is built using a build system called scons, which can be downloaded from http://www.scons
.org, where again full instructions can be found for its installation. The sources for Csound can be downloaded from http://csound.sourceforge.net. Once you have these, building Csound is just a matter of
running the following command in the top-level directory of the source code: $ scons. This will build
the software in the top-level sources directory. You can then run Csound from there without the need
for anything else: $ ./csound. If instead you would like to work from other directories, you can always
place that directory in your $PATH environment variable. In this case, you will also want to set the
$OPCODEDIR variable to contain this directory as well, so that Csound can ﬁnd its plug-ins. If you are
doing this, to avoid confusion, you should not have more than one build of Csound in your system (e.g.
this one you have built yourself and another from an installer distribution). Alternatively, by running
your own build of Csound only from the top-level sources directory, you should avoid any mix-up of
versions and builds (this is what we will recommend for the work covered in this chapter). More details
on building Csound with other components and other options can be found in the Csound manual (also
found in http://csound.sourceforge.net)
3. If you look at the sources of some ﬁlter opcodes you will see that care is taken to read the inputs
before any output is written, in case there is this kind of variable sharing. A simple example can be found
in areson where the output signal is remembered in a local variable until after the last use of the input
signal. More extreme cases can be found elsewhere.
4. In Cþþ this is not necessary, as a struct is automatically a type in that language.
5. This is of MYFLT type.
6. For more on ﬁlters, see The Csound Book, ed. R. Boulanger (MIT Press, 2000); K. Steiglitz, A Digital
Signal Processing Primer (Addison-Wesley, 1996).
7. The pointer arithmetic form was universal in earlier versions of Csound, but the for loop is better
optimized by modern compilers and is thus preferred.

615

Understanding an Opcode in Csound

8. This is described in chapter 4 of the present volume.
9. Remember that the second ﬁeld in an OENTRY is an unsigned short that is typically a 16-bit
quantity.
10. Much of the rest is related to looping, and to the use of tables in oscillators.
11. As was mentioned in note 2 above, Csound uses the scons build system. This software uses a script
ﬁle called SConstruct, which contains all details of how to compile and link the various components
of the software. SConstruct has lists of all the required source ﬁles inside it. In the speciﬁc case of
internal opcodes, these ﬁles are in a list called ‘libCsoundSources’, which starts at around line 1106 in
the ﬁle:
else:
libCsoundSources = Split('''
Engine/auxfd.c
. . .
Top/utility.c
''')
Placing the name (and directory location) of your source code ﬁle anywhere inside this list (for instance
after the last line but before the triple quotes) will compile it as an internal component of Csound.
12. Strictly negative means less that zero; a non-strict negative would include zero as negative.
13. There is a -m option that controls the kind of messages that actually are printed.
14. Some of the ‘‘American English’’ messages it produced are, in fact, not compatible with the English
that I speak and write.
15. That is a DLL in Windows, a .so in UNIX and GNU/Linux or a.dylib in OS X.
16. Again in SConstruct we ﬁnd a section that starts with the following big comment:
############################################################
#
# Plugin opcodes.
############################################################
Just after these lines you can add your own call to makePlugin as discussed in the text:
makePlugin(pluginEnvironment, 'negate, ['Opcodes/negate.c'])
17. R. Boulanger and J. fﬁtch, ‘‘Teaching software synthesis: From hardware to software synthesis,’’ in
Global Village—Global Brain—Global Music: KlangArt-Kongreß 1999, ed. B. Enders and J. Strange-Elbe
(Electronic Publishing, 2003).
18. Information for the GNU gettext project is available at http://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/. The
code is available at http://ftp.gnu.org/pub/gnu/gettext/. The gettext FAQ is available at http://www
.gnu.org/software/gettext/FAQ.html.
19. The online manual for gettext is available at http://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/
gettext.html.

11

Spectral Opcodes

Victor Lazzarini

Developing opcodes that process spectral data is as simple as writing ordinary unit generators. Csound has a special data type, fsig, that was designed to hold self-describing spectral
data. The fsig was created alongside a series of unit generators known as the ‘‘streaming
phase vocoder’’1 opcodes. These include, among other things, the analysis opcode pvsanal
and the synthesis opcode pvsynth, which can be used to transform signals from waveforms
(in the time domain) into spectra (in the frequency domain) and vice versa. With spectral
data, it is possible to design interesting and unique effects. This chapter will introduce the
main elements of fsigs and how opcodes to process them can be created.
11.1

Processing Spectral Signals
As was discussed in chapter 10, Csound provides data types for control and audio, which are
all time-domain signals. For spectral domain processing, there are actually two separate
signal types, wsig and fsig. The former is a signal type introduced by Barry Vercoe to hold a
special, non-standard, type of logarithmic frequency analysis data and is used with a few
opcodes originally provided for manipulating this data type. The latter is a self-describing
data type designed by Richard Dobson to provide a framework for spectral processing, in
what is called ‘‘streaming phase vocoder processing.’’ Opcodes for converting between timedomain audio signals and fsigs, as well as a few processing opcodes, were provided as part of
the original framework by Dobson. In addition, support for a self-describing, portable, spectral ﬁle format PVOCEX has been added to Csound, into the analysis utility program pvanal
and with a ﬁle reader opcode.
Fsig is a self-describing Csound data type that will hold frames of spectral analysis data
based on the discrete Fourier transform (DFT). Each frame will contain the positive side of
the spectrum, from 0 hertz to the Nyquist frequency (inclusive). The framework can support
different spectral formats: real-imaginary, phase-amplitude, frequency-amplitude, and sinusoidal tracks. We will be discussing here the most common of these formats: amplitudefrequency, which will hold pairs of ﬂoating-point numbers with the amplitude and frequency
(in hertz) data for each DFT analysis bin. This is probably the most musically meaningful of

618

Chapter 11

the DFT-based output formats and can be generated by the phase vocoder (PV) analysis
(implemented by the already mentioned opcode pvsanal and the utility analysis program
pvanal).
The fsig data type is deﬁned by the following C structure:
typedef struct pvsdat {
long N; /* framesize-2, DFT length */
long overlap; /* number of frame overlaps */
long winsize; /* window size */
int wintype; /* window type: hamming/hanning */
long format; /* format: we will be using AMP:FREQ */
unsigned long framecount; /* frame counter */
AUXCH frame; /* spectral sample is a 32-bit float */
} PVSDAT;
The structure holds all the data needed to describe the signal type: the DFT size (N),
which will determine the number of analysis bins (N/2 þ 1) and the framesize; the number
of overlaps, or decimation, which will determine analysis hopsize (N/overlaps); the size of
the analysis window, generally the same as N; the window type: currently supporting PVS_
WIN_HAMMING, PVS_WIN_HANN, PVS_WIN_KAISER and PVS_WIN_CUSTOM; the data format:
we will be using PVS_AMP_FREQ only, (PVS_TRACKS is also used in Csound); a frame
counter, for keeping track of processed frames; and ﬁnally the AUXCH structure, which will
hold the actual array of ﬂoats with the spectral data.
11.1.1

Spectral Opcode Speciﬁcs

A number of implementation differences exist between spectral and time-domain processing
opcodes. The main one is that new output is produced only if a new input frame is ready to
be processed. Because of this implementation detail, the processing function of a streaming
PV opcode is actually registered as a k-rate routine. In addition, opcodes allocate space for
their fsig frame outputs, unlike ordinary opcodes, which simply take ﬂoating-point buffers
as input and output. The fsig dataspace is allocated externally, in similar fashion to audiorate vectors and control-rate scalars; however the DFT frame allocation is done by the opcode
that generates the signal. With that in mind, and observing that type of data we are processing is frequency-domain, we can implement a spectral unit generator as an ordinary (k-rate)
opcode.
The code example we will develop here takes advantage of one of the main aspects of the
PV data format: the separation between amplitudes and frequencies.2 We will implement a
spectral highlighter, or spectral arpeggiator. We are borrowing the idea from Trevor Wishart’s
specarp program from the original Composers Desktop Project suite of PV data transformation software. The concept (and implementation) is very simple, yet effective: we will
emphasize one central bin, while attenuating all others. This will happen for every output

619

Spectral Opcodes

frame, depending on three k-rate controls: bin index, depth of attenuation and highlight
gain. In order to provide a frame-size-independent bin index, we will take it as a normalized
value, between 0 and 1, scaling it to the fftsize. The depth will control how much all bins,
except the highlighted one, will be attenuated, from 0 (no attenuation) to 1 (full attenuation).
The highlight gain is simply the positive gain applied to the selected bin. This transformation
only concerns the amplitudes of each spectral bin, so we will pass all frequencies unchanged.
The opcode dataspace is as follows:
#include <csdl.h>
#include <pstream.h>
typedef struct _pvsarp {
OPDS h;
PVSDAT *fout;
PVSDAT *fin;
MYFLT *cf,*kdepth, *gain;
unsigned long lastframe;
} pvsarp;
The opcode dataspace contains pointers to the output and input fsig, as well as the k-rate
input parameters and a frame counter. The init function has to allocate space for the output
fsig DFT frame, as well as setting the various PVSDAT parameters:
int pvsarp_init(CSOUND *csound, pvsarp *p)
{
long N = p->fin->N; /* fftsize */
/* allocate output fsig frame if needed */
if (p->fout->frame.auxp==NULL ||
p->fout->frame.size < sizeof(float) * (N+2))
csound->AuxAlloc(csound,(N+2)*sizeof(float),&p->fout >frame);
/* initialize the PVSDAT structure */
p->fout->N = N;
p->fout->overlap = p->fin->overlap;
p->fout->winsize = p->fin->winsize;
p->fout->wintype = p->fin->wintype;
p->fout->format = p->fin->format;
p->fout->framecount = 1;
p->lastframe = 0;
if (!(p->fout->format==PVS_AMP_FREQ) ||
(p->fout->format==PVS_AMP_PHASE))
return csound->InitError(csound,
"pvsarp: signal format must be amp-phase or amp-freq.\n");
return OK;
}

620

Chapter 11

The processing function keeps track of the frame count and only processes the input,
generating a new output frame, if a new input is available. The framecount is generated by
the analysis opcode and is passed from one processing opcode to the next in the chain. As
mentioned before, the processing function is called every control period, but it is independent of it, performing only when needed. The only caveat is that the fsig framework requires
that the control period, in samples (ksmps), be smaller than or equal to the analysis hopsize.
As mentioned above, this process only alters the amplitudes of each bin, indexed by i, passing the frequencies (i+1).3
int pvsarp_process(CSOUND *csound, pvsarp *p)
{
long i,j,N = p->fout->N, bins = N/2 + 1;
float g = (float) *p->gain;
MYFLT kdepth = (MYFLT) *(p->kdepth), cf = (MYFLT) *(p->cf);
float *fin = (float *) p->fin->frame.auxp;
float *fout = (float *) p->fout->frame.auxp;
if(fout==NULL)
return csound->PerfError(csound, "pvsarp: not initialized\n");
/* if a new frame is ready for processing */
if(p->lastframe < p->fin->framecount) {
/* limit cf and kdepth to 0—1 range */
/* scale cf to the number of spectral bins */
cf = cf >= 0 ? (cf < 1 ? cf*bins : bins-1) : 0;
kdepth = kdepth >= 0 ? (kdepth <= 1 ? kdepth :
(MYFLT)1.0): (MYFLT)0.0;
/* j counts bins, whereas i counts frame positions */
for(i=j=0;i < N+2;i+=2, j++) {
/* if the bin is to be highlighted */
if(j == (int) cf) fout[i] = fin[i]*g;
/* else attenuate it */
else fout[i] = (float)(fin[i]*(1-kdepth));
/* pass the frequencies unchanged */
fout[i+1] = fin[i+1];
}
/* update the internal frame count */
p->fout->framecount = p->lastframe = p->fin->framecount;
}
return OK;
}
Finally, the localops OENTRY structure for this opcode will look like this (not forgetting the
LINKAGE macro):

621

Spectral Opcodes

static OENTRY localops[] = {
{"pvsarp", sizeof(pvsarp), 3, "f", "fkkk", (SUBR)pvsarp_init,
(SUBR)pvsarp_process}
};
LINKAGE
11.2

Modifying the Frequencies
The next example shows how frequencies can be manipulated in a pitch-shifting opcode,
pvtranspose. In contrast with amplitudes, some care has to be taken when changing the
values of frequencies in bins. If they exceed the bin bandwidth, i.e. they are actually moving
into another bin’s frequency range, then they need to be moved to a different bin. So the
principle of modifying frequencies involves changing them and moving the bin’s contents
(amplitude and frequency) to a new bin.
The opcode data space deﬁnes one fsig output, one fsig input, and two extra k-rate parameters, the pitch transposition ratio and an amplitude scaling factor:
typedef struct _pvstransp {
OPDS h;
PVSDAT *fout;
PVSDAT *fin;
MYFLT *kscal;
MYFLT *gain;
unsigned long lastframe;
} pvstransp;
The initialization function is pretty much the same as in the previous example:
static int pvstransp_init(CSOUND *csound, pvstransp *p)
{
long N = p->fin->N;
if (p->fout->frame.auxp == NULL ||
p->fout->frame.size < sizeof(float) * (N + 2))
csound->AuxAlloc(csound,
(N + 2) * sizeof(float), &p->fout->frame);
p->fout->N = N;
p->fout->overlap = p->fin->overlap;
p->fout->winsize = p->fin->winsize;
p->fout->wintype = p->fin->wintype;
p->fout->format = p->fin->format;
p->fout->framecount = 1;
p->lastframe = 0;
return OK;
}

622

Chapter 11

The main part of the opcode is found in the processing function. Here in the inside code
section, after the ‘‘ready for processing’’ test, where the last frame is compared to the current
input’s frame count, we have the following steps:
1. Copy the 0 Hz and Nyquist amplitudes unchanged (these might actually change in later
steps).
2. Zero the output amplitudes and set frequencies to 1.0. This is used later to check that
empty bins are not amplitude-scaled.
3. In a loop from bin 1 upward, ﬁnd the target bin then copy the input amplitude to that
bin. Scale the input frequency and copy it to the target bin.
4. Make sure we are not overstepping the array when doing the previous operation. This will
actually get rid of any possible aliasing when transposing upward.
5. Scale the bins that have moved data onto them (the ones not marked 1.0, since negative
frequencies will never occur).
The code is as follows:
static int pvstransp_process(CSOUND *csound, pvstransp *p)
{
long i, bin, j, N = p->fout->N;
float max = 0.0f;
MYFLT pscal = (MYFLT) fabs(*p->kscal);
float g = (float) *p->gain;
float *fin = (float *) p->fin->frame.auxp;
float *fout = (float *) p->fout->frame.auxp;
if (fout == NULL)
return csound->PerfError(csound,
Str("pvscale: not initialized"));
if (p->lastframe < p->fin->framecount) {
/* do not change the Ohz and Nyquist bins */
fout[0] = fin[0];
fout[N] = fin[N];
/* zero the output amplitudes */
for (i = 2; i < N; i += 2) {
fout[i] = 0.f;
fout[i+1] = -1.0f;
}
for (i=2,bin=1; i < N; bin++, i += 2) {
/* find the target new bin */
j = (int) (bin * pscal)*2;
/* scale frequency and move bins */

623

Spectral Opcodes

if (newbin < N && newbin > 0) {
fout[j] = fin[i];
fout[j+1] = (float) (fin[i+1] * pscal);
}
}
for (i = 2; i < N; i += 2) {
if (fout[i+1] != -1.0f)
fout[i] *= g; /* scale amplitude */
}
p->fout->framecount = p->lastframe = p->fin->framecount;
}
return OK;
}
static OENTRY localops[] = {
{"pvstransp", sizeof(pvstransp), 3, "f", "fkk",
(SUBR)pvstransp_init, (SUBR)pvstransp_process}
};
LINKAGE
Processing frequencies requires a little more care than processing amplitudes. However,
once the above limitations are understood, processes can be devised that manipulate them
successfully.
11.3

Documentation—The Final Frontier
It is generally assumed that software development stops here (when the ﬁnished code is
tested and works), but a ﬁnal and important stage is still to be completed. This is of course
the writing of suitable documentation for our work. Without it, any software is of limited
use, perhaps only for its developers, but even in this case, its usability is not guaranteed.
Therefore, it is important that a manual page and some examples are supplied with every
new opcode.
A Csound manual page template for opcode reference is very well established. The manual
currently exists in many formats: plain text, help ﬁle, html, xml, etc. The latter is particularly
ﬂexible as it can itself generate documentation in different forms. For those interested in that
format, a quick look at some opcode entries will be enough for learning the xml tags used in
the manual.
In general, the manual page should have the following format:
title (generally the opcode’s name)
short description: one line on what it does
description: under that heading, a longer discussion of what the opcode does and how to use
it

624

Chapter 11

syntax: the opcode’s csound syntax
initialization parameters and their description
performance parameters and their description, including their expected ranges
a csound instrument example of opcode usage.
As an example, here is the plain-text manual entry for the pvsarp opcode discussed in the
preceding section:
PVSARP
Spectral filtering and arpeggiation of PV streams.
DESCRIPTION
Pvsarp takes an input fsig and arpeggiates it according to bin index,
effect depth and boost amplitude controls. On each fsig input frame,
it will apply a gain to the target bin, as well as attenuating all the
other frequency bins according to the depth control.
fsig pvsarp fin, kcf, kdepth, kgain
[INITIALIZATION: this is omitted as the opcode does not have i-type
parameters]
PERFORMANCE
fin—input fsig
kbin— bin index (normalized, 0-1, equivalent to the 0 Hz—Nyquist
range), determining the target bin for arpeggiation.
kdepth—depth of attenuation of surrounding bins (0 <= kdepth <= 1)
kgain—gain (multiplier), applied to the target bin.
EXAMPLE
This example arpeggiates the spectrum of an input signal, using an LFO
(with a triangle wave) to control the bin index. The modulation width
is 0.05*SR/2 (1102.5 at 44.1 KHz) and the lowest frequency is
0.005*SR/2 (110.25).
instr 1
ifftsize = 1024
iwtype = 1
ifr = 0.2
idepth = 1
asig in
kbin oscil 0.05, ifr, 1
kbin = kbin + 0.005
fsig pvsanal asig, ifftsize, ifftsize/4, ifftsize, iwtype
ftps pvsarp fsig, kbin, 0.95, 15
atps pvsynth ftps

625

Spectral Opcodes

out atps
endin
f1 0 1024 7 0 512 1 512 0
i1 0 20
11.4

Conclusion
Spectral processing and opcode development have become more accessible with the introduction of the plug-in framework and the fsig data type. Now, users with a basic understanding of C can design frequency-domain processing unit generators. This is a feature
that makes Csound one of the most ﬂexible synthesis and processing systems to extend and
customize.

11.5

Exercises
Exercise 11.5.1
Design and implement an opcode that ﬁlters out a certain user-deﬁned band of frequencies.
Allow for control-rate changes in the bandwidth and amount of ﬁltering.
Exercise 11.5.2
Write a manual page for the pvstransp opcode, providing a usage example and explaining its
parameters.
Exercise 11.5.3
Design and implement an opcode that (a) takes two fsigs, (b) splits their spectra in half,
(c) combines the lower half of one with the upper half of the other, (d) outputs the composite fsig.

Notes
1. The phase vocoder is a popular algorithm for spectral analysis and re-synthesis. It is based on a DFT
analysis followed by amplitude and frequency estimation of each analysis point (bin). It results in a
series of frames of amp-freq data pairs, one for each analyzed frequency bin from 0 Hz to the Nyquist
frequency, inclusive. The analysis is performed at a certain time interval and the number of points in
the analysis determines the frequency precision of the result. A typical size is 1,024, giving 512 þ 1 analysis bins (the extra bin is at the Nyquist frequency). Often the interval between the analysis is

1
4

of the

analysis size, here 256 samples. So in this case, we will be producing one frame of 513 bins (with amp þ
freq) every 256 samples. For more details on how the PV algorithm works, see chapter 9.
2. One of the great things about fsigs is that we do not even need to know how the PV works in detail.
All we need to know is how the data is presented to us. We know that the ﬁrst pair of values in the

626

Chapter 11

spectral frame correspond to the 0-Hz bin and the following pairs are in incremental frequency steps all
the way to the Nyquist. Each bin has equal bandwidth, so for 1,024 points we will have 512 equal-sized
bins from 0 to the 12 sampling rate: at 44.1 KHz we have bins of 22,050/512 ¼ 43.3 Hz. So the lowest bin
after 0 Hz will be centered at 43.3 Hz, the next one at 86.6 Hz, and so on. If we want to isolate a particular frequency band, we need only identify the correct bin.
3. Filters can be quite successfully implemented as streaming PV opcodes. For this type of application,
the idea is that we will not touch the frequencies, but only change the amplitudes. The spectral envelope
(the shape of the amplitude spectrum) will determine what frequencies get emphasized and what frequencies get cut off. Generally, the best method to impose a ﬁlter shape onto an input sound is by multiplying the two together. The only thing to watch out for is that the resulting amplitudes do not get out
of hand. One handy way of making sure they are OK is to keep your ﬁlter amplitudes between 0 and 1
(or not too much above 1).

Algorithmic Synthesis and Music Programming

12

A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program

Eric Lyon

In this chapter I will develop a tool for algorithmic sound design based on a digital simulation of an analog synthesizer. This is not a new idea but rather one of the oldest in computer
music. Researchers at Bell Labs during the 1950s, including Max Mathews, had the fundamental insight that analog electronic circuits could be understood to be performing mathematical operations that could be modeled digitally, and then programmed and simulated on
the computer. The digital signal in such programs represented analog signal ﬂowing through
analog electronic components, thus allowing engineers to model electronic circuits without
physically building them. Bell Labs researchers Kelly, Lochbaum, and Vyssotsky wrote the
program BLODI (block diagram) to simulate electronic circuits.1 Mathews wrote a series of
programs (Music I–V)2 to simulate the circuitry for analog musical synthesizers, and to facilitate their use in musical composition. Thus was born the ﬁrst acoustic compiler, with many
descendents still in use today, such as Csound, cmusic, and Cmix.
12.1

Basic System Design
The basic method of analog synthesis is to patch together self-contained modules that generate or modify electronic signals into conﬁgurations with particular sound qualities. This
paradigm is adopted in Csound where sound modules are replaced with unit generators,
and patch cords are replaced with signal variables. This project has two parts. First we will
write a very simple language that translates patch speciﬁcations into Csound orchestras.
Second, we will write a program that algorithmically generates patch speciﬁcations, automating the sound design process.
There are a few reasons why we take the intermediary step of designing a patch speciﬁcation language rather than directly generating Csound code. A patch language designed to
represent speciﬁc Csound code conﬁgurations will be easier to use than writing the Csound
code directly. This will make patch speciﬁcation more convenient, thus encouraging the creation of more complex patches. Given the large number of unit generators in Csound, narrowing to the use of a small subset of available unit generators will focus the project, leading
to uses of Csound that might not otherwise be attempted.

630

Chapter 12

The ﬁrst decision is which analog modules we wish to model and manipulate in Csound.
We will start with four very basic modules: an oscillator, a ﬁlter, a sample and hold unit, and
noise. We will also bear in mind that we will probably wish to add more modules as the project develops. Therefore the design of the overall program should make the addition of more
modules a relatively simple matter. Let’s start with the oscillator.
12.1.1

Patch Speciﬁcation for an Oscillator

Primarily we can control the oscillator’s waveform and its frequency. But to make things
more interesting, we can add the capability to frequency modulate and amplitude modulate
the oscillator. Since we may wish to use the oscillator as an LFO (low-frequency oscillator)
controller for another oscillator (or some other module), we would like to be able to specify
the range of its output signal (for example have it slowly vary between 500 and 550 Hz and
use it as a frequency control signal). Since the oscillator will be implemented with Csound,
we also need to give the name of an audio variable to hold its output.
The possible parameters to our oscillator are frequency, FM signal, AM signal, output variable, output minimum, and output maximum.
12.1.2

Designing the Interface

Consider a simple case in which the oscillator is a sine wave with a frequency of 880.0 and
the output is assigned to variable a1. The Csound code will look like this:
a1 oscil 1.0, 880.0, isine
where isine will be deﬁned to point to a stored sine-wave table. If we wish to frequency
modulate a1 with the signal in a2, the code is not much more complex:
a1 oscil 1.0, 880.0 * (1.0 + a2) , isine
This appears to restrict us to an FM index of 1 (since presumably a2 will vary between 1
to 1), but as we will later see, this is not the case. AM with signal a2 can be implemented
with
a1 oscil a2, 880.0, isine
Finally, scaling output from an oscillator to between 100 and 600 for use as an LFO at speed
7 Hz gives us this code:
a1 oscil 1.0, 7.0, isine
a1 = 100 + (500 * ((a1+1.) * 0.5))
The ﬁrst part of our project will be to transform simple speciﬁcations into actual Csound
code. The ﬁrst decision is how to specify our oscillator. Let’s assume that we will read in data

631

A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program

a line at a time, and the ﬁrst word in the line will indicate that we are calling an oscillator.
(Remember we plan to implement other modules.)
The simplest approach is to decide on all the parameters we need for the oscillator, and list
them in series. Let’s list the data we need: output variable, frequency, waveform, AM signal,
FM signal, output minimum, output maximum. So we could write
OSC a1 440 SINE NONE NONE –1 1
That is the format we will use here, since it is the simplest and we don’t want to spend too
much time on parsing. If our intent was to make a lot of these patches by hand rather than
through automation, we might consider other formats that would allow us to only specify
the required information, such as
OSC OUT=a1 FREQ=440
The ideal parser will anticipate everything that could be thrown at it, and will have an
elegant and informative response to surprises. Ours, however, will be just good enough to
parse data in the form we require. It will fail catastrophically if given any data that does not
conform to our rigid speciﬁcations. Since we plan to ultimately generate this data from a program rather than enter it manually, this is not as irresponsible as it may seem at ﬁrst glance.
12.2

Building the Code
We need to make speciﬁcation conventions for each module we wish to support. We therefore need C code to read in the patch speciﬁcations, turn them into Csound code, embed
this code inside a working instrument, and ﬁnally write a Csound orchestra that can synthesize the patch. We will work from the inside out, ﬁrst writing code to read in lines of patch
speciﬁcation and convert them to Csound code. First we make a structure to contain the data
we need for oscillators. We will put it in a header ﬁle called synmod.h. We also deﬁne constants for the maximum number of characters for each variable, and the maximum number
of units that may be contained in a single patch:
#define SYNMOD_CHARS (128)
#define MAXMODS (256)
typedef struct {
char frequency[SYNMOD_CHARS];
char sig_out[SYNMOD_CHARS];
char sig_am[SYNMOD_CHARS];
char sig_fm[SYNMOD_CHARS];
char waveform[SYNMOD_CHARS];
char omin[SYNMOD_CHARS];
char omax[SYNMOD_CHARS];
} OSCMOD;

632

Chapter 12

It may seem odd that we are deﬁning all these variables as strings, rather than ﬂoats. But
this gives us greater ﬂexibility since we can specify the frequency to be a Csound audio variable as well as a simple frequency value in hertz. We will later convert the string to a ﬂoat
with the sscanf() function when necessary.
Now we will write code into a ﬁle called synmod.c. First we write code to read in a patch
ﬁle, line by line. If the module is an OSC, we read the rest of the data. We use the C function
strcmp() to check if the two strings match. This function returns a false value (zero) when
its two arguments match. For now all the modules will be OSCs. We also print the data to
assure that we read it correctly.
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include "synmod.h"
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
OSCMOD *oscs;
int osc_count = 0;
char modname[64];
oscs = (OSCMOD *) malloc(MAXMODS * sizeof(OSCMOD));
while(scanf("%s", modname) != EOF){
if(! strcmp(modname, "OSC")){
/* READ IN THE DATA */
scanf("%s", oscs[osc_count].sig_out);
scanf("%s", oscs[osc_count].frequency);
scanf("%s", oscs[osc_count].waveform);
scanf("%s", oscs[osc_count].sig_am);
scanf("%s", oscs[osc_count].sig_fm);
scanf("%s", oscs[osc_count].omin);
scanf("%s", oscs[osc_count].omax);
/* PRINT IT TO MAKE SURE IT'S OK */
printf("%s %s %s %s %s %s %s\n",
oscs[osc_count].sig_out,oscs[osc_count].frequency,
oscs[osc_count].waveform, oscs[osc_count].sig_am,
oscs[osc_count].sig_fm,oscs[osc_count].omin,
oscs[osc_count].omax);
++osc_count;
}
}
}

633

A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program

12.2.1

Introducing the Command-Line Interface

We will be using synmod within a command-line interface (CLI), a rawer interface than the
GUI that is found on Max/MSP and most other modern music programs. The interface to
the CLI is text; you type commands at a prompt. Although the CLI is relatively primitive, in
some cases it is possible to accomplish tasks faster by typing into a CLI than by manipulating
a mouse over a GUI. In Mac OS X, the CLI is accessed with the program Terminal, which is
found in the Utilities sub-folder of Applications. Most of work of this chapter will be consist
of typing commands into a terminal window.
Compile synmod by running the gcc compiler in a terminal window as shown below. You
must be in the same directory where you created the synmod.c ﬁle. This will create an executable program ﬁle called synmod3:
$ gcc –o synmod synmod.c
Write the following data into a ﬁle called mpatch1, using your favorite text editor4:
OSC a1 440 SINE NONE NONE -1 1
OSC a2 770 SINE NONE NONE -1 1
Now test the program5:
$ synmod < mpatch1
a1 440 SINE NONE NONE –1 1
a2 770 SINE NONE NONE –1 1
Here < is the UNIX redirect symbol, which in this case means take the data in the ﬁle mpatch
and use it as input to the synmod program.6
12.3

Tightening the Structure and Making It Safer
If there are more than 256 OSCS in the patch ﬁle, this program will fail. This could be
prevented by checking if we are at the limit, and if so, allocating more memory with
realloc(). We will take the middle path and simply shut down the program if more that
256 OSCS are requested. In the current form of the program, reading in the data will clutter
up the main program loop. This will be worse if we decide to do some checking on the data.
Therefore, we will rewrite the program to localize data reading into a function call7:
void read_osc(OSCMOD *oscs, int count)
{
scanf("%s %s %s %s %s %s %s",oscs[count].sig_out,
oscs[count].frequency, oscs[count].waveform,
oscs[count].sig_am, oscs[count].sig_fm,
oscs[count].omin, oscs[count].omax);

634

Chapter 12

if(count >= MAXMODS){
fprintf(stderr,
"Number of oscillators has exceeded maximum: %d\n",
MAXMODS);
exit(1);
}
}
We must put the function prototype into synmod.h:
void read_osc(OSCMOD *oscs, int count);
We also need a function to write the Csound code for each stored oscillator. We’ll call it
print_osc(). We will support some basic waveforms, all of which can easily be generated
with the Csound GEN10 function:
void print_osc(OSCMOD osc)
{
float omin, omax;
float mo2;
printf("%s oscil ", osc.sig_out);
if(!strcmp(osc.sig_am, "NONE")){
printf("1.0, ");
} else {
printf("%s, ", osc.sig_am);
}
if(!strcmp(osc.sig_fm, "NONE")){
printf("%s, ", osc.frequency);
} else {
printf("%s * (1.0 + %s), ",osc.frequency, osc.sig_fm);
}
if(!strcmp(osc.waveform, "SINE")){
printf("isine\n");
}
else if(!strcmp(osc.waveform, "TRIANGLE")) {
printf("itriangle\n");
}
else if(!strcmp(osc.waveform, "SAWTOOTH")){
printf("isawtooth\n");
}
else if(!strcmp(osc.waveform, "SQUARE")){
printf("isquare\n");
}

635

A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program

else if(!strcmp(osc.waveform, "PULSE")){
printf("ipulse\n");
}
else {
fprintf(stderr,"print_osc: %s is unknown"
"- using sine instead\n",osc.waveform);
printf("isine\n");
}
sscanf(osc.omin,"%f",&omin); // convert strings to floats
sscanf(osc.omax,"%f",&omax);
if(omin != -1.0 || omax != 1.0){ // rescale output if necessary
mo2 = (omax - omin) / 2.0;
printf("%s = %s + (%f*%s + %f)\n",
osc.sig_out, osc.omin, mo2, osc.sig_out, mo2);
}
}
You should add the function prototype of print_osc to synmod.h as we did for the prototype to read_osc().
We ﬁnally rewrite the main program as shown below. Notice how we avoid clutter in the
main program by moving the nitty-gritty action elsewhere. In anticipation of different kinds
of unit generators, we have added a test for an opcode at the beginning of the line. At present we only test for OSC, but that will soon change.
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
OSCMOD *oscs;
int osc_count = 0;
char modname[64];
int i;
oscs = (OSCMOD *) malloc(MAXMODS * sizeof(OSCMOD));
while(scanf("%s", modname) != EOF){
if(!strcmp(modname, "OSC")){
read_osc(oscs, osc_count++);
} else {
fprintf(stderr,"%s is an unknown module\n", modname);
}
}
for(i = 0; i < osc_count; i++){
print_osc(oscs[i]);
}
}

636

Chapter 12

Having changed our line parsing scheme, we now need to change our mpatch2 ﬁle to read as
follows:
OSC a1 440 SINE NONE NONE -1 1
OSC a2 770 SINE NONE NONE -1 1
At this point we can test the program to see if it is spitting out valid Csound code. The
output
$ synmod < mpatch1
a1 oscil 1.0, 440, isine
a2 oscil 1.0, 770, isine
is exactly what we hoped to see. Now let’s test the FM and AM. Put the following data into a
ﬁle called mpatch2.
OSC a1 440 SINE NONE NONE -1 1
OSC a2 770 SINE a1 NONE -1 1
OSC a3 330 TRIANGLE NONE a2 -1 1
$ synmod
a1 oscil
a2 oscil
a3 oscil

< mpatch2
1.0, 440, isine
a1, 770, isine
1.0, 330 * (1.0 + a2), itriangle

and test the remapping capability with the following data in mpatch3:
OSC a1 3.0 SINE NONE NONE 440 660
OSC a2 a1 SINE NONE NONE -1 1
$ synmod
a1 oscil
a1 = 440
a2 oscil

< mpatch3
1.0, 3.0, isine
+ (110.000000*a1 + 110.000000)
1.0, a1, isine

All that is needed to turn this into a working Csound instrument is an output statement.8
We need to specify that in our patchﬁle, so we will make another module called MIXOUT
with this simple format:
MIXOUT variable amplitude
We add a MIXOUT struct to the header ﬁle synmod.h:
typedef struct {
char outvar[SYNMOD_CHARS];
char amplitude[SYNMOD_CHARS];
} MIXOUT;
We now create functions to read and write the MIXOUT module. To avoid annoying clicks,
we will apply a simple envelope as part of the mix print function:

637

A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program

void read_mix(MIXOUT *mix, int count )
{
scanf("%s %s", mix[count].outvar, mix[count].amplitude );
}
void print_mix( MIXOUT mix )
{
float amp;
sscanf(mix.amplitude, "%f", &amp);
printf ("kenv linseg 0,.05,%f,p3-0.1,%f,.05,0\n",amp, amp);
printf("out (%s)*kenv\n", mix.outvar);
}
Note the parentheses around the output variable. This enables us to use expressions like
a1+a2 as output, in order to mix out more than one variable at a time.
Add the prototypes to synmod.h:
void read_mix(MIXOUT *mix, int count);
void print_mix(MIXOUT mix);
Finally, update the main function to allocate space for the MIXOUT modules, and scan for a
MIXOUT opcode in addition to scanning for OSC:
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
OSCMOD *oscs;
MIXOUT *mixes;
int osc_count = 0;
int mix_count = 0;
char modname[64];
int i;
oscs = (OSCMOD *) malloc(MAXMODS * sizeof(OSCMOD));
mixes = (MIXOUT *) malloc(MAXMODS * sizeof(MIXOUT));
while(scanf("%s", modname) != EOF){
if(! strcmp(modname, "OSC")){
read_osc(oscs, osc_count++);
}
else if(! strcmp(modname, "MIXOUT")){
read_mix(mixes, mix_count++);
} else {
fprintf(stderr,"%s is an unknown module\n", modname);
}
}

638

Chapter 12

for(i = 0; i < osc_count; i++){
print_osc(oscs[i]);
}
for(i = 0; i < mix_count; i++){
print_mix(mixes[i]);
}
}
Add a mixout line to mpatch3:
OSC a1 3.0 SINE NONE NONE 440 660
OSC a2 a1 SINE NONE NONE -1 1
MIXOUT a2 5000
Compile and test:
$ synmod < mpatch3
a1 oscil 1.0, 3.0, isine
a1 = 440 + (110.000000*a1 + 110.000000)
a2 oscil 1.0, a1, isine
kenv linseg 0,.05,5000.000000,p3-0.1,5000.000000,.05,0
out (a2)*kenv
Everything seems to work as intended. The next step is to wrap all of these ideas up in a
working Csound orchestra.
12.4

Writing the Csound Wrapper Code
Originally Csound code was divided between an ‘‘orchestra’’ ﬁle containing synthesis instrument deﬁnitions and a ‘‘score’’ ﬁle containing calls to those instruments. We will ﬁnd it
more convenient to use the Uniﬁed File Format, designed by Michael Gogins, that combines
orchestra and score information into a single ﬁle.9
We will create two new functions, print_header() and print_score(), that when
combined with the main program will write a functioning .csd ﬁle to stdout:
void print_header(void)
{
printf("<CsoundSynthesizer>\n\n");
printf("sr = 44100\n");
printf("kr = 4410\n");
printf("ksmps = 10\n");
printf("nchnls = 1\n\n");
printf("<CsInstruments>\n\n");
printf("\tinstr 1\n");
printf("isine = 1\n");

639

A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program

printf("itriangle = 2\n");
printf("isawtooth = 3\n");
printf("isquare = 4\n");
printf("ipulse = 5\n");
}
The score will have a duration parameter to specify the length of the note:
void print_score(float duration)
{
printf("\tendin\n\n");
printf("</CsInstruments>\n");
printf("<CsScore>\n\n");
printf("f1 0 8192 10 1 ; sine\n");
printf("f2 0 8192 10 1 0 .111 0 .04 0 .02 0 ; triangle\n");
printf("f3 0 8192 10 1 .5 .333 .25 .2 .166 .142 .125 ;
sawtooth\n");
printf("f4 0 8192 10 1 0 .333 0 .2 0 .142 0 .111; square\n");
printf("f5 0 8192 10 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1; pulse\n\n");
printf("i1 0 %f\n\n", duration);
printf("</CsScore>\n");
printf("</CsoundSynthesizer>\n");
}
As before, you will have to add function prototypes to the header ﬁle synmod.h. I will
assume that you now know how to do this by yourself.
We now sandwich our main code generation with calls to the header and score functions:
/* WRITE .csd FILE FOR CSOUND */
print_header();
for(i = 0; i < osc_count; i++){
print_osc(oscs[i]);
}
for(i = 0; i < mix_count; i++){
print_mix(mixes[i]);
}
print_score(10.0); /* TEN SECOND NOTE */
The entire main function now looks as follows:
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
OSCMOD *oscs;
MIXOUT *mixes;

640

Chapter 12

int osc_count = 0;
int mix_count = 0;
char modname[64];
int i;
oscs = (OSCMOD *) malloc(MAXMODS * sizeof(OSCMOD));
mixes = (MIXOUT *) malloc(MAXMODS * sizeof(MIXOUT));
/* WRITE .csd FILE FOR CSOUND */
print_header();
while(scanf("%s", modname) != EOF){
if(! strcmp(modname, "OSC")){
read_osc(oscs, osc_count++);
}
else if(! strcmp(modname, "MIXOUT")){
read_mix(mixes, mix_count++);
} else {
fprintf(stderr,"%s is an unknown module\n", modname);
}
}
for(i = 0; i < osc_count; i++){
print_osc(oscs[i]);
}
for(i = 0; i < mix_count; i++){
print_mix(mixes[i]);
}
print_score(10.0); /* TEN SECOND NOTE */
}
Compile synmod yet again. At this point, the code will generate a working Csound .csd ﬁle.
Type the following into a ﬁle called mpatch4:
OSC a1
OSC a2
OSC a3
OSC a4
OSC a5
OSC a6
MIXOUT

100 PULSE NONE NONE -1 1
100.1 PULSE NONE NONE -1
100.2 PULSE NONE NONE -1
100.3 PULSE NONE NONE -1
100.4 PULSE NONE NONE -1
100.5 PULSE NONE NONE -1
a1+a2+a3+a4+a5+a6 2000

Look at the output:
$ synmod < mpatch4
synmod < mpatch4
<CsoundSynthesizer>

1
1
1
1
1

641

A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program

sr = 44100
kr = 4410
ksmps = 10
nchnls = 1
<CsInstruments>
instr 1
isine = 1
itriangle = 2
isawtooth = 3
isquare = 4
ipulse = 5
a1 oscil 1.0, 100, ipulse
a2 oscil 1.0, 100.1, ipulse
a3 oscil 1.0, 100.2, ipulse
a4 oscil 1.0, 100.3, ipulse
a5 oscil 1.0, 100.4, ipulse
a6 oscil 1.0, 100.5, ipulse
kenv linseg 0,.05,2000.000000,p3-0.1,2000.000000,.05,0
out (a1+a2+a3+a4+a5+a6)*kenv
endin
</CsInstruments>
<CsScore>
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5

0
0
0
0
0

8192
8192
8192
8192
8192

10
10
10
10
10

1
1
1
1
1

; sine
0 .111 0 .04 0 .02 0 ; triangle
.5 .333 .25 .2 .166 .142 .125 ; sawtooth
0 .333 0 .2 0 .142 0 .111; square
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1; pulse

i1 0 10.000000
</CsScore>
</CsoundSynthesizer>
Route the output to a .csd ﬁle. The UNIX redirect symbol ‘‘>’’ here means ‘‘send the
output from synmod into a new ﬁle called mpatch4.csd which will be created, or written
over if it already exists’’10:
$ synmod < mpatch4 > mpatch4.csd
Run Csound11 on this ﬁle. We will use the CLI version of Csound here. For convenience we
will write the output to the DACs of your computer with the –odac ﬂag, effectively generating the sound in real time.
$ csound -odac mpatch4.csd

642

Chapter 12

You should hear a ﬂanging effect as the detuned harmonics gradually reinforce or cancel
each other. Now would be a good time to take a break and play around with some patches.
Here are a few ideas to get you started.
FM:
OSC a1
OSC a2
OSC a3
MIXOUT

0.25 SINE NONE NONE 0.1 1
102 SINE a1 NONE -8 8
100 SINE NONE a2 -1 1
a3 10000

Tonal:
OSC a1 4.76 SINE NONE NONE 0.6 1
OSC a2 5.33 SINE NONE NONE 0.6 1
OSC a3 3.15 SINE NONE NONE 0.6 1
OSC a4 7.54 SINE NONE NONE 0.6 1
OSC a5 4.78 SINE NONE NONE 0.6 1
OSC av1 7.56 SINE NONE NONE -.01 .01
OSC av2 7.08 SINE NONE NONE -.01 .01
OSC av3 5.26 SINE NONE NONE -.01 .01
OSC av4 3.82 SINE NONE NONE -.01 .01
OSC av5 6.85 SINE NONE NONE -.01 .01
OSC a6 261.6256 TRIANGLE a1 av1 -1 1
OSC a7 329.6276 SAWTOOTH a2 av2 -1 1
OSC a8 391.9954 SQUARE a3 av3 -1 1
OSC a9 493.8833 SAWTOOTH a4 av4 -1 1
OSC a10 587.3295 TRIANGLE a5 av5 -1 1
MIXOUT a6+a7+a8+a9+a10 2000
More complex:
OSC atr1 .15 SINE NONE NONE 0.6 1.0
OSC a1 131 SINE atr1 NONE -25 25
OSC a2 93.3 SAWTOOTH NONE atr1 0.6 1
OSC a3 200.5 TRIANGLE a2 a1 -1 1
OSC a4 17.1 SQUARE a2 a1 -1 1
MIXOUT a3+a4 5000
12.5

Enabling Oscillator Feedback
One attractive feature of analog oscillators that we lack at present is the ability to route the
output of an oscillator back into itself or into another oscillator that controls it. Routing a
signal output to its input is called feedback. Csound is capable of implementing oscillator
feedback, with a few small modiﬁcations to the current orchestra. First we must change the

643

A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program

local a variables to global variables. In order to use global variables with feedback, they must
ﬁrst be initialized. This requires a small bit of additional code. We will write a function to
generate this initialization code, called initialize_globals(). We will later modify this
function to initialize other global variables as well.
void initialize_globals(OSCMOD *oscs, int osc_count)
{
int i;
for(i = 0; i < osc_count; i++){
printf("%s init 0.0\n", oscs[i].sig_out);
}
}
Add this function to the code ﬁle, and its prototype to the header ﬁle.12 This function will
get called in main() just before we call print_oscs(). Here is the new main() function:
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
OSCMOD *oscs;
MIXOUT *mixes;
int osc_count = 0;
int mix_count = 0;
char modname[64];
int i;
oscs = (OSCMOD *) malloc(MAXMODS * sizeof(OSCMOD));
mixes = (MIXOUT *) malloc(MAXMODS * sizeof(MIXOUT));
print_header();
initialize_globals(oscs, osc_count);
while(scanf("%s", modname) != EOF){
if(! strcmp(modname, "OSC")){
read_osc(oscs, osc_count++);
}
else if(! strcmp(modname, "MIXOUT")){
read_mix(mixes, mix_count++);
} else {
fprintf(stderr,"%s is an unknown module\n", modname);
}
}
for(i = 0; i < osc_count; i++){
print_osc(oscs[i]);
}

644

Chapter 12

for(i = 0; i < mix_count; i++){
print_mix(mixes[i]);
}
print_score(10.0);
}
Here is a simple patch that utilizes feedback. We are now using global audio variables in
the patch. Try this with the new version of synmod.
OSC ga1 100 SINE NONE ga2 -1 1
OSC ga2 113 SINE NONE ga1 -1 1
MIXOUT ga2 20000
More complex conﬁgurations yield more complex behavior.
OSC ga1 450 SINE NONE ga4 -1 1
OSC ga2 1.41 SINE NONE ga1 -1 1
OSC ga3 6.5 SINE NONE ga2 -1 1
OSC ga4 1001.15 SINE NONE ga3 -1 1
MIXOUT ga1 20000
A longer duration would be preferable for this patch. Rather than hard coding the duration,
we will add an opcode called DURATION, so that duration may be set from inside the patch.13
Here is our updated main() function. Since we are not adding any new functions, we do not
have to update the header ﬁle this time.
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
OSCMOD *oscs;
MIXOUT *mixes;
int osc_count = 0;
int mix_count = 0;
char modname[64];
int i;
float duration = 10.0; /* Our default duration is 10 seconds */
oscs = (OSCMOD *) malloc(MAXMODS * sizeof(OSCMOD));
mixes = (MIXOUT *) malloc(MAXMODS * sizeof(MIXOUT));
print_header();
while(scanf("%s", modname) != EOF){
if(! strcmp(modname, "OSC")){
read_osc(oscs, osc_count++);
}
else if(! strcmp(modname, "MIXOUT")){
read_mix(mixes, mix_count++);

645

A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program

}
/* Now we scan for duration too */
else if(! strcmp(modname, "DURATION")){
scanf("%f", &duration);
}
else {
fprintf(stderr,"%s is an unknown module\n", modname);
}
}
initialize_globals(oscs, osc_count);
for(i = 0; i < osc_count; i++){
print_osc(oscs[i]);
}
for(i = 0; i < mix_count; i++){
print_mix(mixes[i]);
}
/* now we use our duration variable, but we do not have to
change print_score() since we planned ahead! */
print_score(duration);
}
We can now revisit that last patch:
DURATION 30
OSC ga1 450 SINE NONE ga4 -1 1
OSC ga2 1.41 SINE NONE ga1 -1 1
OSC ga3 6.5 SINE NONE ga2 -1 1
OSC ga4 1001.15 SINE NONE ga3 -1 1
MIXOUT ga1 20000
12.6

Adding Noise
Most of the hard work on this part of the project is done. We need only add a few more
module types, following the existing model of the oscillator module. Each new addition
will increase the variety of possible sounds that can be teased from our algorithmic sound
design strategy.
Next we will add a module for interpolated noise.14 This will be useful both as an audio
signal and as a control source. We must specify the Csound variable name, the speed of
change, the random seed, and output minimum and maximum values. For example:
NOISE ga1 4.5 .111 –1 1
Here is the structure, which will go into the header ﬁle:

646

Chapter 12

typedef struct {
char speed[SYNMOD_CHARS];
char sig_out[SYNMOD_CHARS];
char seed[SYNMOD_CHARS];
char omin[SYNMOD_CHARS];
char omax[SYNMOD_CHARS];
} NOISEMOD;
Deﬁnition and allocation:
NOISEMOD *noises;
int noise_count = 0;
. . .
noises = (NOISEMOD *) malloc( MAXMODS * sizeof(NOISEMOD));
Functions:
void read_noise(NOISEMOD *unit, int count)
{
scanf("%s %s %s %s %s", unit[count].sig_out unit[count].speed,
unit[count].seed, unit[count].omin, unit[count].omax);
}
void print_noise(NOISEMOD noise)
{
float omin, omax, mo2;
printf("%s randi 1.0, %s, %s\n", noise.sig_out, noise.speed,
noise.seed);
sscanf(noise.omin,"%f",&omin); // convert strings to floats
sscanf(noise.omax,"%f",&omax);
if(omin != -1.0 || omax != 1.0){
mo2 = (omax - omin) / 2.0;
printf("%s = %s + (%f*%s + %f)\n", noise.sig_out,
noise.omin, mo2, noise.sig_out, mo2);
}
}
The slightly difﬁcult part is that we will now need to modify the initialize_globals()
function and function call as follows:
initialize_globals(oscs, osc_count, noises, noise_count);
void initialize_globals(OSCMOD *oscs, int osc_count, NOISEMOD
*noises, int noise_count)
{
int i;

647

A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program

for(i = 0; i <
printf("%s
}
for(i = 0; i <
printf("%s
}

osc_count; i++){
init 0.0\n", oscs[i].sig_out);
noise_count; i++){
init 0.0\n", noises[i].sig_out);

}
Now that we have changed the initialize_globals() function, we must also change
its prototype in the header ﬁle. At this point, you should be able to rewrite the main()
function on your own. Try doing so before reading further.
The updated main() function is as follows:
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
OSCMOD *oscs;
MIXOUT *mixes;
NOISEMOD *noises; /* We now define a pointer for the noise
modules here. */
int osc_count = 0;
int mix_count = 0;
int noise_count = 0; /* We now keep count of noise modules. */
char modname[64];
int i;
float duration = 10.0;
oscs = (OSCMOD *) malloc(MAXMODS * sizeof(OSCMOD));
mixes = (MIXOUT *) malloc(MAXMODS * sizeof(MIXOUT));
/* Here is our new allocation call */
noises = (NOISEMOD *) malloc( MAXMODS * sizeof(NOISEMOD));
print_header();
while(scanf("%s", modname) != EOF){
if(! strcmp(modname, "OSC")){
read_osc(oscs, osc_count++);
}
/* Notice that we put noise before the MIXOUT. Otherwise
the noise would not be mixed out. */
else if(! strcmp(modname, "NOISE")){
read_noise(noises, noise_count++);
}
else if(! strcmp(modname, "MIXOUT")){
read_mix(mixes, mix_count++);

648

Chapter 12

}
else if(! strcmp(modname, "DURATION")){
scanf("%f", &duration);
}
else {
fprintf(stderr,"%s is an unknown module\n", modname);
}
}
/* Our call to initialize_globals now initializes noise too. */
initialize_globals(oscs, osc_count, noises, noise_count);
for(i = 0; i < osc_count; i++){
print_osc(oscs[i]);
}
/* We print the noise here: */
for(i = 0; i < noise_count; i++){
print_noise(noises[i]);
}
for(i = 0; i < mix_count; i++){
print_mix(mixes[i]);
}
print_score(duration);
}
Here are a few patch ﬁles you can use to test the NOISE opcode.
Simple random control of oscillator frequency:
DURATION 15
NOISE ga1 2.5 .222 57 670
OSC ga2 ga1 SAWTOOTH NONE NONE -1 1
MIXOUT ga2 10000
Interpolated noise modulation of a sine wave creates a formant region centered on the sine
frequency:
NOISE ga1 100 .222 -1 1
OSC ga2 380 SINE ga1 NONE -1 1
MIXOUT ga2 10000
Here is a patch where similar noise units gradually go out of phase:
DURATION 30
NOISE ga1a 6.0 .522 80 1200
NOISE ga1b 6.15 .522 80 1200
NOISE ga1c 6.3 .522 80 1200
OSC ga2 ga1a TRIANGLE NONE NONE -1 1

649

A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program

OSC ga3 ga1b TRIANGLE NONE NONE -1 1
OSC ga4 ga1c TRIANGLE NONE NONE -1 1
MIXOUT ga2+ga3+ga4 7000
12.7

Sample and Hold
Now let us quickly build a sample and hold unit.15 It is essentially the same as the NOISE
unit, except without interpolation between random values. In fact the only difference is
that we use Csound opcode randh rather than randi so we’ll be able to reuse most of the
NOISE code. We’ll use the label SAH for these sample-and-hold units.
We just require a print_sah() function. We can use the NOISE structure.
void print_sah(NOISEMOD noise)
{
float omin, omax, mo2;
printf("%s randh 1.0, %s, %s\n", noise.sig_out, noise.speed,
noise.seed);
sscanf(noise.omin,"%f",&omin); // convert strings to floats
sscanf(noise.omax,"%f",&omax);
if(omin != -1.0 || omax != 1.0){
mo2 = (omax - omin) / 2.0;
printf("%s = %s + (%f*%s + %f)\n",
noise.sig_out, noise.omin, mo2, noise.sig_out, mo2);
}
}
We add this code in the appropriate places. We will use the function read_noise() to get
data for the SAH, since the input formats for SAH and NOISE are identical.
else if(! strcmp(modname, "SAH")){
read_noise(sahs, sah_count++);
}
. . .
for(i = 0; i < sah_count; i++){
print_sah(sahs[i]);
}
We must, of course, create new variables and allocate memory as well.
NOISEMOD *sahs;
int sah_count = 0;
sahs = (NOISEMOD *) malloc(MAXMODS *sizeof(NOISEMOD));
Finally, we have to update the initialize_globals() function, and its prototype in
the header ﬁle.

650

Chapter 12

void initialize_globals(OSCMOD *oscs, int osc_count, NOISEMOD *noises,
int noise_count, NOISEMOD *sahs, int sah_count)
{
int i;
for(i = 0; i < osc_count; i++){
printf("%s init 0.0\n", oscs[i].sig_out);
}
for(i = 0; i < noise_count; i++){
printf("%s init 0.0\n", noises[i].sig_out);
}
for(i = 0; i < sah_count; i++){
printf("%s init 0.0\n", sahs[i].sig_out);
}
}
This time I will not show you the updated main() function, but if you get stuck you can
ﬁnd it on the DVD.
We can test with the last patch, replacing the NOISEs with SAHs.
DURATION 30
SAH ga1a 6.0 .522 80 1200
SAH ga1b 6.15 .522 80 1200
SAH ga1c 6.3 .522 80 1200
OSC ga2 ga1a TRIANGLE NONE NONE -1 1
OSC ga3 ga1b TRIANGLE NONE NONE -1 1
OSC ga4 ga1c TRIANGLE NONE NONE -1 1
MIXOUT ga2+ga3+ga4 7000
It’s also fun to add SAH units together to create terraced melodies:
DURATION 30
SAH ga1 6.0 .522 20 150
SAH ga2 7.15 .499 20 200
SAH ga3 1.33 .131 20 500
OSC ga4 ga1+ga2+ga3 SQUARE NONE NONE -1 1
MIXOUT ga4 10000
or sum and difference melodies:
DURATION 30
SAH ga1 1.45 .332 20 150
SAH ga2 2.73 .619 20 200
OSC ga3 ga1+ga2 SQUARE NONE NONE -1 1
OSC ga4 ga1-ga2 SQUARE NONE NONE -1 1
MIXOUT ga3+ga4 10000

651

12.8

A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program

Adding the Filter
A modular synthesizer would be somewhat lacking without a ﬁlter. Csound has many attractive ﬁlters to choose from. We will use the moogvcf ﬁlter for sentimental reasons, as it is based
on an analog ﬁlter from the Moog synthesizer. The two main parameters are cutoff frequency
and resonance. The format will be
VCF OUTPUT INPUT CUTOFF RESONANCE
At this point, you should be able to fully implement the new opcode on your own.16 As a
simple test we can use an SAH to ﬁlter noise with a fairly high resonance. For moogvcf, 1.0 is
the maximum resonance. Here is an example:
DURATION 20
SAH ga1 7.45 .1384 200 1400
NOISE ga2 8000 .1 -1 1
VCF ga3 ga2 ga1 0.98
MIXOUT ga3 10000
Below is a ﬁxed chord with three randomly sweeping ﬁlters:
DURATION 30
OSC ga1 100 SAWTOOTH NONE NONE -1 1
OSC ga2 125.1 SAWTOOTH NONE NONE -1 1
OSC ga3 150.25 SAWTOOTH NONE NONE -1 1
OSC ga4 187.6 SAWTOOTH NONE NONE -1 1
OSC ga5 225.8 SAWTOOTH NONE NONE -1 1
NOISE ga6 1.5 .845 100 1500
VCF ga7 (ga1+ga2+ga3+ga4+ga5)*0.2 ga6 0.9
NOISE ga8 0.3 .225 100 1500
VCF ga9 (ga1+ga2+ga3+ga4+ga5)*0.2 ga8 0.9
NOISE ga10 0.3 .125 400 2500
VCF ga11 (ga1+ga2+ga3+ga4+ga5)*0.2 ga10 0.9
MIXOUT ga7+ga9+ga11 10000
To summarize, here are the input formats for all the modules we wrote.
OSC OUTPUT FREQUENCY WAVEFORM AM FM OUTMIN OUTMAX
NOISE OUTPUT SPEED SEED OUTMIN OUTMAX
SAH OUTPUT SPEED SEED OUTMIN OUTMAX
VCF OUTPUT INPUT CUTOFF RESONANCE
MIXOUT OUTPUT AMPLITUDE
DURATION DURATION
The available waveforms are SINE, TRIANGLE, SAWTOOTH, SQUARE, and PULSE.

652

Chapter 12

Conclusion
This concludes the ﬁrst part of the project, but there is more on the DVD. For now, consider
what other Csound units might be useful to add to this program. What are some of the limitations of this model? How could you improve on it? Finally, experiment with creating
patches by hand. That will give you a good feel for what is possible with synmod.
After you ﬁnish exploring the musical use of your own additions to the basic synmod system in this chapter, you can learn to add more features and functionality to the synmod
system from the DVD chapters Algorithmic Patch Design for Synmod and Algorithmic
Sound Design.
Notes
1. J. Kelly, C. Lochbaum, and V. Vyssotsky, ‘‘A Block Diagram Compiler,’’ Bell System Technical Journal 40
(1961): 669–676.
2. M. Mathews, ‘‘An Acoustic Compiler for Music and Psychological Stimuli,’’ Bell System Technical Journal 40 (1961): 677–694.
3. The dollar sign ($) is a typical UNIX ‘‘prompt.’’ You may see a different prompt, depending on how
your system is conﬁgured. The prompt appears at the leftmost point in the input line of your terminal
window. It means ‘‘type text here.’’
4. We can do this a bit faster in UNIX by redirecting text into a new ﬁle with the cat command, rather
than ﬁring up a text editor. First type $ cat > mpatch1. Then type
OSC a1 440 SINE NONE NONE -1 1
OSC a2 770 SINE NONE NONE -1 1
Finally, type control-D to close and save the ﬁle. (Control-D means hold down the control key and then
press d.)
5. The working code and patches can be found on the DVD.
6. There is a small chance that when you try to execute synmod above you may receive the following
warning: synmod: Command not found. What this means is that the shell that your terminal is running
could not ﬁnd synmod even though it is in the current directory. The shell is the command interpreter
run by the Terminal application. You may not have control over what shell is initially launched as that
decision might have been made by your sysadmin. There are two solutions if you run into this problem.
The ﬁrst is to type $ tcsh. That will bring up the tcsh that is smart enough to ﬁnd executables in the
current directory. Alternatively, each time you execute synmod, you can type $ ./synmod. Here ./
refers to the current directory and removes any potential ambiguity about the location of the desired ﬁle.
7. This next modiﬁcation and reﬁnement of our code and patches can be found on the DVD.
8. This MIXER modiﬁcation and reﬁnement of our code and patches can be found on the DVD.

653

A Modular Synthesizer Simulation Program

9. A description of this format is available at http://www.csounds.com/manual/html/CommandUniﬁle
.html.
10. This ADDITIVE and FM modiﬁcation and reﬁnement of our code and patches can be found on the
DVD.
11. If you are reading this book, you almost certainly have Csound installed on your computer. But just
in case you don’t, the current version of Csound can be downloaded from http://www.csounds.com/,
where you can ﬁnd the version of Csound most appropriate to your computer and OS.
12. This OSCILLATOR FEEDBACK modiﬁcation and reﬁnement of our code and patches can be found on
the DVD.
13. This DURATION modiﬁcation and reﬁnement of our code and patches can be found on the DVD.
14. This INTERPOLATED NOISE modiﬁcation and reﬁnement of our code and patches can be found on
the DVD.
15. This SAMPLE AND HOLD modiﬁcation and reﬁnement of our code and patches can be found on the
DVD.
16. If you run into any snags, you can ﬁnd this ﬁnal FILTER modiﬁcation and reﬁnement of our code
on the DVD.

13

Using C to Generate Scores

John fﬁtch

This chapter is a case study in algorithmic composition, following the development of a
piece from initial concept to ﬁrst completion—one hesitates to say that the work is complete. The computation will be done in C, generating a Csound score that can be rendered
out of real time. Before continuing it is worth noting that there are more complex systems
available. Csound, in fact, has had a library of manipulation functions collectively called
Cscore since its beginning. Rather than using one of these systems we are going to develop
our own low-level C code as the composition and compositional ideas develop.
13.1

The Musical Concept
In order to be deﬁnite rather than general, we are going to consider a piece from my Drums
and Different Canons (table 13.1). These pieces are explorations of the cyclical nature of certain classes of differential equations—cycles that do not repeat exactly. From that it should
be clear that there are two signiﬁcant components of the process; the ﬁrst is to generate
the raw stream of values from the differential equation and the second is to map these onto
musical events, as exempliﬁed by a Csound score. We are not directly concerned with sound
design in this project, and so we will borrow Csound instruments from others. It would be
possible to use the raw data stream to generate audio directly, but this is not done here.
The piece we are going to develop is number 4 in the sequence, Unbounded Space. We will
not necessarily follow the exact path of the composer, but it will be sufﬁciently close for the
relationship between the programming, the concept and the music to be audible. For this
piece, the Csound instruments are taken from Richard Boulanger’s Trapped in Convert, a ﬁne
set of sounds that Boulanger has continued to explore in works like At Last, Free. . . . The
main data source was decided a priori to be the Henon difference equation, which was used
for the ﬁrst in the series. These decisions leave a great deal to be determined as the work
develops. We have decided to explore the near-cyclical behavior using Boulanger’s sound
design. Questions not yet raised include: pitch system, duration, selection of individual
events and many more details.

656

Chapter 13

Table 13.1
Catalog of Drums and Different Canon works.
Year

Number

Title

Length

1996

1

Henon, Gruneberg, Distance

7:00

2000

2

Stalactite

7:37

2001

3

For Connie (Piano)

4:00

2002
2002–03

4
5

Unbounded Space
Charles a´ Nuit

6:50
5:00

We will start by considering the raw data stream, and then explore various mappings of
this to events.
13.2

The Raw Process
The basis of a whole family of algorithmic compositions is some mathematical (or other)
process that generates an inﬁnite stream of numbers. There are a large number of such processes, but for interesting music one needs the process not to just cycle through the same
values. This is at the heart of the interest in chaotic processes for artistic use. These chaotic
processes divide into two main groups: differential equations and difference equations. They
are in fact very closely related as we can see.
Consider the (non-chaotic) equation
x 00 ¼ x,

(1)

which can be recast as a pair of coupled equations by deﬁning y ¼ x 0 , we have
x0 ¼ y

(2)

and
y 0 ¼ x.

(3)

We need to develop a small C function that, every time it is called, delivers (x, y) pairs of
values. (This is not the correct place to start to teach the intricacies of numerical analysis.
There are a great number of unexpected problems in numerical calculations, and a full treatment requires some sophistication in linear algebra and other areas of mathematics.1) In this
case we will use a simple technique. Recall that the meaning of a derivative dx/dt is the gradient (slope, tangent) of the function x at some time t. If we take a small time dt and draw a
chord to the function from its value at times t and t þ dt then we have an approximation to
the tangent. (See ﬁgure 13.1.)
As dt gets smaller, the chord gets closer to the tangent. The slope of the chord is
x0 Q

x(t þ dt)  x(t)
.
(t þ dt)  t

(4)

657

Using C to Generate Scores

Figure 13.1
Tangents and chords.

Rearranging this equation, we see that
x(t þ dt) ¼ x 0 dt þ x(t).

(5)

Thus, if we choose some small value for dt we can calculate the value of x at the next value of
ndt from a starting value and the derivative. Equations 4 and 5 above deﬁne the derivative in
terms of x, and so we have a complete method:
x(t þ dt) ¼ dt  y(t) þ x(t),

(6)

y(t þ dt) ¼ dt  x(t) þ y(t).

(7)

We can convert this to a sequence, using the notation of a sufﬁx to count the number of
iterations:
xnþ1 ¼ xn þ hyn ,

(8)

ynþ1 ¼ yn  hxn .

(9)

For the piece of music we are considering, the decision is to use the Henon map, or more
strictly a member of the Henon map indexed by two constants, A and B:
xnþ1 ¼ 1 þ yn  Ax2n ,

(10)

ynþ1 ¼ Bxn .

(11)

We can choose different values of A and B to get different streams.
When coding this process in C, the ﬁrst problem is that we require two answers from each
call. We could arrange that the function returned a structure, but that is usually a wrongminded idea in C, in part due to the implementation issues, but in part because there is a

658

Chapter 13

much simpler way. If we call the function with the address where the current values of x and
y are stored, the function replaces them2:
extern double A, B;
void henon(double *x, double *y)
{
double new_x;
double new_y;
double xx = *x;
double yy = *y;
new_x = 1.0 + yy – A * (xx*xx);
new_y = B * xx;
*x = new_x;
*y = new_y;
}
In this function, we have to take a little care that we do not overwrite the old values before
we ﬁnish needing them. The code above is overcautious: the value yy is used only once. The
squaring is done by repeated multiplication rather than by calling the pow function (which
would be considerably slower).3
13.3

Applying the Henon Map
We now have the ability to generate a stream of numbers, but this is not yet music. We have
to consider how to map the numbers onto musical events. Having chosen to ‘‘borrow’’ the
sound design from Boulanger, we have 13 primary instruments and two effects instruments.
An initial idea might be to take the data stream, and take the integer values of the stream
x 0 , x1 , . . . to select the instrument, and the values of the y stream to say how long each sound
will last. A slight problem with that plan is that since we do not know the range of values
that can be in x we may never use more than one instrument. We can easily run the henon
function for a length of time and record the maximum and minimum values.
#include <stdio.h>
double A = 1.3, B = 0.21;
int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
double maxx = 1.0, maxy = 1.0;
double minx = 1.0, miny = 1.0;
int iterations = 1000000;
double x = 1.0, y = 1.0; /* Initial values */
int i;

659

Using C to Generate Scores

for (i=0; i<iterations; i++) {
henon(&x, &y);
if (x>maxx) maxx = x;
if (x<minx) minx = x;
if (y>maxy) maxy = y;
if (y<miny) miny = y;
}
printf("x has range (%f,%f)\ny has range (%f,%f)\n",
minx,maxx,miny,maxy);
}
Running this program with the henon function from above gives (0.860850, 1.193449) as
the range of x and (0.180779, 1.000000) as the range of y. If one increases the number of
iterations to 2 million, the values do not change. Thus, we can be reasonably conﬁdent in
this range; besides, we are not likely to need that many raw values unless we are expecting
the piece to last a very long time.
What this does show is that taking the integer part of x is not sufﬁcient. We could of
course scale x so that it was in the range [1,13]. If we add 0.860850 to x, the range
becomes [0,2.054299], so if we want a range of 0 to 12 we need to multiply by a
number that makes 2.054299 into 12, or 12/2.054299 = 5.841409, and so we get
the formula for a range of [1,13] as X = 1+(x+0.860850)*5.841409. It is a good idea
to check this formula. If x ¼ 0 this gives a value of 1, while if x ¼ 1.193449 it yields
1+(1.193449+0.860850)*5.841409, which is 13, which checks. Coding this formula as
C, and for the moment ignoring the pitch, amplitude, and other parameters:
#include <stdio.h>
double A = 1.3, B = 0.21;
int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
int iterations = 1000;
double x = 1.0, y = 1.0; /* Initial values */
int i;
for (i=0; i<iterations; i++) {
henon(&x, &y);
printf("i%d %d\n", (int)(1.0+(x+0.860850)*5.841409), i);
}
}
We can run this program for 1,000 note events, but in order to get any evaluation of the
utility of this approach it might be useful to count how many of each value is generated.
Here is a program to gather some statistics:

660

Chapter 13

#include <stdio.h>
double A = 1.3, B = 0.21;
int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
int iterations = 1000;
int count[13];
double x = 1.0, y = 1.0; /* Initial values */
int i;
for (i=0; i<13; i++) count[i] = 0;
for (i=0; i<iterations; i++) {
int instr;
henon(&x, &y);
instr = (int)(1.0+(x+0.860850)*5.841409);
count[instr-1]++;
printf("i%d %d\n", instr, i);
}
printf("\nSTATICS:\n");
for (i=0; i<13; i++) printf("%d ",count[i]);
printf("\n");
}
The statistics for 1,000 iterations are
133 6 3 3 126 9 129 144 26 143 132 145 0.
The ﬁrst thing we notice here is that we do not generate an instrument 13 at all. The reason
why is fairly clear; our formula took us to a range of [1,13] but only just reaches 13. With a
little rounding error it is quite possible for the 13 to never actually occur. We can adjust this
by mapping x to the range [1,13.9] and then the integer part will be a better range. It is
easy to see that this can be achieve by changing the 12 in the above calculation to 12.9,
and I get a revised multiplier of 6.279514, and for 1,000 iterations the statistics
133 5 4 3 6 128 5 253 23 148 17 130 144
This may be a usable allocation of instruments, and so we can move to consider the other
parameters of the note events; pitch, onset time and duration—we will continue to delay
consideration of the other parameters of the timbre until later. But we do need to know
how many parameters each instrument needs, and also typical range of values.
13.3.1

Outputting Note Events

The plan is to create a function for each instrument that outputs a single score event with
appropriate parameters. We will call these functions instr_1 through instr_13, and we

661

Using C to Generate Scores

Table 13.2
Parameter ranges for Boulanger’s Trapped in Convert instruments.
Instr

Para Min

Max

Para

Min

Max

Para

Min

Max

Para

Min

Max

1

p3
p9

5
0

24
0.99

p6

200

700

p7

0.0

5.2

p8

3

18

2

p3
p9

4
3

9
21

p6
p10

500
0

6000
0.38

p7

0

1

p8

17

60

3

p3

5

8

p6

600

900

p7

0.5

0.8

p8

45

70

4

p3
p9

0.7
5

3.1
50

p6
p10

850
0.2

5001
0.9

p7

5699

10000

p8

18

7000

5

p3
p9

0.9
2

2.4
11

p6
p10

2000
3

4500
11

p7
p11

0.1
12

0.4
20

p8
p12

0.1
27

1
37

6

p3
p7

4.3
10

8.5
100

p4
p8

0.81
0.4

17
0.6

p5
p9

3000
0.9

6000
1.6

p6

17

9000

7

p3
p8

1.9
0.3

6.4
1

p4
p9

8000
2

9999
3

p6
p10

0.01
2

0.2
3

p7
p11

0.7
0.1

1
0.23

8

p3
p7

3.1
10

26.9
1000

p4
p8

0.79
2

4
33

p5
p9

20
1.3

10000
22

p6
p10

100
0.1

11000
1

9

p3
p8

2.85
3.8

9.1
39

p4

0.1

0.9

p6

600

3100

p7

0.1

0.9

10

p3
p9

1.6
27

34
300

p6

300

6000

p7

0.1

0.8

p8

1.4

68

11

p3

4

8

p4

0.2

0.5

p6

1200

3300

p7

0.1

0.5

12

p3
p8

0.6
4

3
30

p4
p9

0.3
0.1

11
0.3

p6

1000

3000

p7

200

7000

13

p3
p8

4
5

4.5
7

p4

0.4

0.4

p6

1500

2000

p7

30

40

will call them with the time, duration, and pitch of the note (where that is appropriate), and
use ﬁxed timbral parameters until we have the basic design under control. In order to determine ‘‘typical’’ values for the other p ﬁelds, it is necessary to inspect the score of Trapped in
Convert to see what values are used there. This is a little tedious. I did the calculations by ﬁrst
sorting the score as text, and then deleting the comment and blank lines.4 The relevant
values are given in table 13.2, where the pitch values have been omitted. From this table
we can construct the ﬁrst version of our output functions (assuming that the start time, the
duration, and the pitch are provided as parameters), by using typical values for the other
parameters. Later we will consider more sophisticated modiﬁcation of these. Here is the code:
int instr_1(double tt, double dur, double pitch)
{
/* i1: p6=amp,p7=vibrat,p8=glisdeltime (default < 1),
p9=frqdrop */

662

Chapter 13

double amp, vibrat, glis, frqdrop;
amp= 500.0;
vibrat= 0.001;
glis = 10.0;
frqdrop = 0.99;
printf("i1 %f %f 0 %f %f %.3f %f %.2f\n",
tt, dur, pitch, amp, vibrat, glis, frqdrop);
}
int instr_2(double tt, double dur, double pitch)
{
/* i2: p6=amp,p7=rvbsnd,p8=lfofrq,p9=num of harmonics,
p10=sweeprate */
double amp, rvbsnd, lfofrq, numh, sweeprate;
amp= 2000;
rvbsnd = 0.5;
lfofrq = 11;
numh = 10;
sweeprate =0.5;
printf("i2 %f %f 0 %f %f %f %f %f %f\n",
tt, dur, pitch, amp, rvbsnd, lfofrq,
numh, sweeprate);
}
int instr_3(double tt, double dur, double pitch)
{
/* i3: p6=amp,p7=rvbsnd,p8=rndfrq */
double amp, rvbsnd, rndfrq;
amp= 700.0;
rvbsnd = 0.8;
rndfrq = 57.0;
printf("i3 %f %f 0 %f %f %f %f\n",
tt, 10*dur, pitch, amp, rvbsnd, rndfrq);
}
int instr_4(double tt, double dur, double pitch)
{
/* i4: p6=amp,p7=fltrswp:strtval,p8=fltrswp:endval,
p9=bdwth,p10=rvbsnd */
double amp, strtval, endval, bdwth, rvbsnd;
amp = 3000.0;
strtval = 7000;
endval = 40;
rvbsnd = 0.5;

663

Using C to Generate Scores

printf("i4 %f %f 0 %f %f %f %f %f %f\n",
tt, dur, pitch, amp, strtval, endval,
bdwth, rvbsnd);
}
int instr_5(double tt, double dur, double pitch)
{
/* i5: p6=amp,p7=rvbatn,p8=pan:1.0,p9=carfrq,p10=modfrq,
p11=modndx,p12=rndfrq */
double amp, rvbatn, pan, carfrq, modfrq, modndx, rndfrq;
amp =
rvbatn = -0.3;
pan =
carfrq = 5;
modfrq = 7;
modndx = 17;
rndfrq = 25;
printf("i5 %f %f 0 %f %f %f %f %f %f %f %f\n",
tt, dur, pitch, amp, rvbatn, pan, carfrq,
modfrq, modndx, rndfrq);
}
int instr_6(double tt, double dur, double pitch)
{
/* i6: p5=swpfrq:strt,p6=swpfrq:end,p7=bndwth,p8=rvbsnd,p9=amp */
double strt, end, bndwth, rvbsnd, amp2;
strt = 3000;
end = 17;
bndwth = 10;
rvbsnd = 0.6;
amp2 = 1.6;
printf("i6 %f %f 17 %f %f %f %f %f\n",
tt, dur, strt, end, bndwth, rvbsnd, amp2);
}
int instr_7(double tt, double dur, double pitch)
{
/* i7: p4=amp,p5=frq,p6=strtphse,p7=endphse,p8=ctrlamp(.1-1),
p9=ctrlfnc, p10=mainfnc, p11=revb */
double amp, frq, trtphse, endphse, ctrlamp, ctrlfnc,
mainfnc, revb;
amp = 9000.0;
trtphse = 0.2;
endphse = 0.7;

664

Chapter 13

ctrlamp = 0.5;
ctrlfnc = 2;
mainfnc = 3; /* Should choose 2, 3 or 14 */
revb = 0.12;
printf("i7 %f %f %f %f %f %f %f %f %f %f\n",
tt, dur, amp, pitch, trtphse, endphse, ctrlamp,
ctrlfnc, mainfnc, revb);
}
int instr_8(double tt, double dur, double pitch)
{
/* i8: p4=amp,p5=swpstrt,p6=swpend,p7=bndwt,p8=rnd1:cps,
p9=rnd2:cps,p10=rvbsnd */
double amp, swpstrt, swpend, bndwt, cps1, cps2, rvbsnd;
amp = 1.95;
swpstrt = 2000;
swpend = 5000;
bndwt = 300;
cps1 = 8;
cps2 = 5.6;
rvbsnd = 0.4;
printf("i8 %f %f %f %f %f %f %f %f %f\n",
tt, dur, amp, swpstrt, swpend, bndwt,
cps1, cps2, rvbsnd);
}
int instr_9(double tt, double dur, double pitch)
{
/* i9: p4=delsnd,p5=frq,p6=amp,p7=rvbsnd,p8=rndamp,p9=rndfrq */
double delsnd, amp, rvbsnd, rndamp, rndfrq;
delsnd = 0.4;
amp = 1200;
rvbsnd = 0.2;
rndamp = 25;
rndfrq = 100;
printf("i9 %f %f %f %f %f %f %f %f\n",
tt, dur, delsnd, pitch, amp, rvbsnd,
rndamp, rndfrq);
}
int instr_10(double tt, double dur, double pitch)
{
/* i10: p4=0,p5=frq,p6=amp,p7=rvbsnd,p8=rndamp,p9=rndfrq */
double amp, rvbsnd, rndamp, rndfrq;

665

Using C to Generate Scores

amp = 2000;
rvbsnd = 0.3;
rndamp = 6.9;
rndfrq = 160;
printf("i10 %f %f 0 %f %f %f %f %f\n",
tt, dur, pitch, amp, rvbsnd, rndamp, rndfrq);
}
int instr_11(double tt, double dur, double pitch)
{
/* i11: p4=delsnd,p5=frq,p6=amp,p7=rvbsnd */
double delsnd, amp, vbsnd;
delsnd = 0.3;
amp = 2330;
vbsnd = 0.2;
printf("i11 %f %f %f %f %f %f\n",
tt, dur, delsnd, pitch, amp, vbsnd);
}
int instr_12(double tt, double dur, double pitch)
{
/* i12: p6=amp,p7=swpstrt,p8=swppeak,p9=bndwth,p10=rvbsnd */
double amp, swpstrt, swppeak, bndwth, rvbsnd;
amp = 2000.0;
swpstrt = 1500;
swppeak = 6000;
bndwth = 4.0;
rvbsnd = 0.2;
printf("i12 %f %f 0 %f %f %f %f %f %f\n",
tt, dur, pitch, amp, swpstrt, swppeak, bndwth,
rvbsnd);
}
int instr_13(double tt, double dur, double pitch)
{
/* i13: p6=amp,p7=vibrat,p8=dropfrq */
double amp, vibrat, dropfrq;
amp = 2000;
vibrat = 40;
dropfrq = 7;
printf("i13 %f %f 0 %f %f %f %f\n",
tt, dur, pitch, amp, vibrat, dropfrq);
}

666

Chapter 13

As a ﬁrst attempt we can construct a main program that uses these functions to write a score.
There are still a number of arbitrary decisions, like each note lasting 1 second, and the mapping of y into a pitch using the following formula:
1000.0 (y + 0.180779) + 150.
The code for the main program is
int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
int iterations = 1000;
double x = 1.0, y = 1.0; /* Initial values */
double tt = 0.0, pitch;
int i;
printf("; amp envelopes\n");
printf("f1 0 8192 10 1\n");
printf("f2 0 8192 10 10 8 0 6 0 4 0 1\n");
printf("f3 0 8192 10 10 0 5 5 0 4 3 0 1\n");
printf("f4 0 2048 10 10 0 9 0 0 8 0 7 0 4 0 2 0 1\n");
printf("f5 0 2048 10 5 3 2 1 0\n");
printf("f6 0 2048 10 8 10 7 4 3 1\n");
printf("f7 0 2048 10 7 9 11 4 2 0 1 1\n");
printf("f8 0 2048 10 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 1 1\n");
printf("f9 0 2048 10 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1\n");
printf("f10 0 2048 10 10 0 9 0 8 0 7 0 6 0 5\n");
printf("f11 0 2048 10 10 10 9 0 0 0 3 2 0 0 1\n");
printf("f12 0 2048 10 10 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 3\n");
printf("f13 0 2048 10 10 0 0 0 0 3 1\n");
printf("f14 0 8192 9 1 3 0 3 1 0 9 .333 180\n");
printf("f15 0 8192 9 1 1 90 \n");
printf("f16 0 2048 9 1 3 0 3 1 0 6 1 0\n");
printf("f17 0 9 5 .1 8 1\n");
printf("f18 0 17 5 .1 10 1 6 .4\n");
printf("f19 0 16 2 1 7 10 7 6 5 4 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1\n");
printf("f20 0 16 -2 0 30 40 45 50 40 30 20 10 5 4 3 2 "
"1 0 0 0\n");
printf("f21 0 16 -2 0 20 15 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0\n");
printf("f22 0 9 -2 .001 .004 .007 .003 .002 .005 .009"
".006\n");
for (i=0; i<iterations; i++) {
int instr;
henon(&x, &y);
instr = (int)(1.0+(x+0.860850)*6.279514);

667

Using C to Generate Scores

pitch = (y+0.180779)*1000.0 + 150;
switch (instr) {
case 1:
instr_1(tt, 1.0, pitch); tt += 1.0; break;
case 2:
instr_2(tt, 1.0, pitch); tt += 1.0; break;
case 3:
instr_3(tt, 1.0, pitch); tt += 1.0; break;
case 4:
instr_4(tt, 1.0, pitch); tt += 1.0; break;
case 5:
instr_5(tt, 1.0, pitch); tt += 1.0; break;
case 6:
instr_6(tt, 1.0, pitch); tt += 1.0; break;
case 7:
instr_7(tt, 1.0, pitch); tt += 1.0; break;
case 8:
instr_8(tt, 1.0, pitch); tt += 1.0; break;
case 9:
instr_9(tt, 1.0, pitch); tt += 1.0; break;
case 10:
instr_10(tt, 1.0, pitch); tt += 1.0; break;
case 11:
instr_11(tt, 1.0, pitch); tt += 1.0; break;
case 12:
instr_12(tt, 1.0, pitch); tt += 1.0; break;
case 13:
instr_13(tt, 1.0, pitch); tt += 1.0; break;
}
}
printf("\ne\n");
}
If you run this program and synthesize the score with the Boulanger orchestra (henonTrapped
.orc), you get an algorithmic composition that has some merit, but it gets somewhat stuck
into a seven-beat cycle with insufﬁcient variations. Of course one could attack this problem
by shortening the number of interactions, and modifying the mapping of the pitch. It is also
possible to consider the other parameters, possibly using other parts of the two input variables x and y. In particular, the current program does not use most of the value of x, and
the lower digits of y have very little effect. You might want to experiment with these mappings. However, to my ears, while the equation gives some structure, the overall effect is
not as interesting as I would like. What seems to be missing is the intrinsic structure of the

668

Chapter 13

original piece, and it would be better if we could draw some inspiration from that creative
incitement.
13.3.2

Alternative Mapping of Henon Map

In the Boulanger piece Trapped in Convert the individual instruments play in a certain order.
If we study it, we will see that, ignoring the two effects instruments, there are not many note
events and the sequence is as follows:
int squence[] = { 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 4, 2, 2, 2,
4, 3, 1, 1, 1, 1, 5, 5, 6, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9,
3, 6, 7, 7, 7, 3, 7, 8, 8, 8, 7, 7, 9, 9, 9,
9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 4, 4, 9,
9, 9, 9, 11, 13, 9, 9, 2, 11, 2, 8, 11, 9,
9, 9, 9, 11, 11, 13, 13, 9, 9, 9, 2, 8, 2,
11, 8, 2, 2, 11, 11, 11, 11, 4, 4, 4, 5, 5,
5, 5, 4, 4, 4, 4, 5, 5, 4, 4, 4, 4, 12, 12,
12, 4, 4, 4, 12, 10, 10, 12, 10, 4, 4, 4, 4,
4, 4, 4, 4, 12, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10,
10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8,
8, 8, 4, 10, 10, 10, 10, 2, 2, 4, 4, 10, 10,
10, 10, 10, 10, 10 };
We could use this order in our piece too, but it would be too much of a constraint to have
exactly this number of note events, as this result in little more than an arrangement of the
Boulanger. Rather, what we shall do is to decide on a total length (I decided on 323 seconds
for no clear reason) and just stretch the sequence out. There are 167 note events. To choose
the instrument at time tt we can use a short sequence such as the following:
int selectinstr(double tt)
{
int which;
double ch = 168.0*tt/323.0;
which = (int)(ch+0.5);
if (which>167) return 1; /* Force last event */
if (which== 0) return 0; /* and start event */
return squence[which];
}
We still need to decide on the start time and duration of each event, and the pitch, the
amplitude, and other parameters. At present the Henon map is not enough to control so
many parameters, so we need another sequence of numbers. Based on my experience from
the ﬁrst piece in the set, I decided to use the Standard Map on a torus in addition to Henon
to get a sequence of four numbers.

669

13.4

Using C to Generate Scores

Standard Map on a Torus
Following Bidlack’s description,5 we can derive the standard map from a model of a pendulum that is perturbed with a periodic function. There are two variables; however, they are
both angles measured in radians, in the range [0, 2p], and 2p is the same as 0. This wrapping
round is topologically equivalent to a torus:
Inþ1 ¼ In þ K sin Yn ,

(12)

Ynþ1 ¼ Yn þ Inþ1 ,

(13)

where K is a constant. For our purposes we will take K as 1.2. These equations have chaotic
behavior for K larger than 1 and tend to regular behavior for K smaller, and we would like a
mildly chaotic sequence so some coherence remains, at least locally.
In the same way as we coded the Henon map, we need code for this map:
#include <math.h>
double K = 1.2;
void torus(double *Iota, double *Theta)
{
double new_iota;
double new_theta;
double theta = *Theta;
new_iota = *Iota + K*sin(theta);
new_theta = theta + new_iota;
/* Normalize */
while (new_iota < 0.0) new_iota += TWO_PI;
while (new_iota >= TWO_PI) new_iota -= TWO_PI;
while (new_theta < 0.0) new_theta += TWO_PI;
while (new_theta >= TWO_PI) new_theta -= TWO_PI;
*Iota = new_iota;
*Theta = new_theta;
}
The comments made earlier on the Henon map apply here as well. The new feature is to
arrange that the wrap around the torus is effected. Of course we need a value for TWO_PI to
complete this. One might use a #define to give it the value 6.2831853071795864769, or
one might initialize a variable to be 8 tan1 (1); the latter has the slight merit of giving the
answer to machine accuracy—remember that tan p/4 ¼ 1.6
Unlike before, in order to use this map we do not need to check the range as that is
implicit in the toroidal topology, so we can return to the main compositional effort. We do
require a set of starting values for I and Y, however. An idea of the values from this map can
be given by ﬁgure 13.2.

670

Chapter 13

Figure 13.2
The standard torus map.

13.4.1

Generating Notes from Henon and Torus

With the two maps for every cycle, we have four values to use for algorithmic purposes:
x and y from the Henon map and I and Y from the torus. We will write a function that takes
these values and generates a score event. To make this function shorter we use an array of
functions, each one to output an event for each instrument:
double tt = 0.0;
/* Total time */
int pitch;
/* Last main pitch */
typedef void (*INSTR)(double,double,double,double,double);
INSTR instruments[] = {instr_0, instr_1, instr_2, instr_3,
instr_4, instr_5, instr_6, instr_7,
instr_8, instr_9, instr_10, instr_11,
instr_12, instr_13};
void event_output(double iota, double theta, double x, double y)
{
double dur;
int ins;
double iotaa;

671

Using C to Generate Scores

iotaa = fabs(iota);
pitch = 1+(int)(iotaa*400.0/TWO_PI);
tt += fabs(3.0*theta);
/* Make duration dependent on pitch */
dur = fabs(theta) *60.0/(double)pitch;
if (dur>1) dur = 3.0*sqrt(dur);
ins = selectinstr(tt, dur);
(instruments[ins])(tt, dur, pitch, x, y);
}
This function contains some results from experiment; scaling Y by 3 so the events are
spaced, and the durations are also scaled so lower pitch sounds last longer. This seems to
improve the effects and allows lower notes to develop their character. This was identiﬁed
by experiment, but there are good psycho-acoustic reasons for it as well. You might care
to experiment with different values to see if the effect can be improved. Or even more
advanced, there is no a priori reason to believe that there should be a linear (simple multiplicative) relationship, so you might consider other expressions.
We can now use these ideas to get a new version of our piece. If you try this there are
moments of music but the overall effect is weak. This can be improved greatly by looking at
each individual instrument, using the two additional arguments to control parameters, and
also adjusting the duration and pitch parameters for each instrument to get a better individual sound. For example:
void instr_1(double tt, double dur, double pitch,
double xx, double yy)
{
/* p6=amp,p7=vibrat,p8=glisdeltime(default < 1),p9=frqdrop */
double amp, vibrat, glis, frqdrop;
amp = fabs(xx*1000);
vibrat = 0.001;
glis = fabs(0.9*yy)/6.0;
frqdrop = 0.99;
/* Should be a table */
pitch = 440.0*pow(2.0,((int)pitch-40.0)/12.0);
printf("i1 %f %f 0 %f %f %.3f %f %.2f\n",
tt, 3.0*dur, pitch, amp, vibrat, glis, frqdrop);
}
void instr_2(double tt, double dur, double pitch,
double xx, double yy)
{
/* p6=amp,p7=rvbsnd,p8=lfofrq,p9=#harmonics,p10=sweeprate */
double amp, rvbsnd, lfofrq, numh, sweeprate;
amp = fabs(xx*1800);

672

Chapter 13

rvbsnd = 0.5;
lfofrq = 20*fabs(yy);
while (lfofrq>50)
lfofrq -= 15;
numh = 10;
sweeprate = 0.5;
while (dur>20.0)
dur -= 10.0;
pitch = 440.0*pow(2.0,((int)pitch-34.0)/12.0);
printf("i2 %f %f 0 %f %f %f %f %f %f\n",
tt, 81.0*dur, pitch, amp, rvbsnd, lfofrq,
numh, sweeprate);
}
We are now a long way toward a piece, and we are now in the process of experimental modiﬁcations of the detailed mapping from the two chaotic processes to note events, and in particular the parameters to each instrument.
13.4.2

Developing the Piece

The main computational stages of the composition are now complete. It is necessary to add
some effects, using the original instruments 98 and 99 throughout. To give the whole work
context, that the sounds are all from Trapped in Convert, I decided to make a couple of quotations from the original. After a few experiments it seemed right to start the same way as
Trapped, making my ﬁrst four notes the last four notes of the ﬁrst section, which seem to
have a ‘‘lead in’’ effect. To include them is just a collection of printf statements near the
beginning of the main program, after the f-tables.
printf(";; Quotation from \"Trapped in Convert\" by"
"Richard Boulanger\n\n");
printf("i98 2.9 15.1\n");
printf("i99 2.9 15.1 3\n");
printf("i9 2.9 2.9 0.4 31.407 600 0.2 6.2 320\n");
printf("i9 2.93 2.85 0.43 31.770 640 0.23 6.1 300\n");
printf("i9 7.1 7.9 0.2 33.467 700 0.4 4.5 289\n");
printf("i9 7.14 7.78 0.17 34.050 700 0.43 4.4 280\n");
printf("s\n");
The second quotation I wanted was the bit that starts 43 seconds into the second section,
but after trying it directly after the ﬁrst quotation, it seemed better to insert it after 196 seconds into the algorithmic component. At ﬁrst thought this seems difﬁcult, but it is possible
to use the ‘‘b’’ score operation in Csound to reset the clock, so the second quotation can be
coded:

673

Using C to Generate Scores

printf(";; Second quotation from Trapped\n");
printf("b 196\n");
printf("i9 0 5 0.4 1108.668 1200 0.2 28 39\n");
printf("i9 0 5 0.3 1040.410 1200 0.4 29 37\n");
printf("i3 0.5 6.5 0 6163.728 600 0.6 47\n");
printf("i99 4.5 2 7\n");
printf("i6 4.5 4.3 17 6000 9000 100 0.4 0.9\n");
printf("i99 6.5 9.9 0.7\n");
printf("i7 6.5 3.2 9999 37.349 0.2 0.7 0.6 2 3 0.12\n");
printf("i7 8 1.9 9800 40.965 0.01 0.9 1 3 2 0.23\n");
printf("i7 9 3.8 9900 1052.541 0.99 0.1 0.3 3 2 0.12\n");
printf("i3 9.1 5.5 0 1154.427 900 0.5 67\n");
printf("i7 9.2 2.5 9890 44.158 0.1 1.0 0.7 2 3 0.23\n");
printf("i8 11 4.6 4 20 8000 590 2 9.9 0.6\n");
printf("i8 15.5 3.1 3 50 4000 129 8 2.6 0.3\n");
printf("i8 16.2 4.3 2 10000 9000 200 12 17.9 1\n");
printf("i99 16.4 10.3 0.3\n");
printf("i7 16.4 3.5 8000 36.496 0.2 0.7 0.5 2 3 0.1\n");
printf("i7 19.3 6.4 8000 41.439 0.01 0.9 1 3 2 0.1\n");
printf("i9 20.2 4 0.4 590.702 1000 0.2 4 100\n");
printf("i9 21 4.2 0.4 926.926 1100 0.4 4 167\n");
printf("i9 21.1 8 0.4 670.752 1000 0.6 4 210\n");
printf("i9 21.25 5 0.4 748.553 1200 0.9 5 200\n");
printf("i99 26.7 5.3 11\n");
printf("i9 26.7 1.9 0.5 31.588 3100 0.1 5.9 300\n");
printf("i9 29.1 2.1 0.1 35.252 2900 0.2 4.2 390\n");
printf("i99 32 6.2 0.28\n");
printf("i9 32 9.1 0.34 43.904 2300 0.5 3.8 420\n");
printf("i9 32.1 9.0 0.4 44.083 2500 0.4 4 430\n");
printf("b 0\n");
It was necessary to make a few small modiﬁcations to the original orchestra, mainly to
ensure that the effects did not generate glitches, and to separate the two effects systems
(mine and the original). This was achieved by adding 100 to the modiﬁed instrument numbers, and by making a few inconsequential changes. The ﬁnal version of the program features a few small hand tweaks and includes some statistics-gathering code (which enabled
me to check that the various instruments and pitches were being used as I intended).
Conclusion
In this chapter I have shown programs of the kind that I write to support my algorithmic
composition methodology. It is not my intent to suggest that this is the ‘‘correct’’ or best
way to write algorithmic music, and naturally your own compositional style may require

674

Chapter 13

very different processes. But I do want to suggest that small programs are not difﬁcult, and
that despite all the teaching of Software Engineering there are times when a small program
can be very easily created. For example, checking the range of the values from the raw process generators takes only a few lines of C, and there is no need to fear this. In the algorithmic style I am developing, I frequently write these small programs, and usually throw them
away afterward as I know I can re-create them with ease if I have to. The lesson I want you to
take from this chapter is that programming is not a hard mysterious activity, but can be
made part of our musical activity. Of course the hard part will always remain deciding what
to compute, not how.
Notes
1. For further study, I recommend these texts: S. Forman, Numerical Algorithms That (Usually) Work
(Mathematical Association of America, 1990); W. Cody and W. Waite, Software Manual for the Elementary
Functions (Prentice-Hall, 1980).
2. For a longer explanation of chaotic processes, see R. Bidlack, ‘‘Chaotic Systems as Simple (but Complex) Compositional Algorithms,’’ Computer Music Journal 16 (1992), no. 3: 33–47.
3. The function pow is capable of calculating not only integer powers but also fractional powers. It is
likely that it uses a more complicated variant of the formula xy ¼ exp(y log x). If the second argument
is a positive integer it is clear that a simple loop will be more efﬁcient:
double intpow(double x, int n)
{
int i;
double ans = 1.0;
for (i=0; i<n; i++)
ans = x * ans;
return ans;
}
There is an even faster way, based on the binary decomposition of the positive integer n. The idea is
to use the identities x2m ¼ (xx)m and x2mþ1 ¼ x(x)2m . This suggests that we can test the bottom bit of
the binary representation of n (to see if it is even or odd), and if it is 1 we multiply the answer by x.
In any case we then square x and shift n down one bit (which is equivalent to a division by two ignoring
any fractional part). This gives the simple function
double intpow(double x, int n) /* Binary power function */
{
double ans = 1.0;
while (n!=0) {
if (n&1) ans = ans * x;
n >>= 1;
x = x*x;
}

675

Using C to Generate Scores

return ans;
}
If you can follow that, you must have a good grasp of the concept of binary numbers.
4. I did this with emacs, but it could have been done with standard UNIX tools, including sort, uniq,
sed, and similar command-line tools. A possibility that I did not consider seriously was to write a C program, using the function qsort, and calculating the ranges using this program. I decided on the ranges
by eye, but some would describe me as lazy for this.
5. See note 2.
6. As a mathematician I am used to thinking of angles in radians. If you are more familiar with degrees,
then 360 is 2p radians and 45 is p/4 radians.

14

Modeling Orchestral Composition

Steven Yi

14.1

Introduction
The musical sounds and effects of orchestral composition are a result of both the ensemble’s
physical characteristics and the way music is written for it. By studying orchestral composition, computer music composers and programmers can expand the models of musical representation underlying their music-making software to incorporate the many techniques and
ways of thinking about music that are inherent to orchestral composition. This article will
make observations about the orchestra as a performance ensemble and discuss some of
the techniques composers have used in writing for it. It will then derive a model for music
making from these observations. Finally, the article will present a Cþþ class library implementing this model, along with a program demonstrating how the library can be used.1

14.2

Observations on Orchestral Composition
Orchestral composition involves the concrete qualities of the orchestra as a performance
ensemble, as well as the abstract musical ideas and techniques that a composer may work
with—ideas and techniques that are ultimately performed by the ensemble to achieve the
end musical result.
14.2.1

The Orchestra as Performance Ensemble

Generally, when one speaks about the orchestra, one is referring to a particular ensemble of
performers and the instruments they play (woodwinds, brass, strings, percussion, etc.).
Aspects that may vary from one orchestra to another can include the locations of the performers onstage (such as basses on the left or on the right), the number of instruments
per section (such as eight violins versus ten violins in the Violin I section), the technical
capability of each performer, as well as the types and quality of their instruments. Some
aspects of the orchestra might be determined by the conductor, while others are decided by
the composer, and still other parameters are inﬂuenced by non-musical limitations (such as
budgetary constraints, physical size of a stage, etc.).

678

Chapter 14

Ultimately, these variable aspects are properties of an orchestra that are conﬁgured by one
person or another. If the person conﬁguring the ensemble is the composer, then little can
be done by the conductor or individual performers unless they want to compromise the
composer’s requirements for the piece. If the composer does not exactly specify some properties of the ensemble that is to perform the work, the conductor or performer may make decisions that ultimately affect the orchestral conﬁguration (such as the number of performers to
use in a section or the location of the groups of performers on stage).
Orchestral properties that are typically conﬁgured include the following:
n

n

n

Instruments
Type of instrument required
Number of each instrument to use
Quality of each instrument used
Performers
Technical proﬁciency of performer
Accuracy of timing
Accuracy of pitch
Spatial location of performer
Performer Groups
Number of performers per group
Types of performers per group

In general, the properties that most directly affect the end musical result are the individual
performers’ capabilities and the quality of their instruments. In a professional orchestra, the
difference in technical skill between the ﬁrst and last chair within an instrument section may
be very little, while the differences in an amateur group might be considerably more pronounced. It is worth noting that the same music, played on the same instrument, but played
by different performers may sound noticeably different due to individual ﬂuctuations in
pitch and timing. Instruments may also vary widely in their properties: if a performer plays
the same music on different instruments, the end result will change depending on each
instrument’s unique timbral qualities. The combination of the number and quality of performers that make up an orchestral ensemble, as well as the quality of instruments they use,
all together contribute to the end musical result.
14.2.2

Composing for the Orchestra

The properties of the orchestra as an ensemble provide the composer with possibilities for
sound production, a palette of sound which the composer can draw on in creating a piece
of music. Using that palette of sound, a composer notates a score that instructs performers
on what to perform and when to do so, thereby creating a musical product that results both
from the composer’s instructions and the performers’ realization of them. The notation of
scores can range from precise descriptions of the sounds to be generated to an abstract idea

679

Modeling Orchestral Composition

or image that the performer can interpret freely; the identity of a musical part may stand
alone as a distinct entity or it may exist as part of a much larger musical gesture or idea.
The relationship between the compositional idea, the performance instructions used to
attain this idea, and the mapping of performance instructions to performers are all factors
that will be considered in modeling the orchestral composition programming library.
14.2.3

Performance Instructions

Traditionally, composers have used musical notation, including staffs, clefs, notes, and other
symbols, as a tool to record instructions for creating the musical piece they have in mind.
Common practice musical notation is written relative to a single tempo; pitch, duration, and
other musical qualities are ﬁxed. The meanings of these symbols have been established over
time and constitute a lexicon of commonly used symbols.
Many composers in the twentieth century sought to describe musical ideas and performance techniques that could not be expressed using common practice notation. To convey
their ideas to performers, these composers developed new kinds of notational symbols and
directions. Some of these dictated the performer’s physical actions, leading to extended
performance techniques when musicians were instructed to play their instruments in nonstandard ways. Others allowed musicians to ﬂuidly interpret musical parameters that had
conventionally been ﬁxed in common practice notation, such as duration, pitch, and amplitude. To ensure understanding of their ideas, composers have typically deﬁned the meanings
of unfamiliar symbols at the beginning of the score in which these symbols appear. Some
pieces forgo symbols altogether and provide only a written text as instructions for the performer. The use of symbols and instructions not commonly deﬁned and requiring deﬁnition
in the piece before use will be called here uncommon practice musical notation.
Whether common practice or uncommon practice notation is used, in order for a piece to
be performed, the meaning of the instructions must be deﬁned so that the notation of musical ideas can be understood by the performer. The instructions may precisely specify the
parameters of the sounds the performer is to create, or it may simply give the performer a
generalized set of boundaries in which to generate sound.
14.2.4

Mapping Performance Instructions to Performers

In an orchestra, the end musical result is a product of each member’s contributions. The
musical idea as notated by the composer and realized by the performer may differ; these differences are a result of performance instruction mapping. The mapping of performance
instructions to performers may occur in four different ways (table 14.1).
On a practical level, the many-to-many relationship will not often need to be considered
separately as it will naturally grow out of working with the other three relationships and
merging together instances of them.

680

Chapter 14

Table 14.1
Four ways of ‘‘mapping’’ instructions to performers.
Relationship

Description

One-to-one

One musical instruction is given to one performer to perform. The musical idea
notated is exactly what is intended for the one performer to perform.

One-to-many

One musical idea is given to many performers to perform. A common case of this
is notating music for an instrument section like ‘‘Violin I’’ to perform. While the
composer may notate performance instructions once and designate it for the
group to perform, from the performer’s perspective, they each receive a copy of
the musical instruction to perform and thus there are multiple copies of the
musical instruction. This is a case where the composer intent to direct a group of
performers with a single set of instructions maps out to be performed by many
performers with multiple copies of the original instructions.

Many-to-one

Multiple musical instructions are given to one performer to perform. This kind of
mapping may be commonly seen in music written for the piano where multiple
musical lines may be given to a single performer to perform.

Many-to-many

Multiple musical instructions are given to multiple performers. This is a general
description of the overall notated musical score given to groups of performers to
perform.

14.2.5

Mapping Compositional Ideas to Performance Instructions

Just as performance instructions can be mapped to single or multiple performers, a single
compositional idea may also be mapped to single or multiple sets of performance instructions. A one-to-one relationship between compositional ideas and performance instructions
is commonly found in most Western music, popular or otherwise, and each set of performance instructions is a reﬂection of a single musical idea. A one-to-many relationship
is more often found in orchestral composition from the mid-twentieth century onward. An
example of a one-to-many compositional idea can be found in Iannis Xenakis’s Metastasis
where a singular mass of glissandi sounds is made up of a large number of unique parts.
Taken on its own, each set of musical instructions that makes up a one-to-many musical
idea may not be enough to understand the overall group sound effect. Only when the parts
are performed together does the singular large-scale musical idea come into focus. Also, while
the composer may be working with a singular musical idea in the conception of the piece,
the composer may need to notate many different performance instructions to achieve that
goal. The dissonance between what can be notated and what is desired as the singular group
outcome necessarily arises within the context of common practice notation. We will see,
however, that this dissonance can be resolved when working with computers, where the
composer is free to work with the overall compositional idea, rather than constantly shifting
his attention between the desired group effect and the notation of individual parts to create
that outcome.

681

14.3

Modeling Orchestral Composition

Designing the Orchestral Composition Library
In the previous section we observed that orchestral composition is a combination of many
things:
n
n
n
n
n

the instruments that are being played and generating sound
the performers playing those instruments
the physical layout of the performers and their organization into performer groups
the performance instructions given to performers and performer groups
the composer’s musical ideas, notated as performance instructions.

All these factors are important for the composer of an orchestral work. As a result, each
requires representation within the orchestral composition library in order for the library to
adequately create an experience similar to that of composing for an orchestra. Each of the
above factors is represented in the composition library using the following object-oriented
programming constructs: classes with their properties, conﬁguration of those classes, and
methods called on those classes. By using these aspects of object-oriented programming, we
can create a model that reﬂects our observations about orchestral composition. The following subsections will address each of the aforementioned aspects of orchestral composition.
14.3.1

Using Csound for Instruments and Notes

We need either software or hardware musical instruments to create sound. We also need a
way to perform those instruments, passing in different parameters to affect musical qualities
such as the instrument’s pitch and volume. At this point we have a number of options on
how to proceed. While it is possible for us to develop a software library for musical instruments and create a music software engine to drive those instruments with control information, this would take a great deal of time to develop. Since the focus of this library is on
higher levels of compositional abstraction, the choice was made to target an existing music
software synthesis system. By reusing an existing music software system, we can leverage the
solutions already available and focus more closely on our compositional interests.
Although MIDI-based instruments and software are ubiquitous and popular, this option
was passed over for a number of reasons. First, since MIDI is a binary protocol, this makes
software development for it more complicated than text-based protocols. Working with
MIDI requires either knowing the speciﬁcation rather well in order to compose for it directly
or using a MIDI programming library that adds higher level abstractions on top of the protocol to ease development. While neither is complicated to do, there are simpler alternatives.
Beyond the fact that the protocol is binary, the MIDI speciﬁcation has limitations in its
capability for musical expression that would not be able to meet the needs of the orchestral
composition library. Most values in MIDI are deﬁned as a seven-bit range of 0–127 integers,
too coarse to express subtle gradations in the differences in pitch and amplitude between

682

Chapter 14

instruments and performers that our compositional model needs. While the MIDI speciﬁcation may very well represent a large range of musical needs and the availability of high quality instruments that can communicate via MIDI is attractive, the expressive needs of the
orchestral composition library are beyond what MIDI is capable of performing.
Passing over MIDI as a target system for our model of instruments, several established software solutions are available. Of these, the computer music software Csound was chosen for
its cross-platform availability, the ﬂexibility and power of its synthesis system, and its ease of
targeting as a programmer. As a synthesizer and music engine, Csound has a large number
of audio processing opcodes included that are capable of creating sound-generating instruments more than satisfactorily. The Csound score system also uses either 32-bit ﬂoat or
64-bit double values with values constrained only by what those formats are limited to
expressing, both of which are more than capable of expressing the subtle gradations of
values we will need for the library. Finally, being that the score system is a text format, it is
extremely easy to program as text generation and manipulation is a core capability found in
most programming languages and is also a fundamental skill that most programmers learn.
This reduces the complexity required to develop the library and adds no new library dependencies for the project, thus making it simpler to get started and to maintain.
To be able to work with Csound, we need to know some basics about how it works. Traditionally, Csound projects are split into two text ﬁles: an orchestra ﬁle2 (ORC) containing
deﬁnitions of instruments and a score ﬁle (SCO) containing a list of notes to play for the
instruments used. ORC ﬁles can be used with multiple SCO ﬁles and vice versa, so one can
experiment with the same orchestra and different musical scores, or one may experiment
with the same score but different orchestras. Csound instruments are deﬁned in the ORC
ﬁle with a numerical or string ID that is later used when writing the SCO ﬁle. For the SCO
ﬁle, notes are deﬁned as starting with i, followed by a space delimited list of values (p-ﬁelds).
Here is an example of a note in Csound SCO format:
iI

0

2

440.0

80

The letter i denotes that this line is a note. (Lines starting with other characters have different meanings to Csound.) After the i are three mandatory p-ﬁelds that all notes must have:
p-ﬁeld 1 (p1) is the instrument for which this note is for, p2 is the start time for this note,
and p3 is the duration of this note. In the example note above, the ﬁrst three p-ﬁelds say
that this note is for instrument 1, starting at time 0 and lasting for 2 beats. After p3 come
optional p-ﬁelds whose meanings are deﬁned by the user and are a part of the programming
of the instrument. In the example above, p4’s value of 440.0 may well represent a frequency
value and p5’s value of 80 may represent amplitude in decibels.
By having a user-deﬁnable amount of p-ﬁelds, we have degree of ﬂexibility on a note-tonote basis to set values to describe the qualities of that note. Compared to a MIDI note-on
message, whose properties are only the MIDI note number (0–127) and the MIDI key velocity (0–127), we ﬁnd that Csound offers the user the ability to describe much more about the
musical nature of the note.

683

Modeling Orchestral Composition

The ﬂexibility of arbitrarily deﬁning each instrument’s allowable p-ﬁelds comes at a price
for interoperability. If different instruments do not use the same number and meanings for
p-ﬁelds, then the SCO written for one instrument cannot be reused with a different instrument, and, consequently, the programming library written for one instrument could not be
used with a different instrument. The solution to this problem, then, is to deﬁne a standard
p-ﬁeld signature, one that can handle the musical needs of the orchestral composition
library and can also be implemented by all Csound instruments. By having a standard format
that we agree to use, we can create both instruments that accept information in that format
and a programming library that can generate that format. As a result, different instruments
can be swapped in and out of the project and different score generating programs can be
swapped in and out as well.
For the orchestral composition library we will be using instruments that accept an 8 p-ﬁeld
note format with the following values:
p1—instrument identiﬁer
p2—start time
p3—duration
p4—pitch 1 (in either frequency or Csound PCH notation)
p5—pitch 2 (in either frequency or Csound PCH notation)
p6—amplitude in dB
p7—spatial location (from 1.0 to 1.0 corresponding with left and right panning)
p8—articulation (the type of amplitude and ﬁlter envelope to use, may be either 0 for ADSR
envelope, 1 for triangular envelope, or 2 for ramp envelope)
This eight p-ﬁeld note format will be ﬂexible enough to handle the compositional needs of
the examples provided below. The p4 and p5 ﬁelds are used by the example instruments
to indicate a starting pitch and ending pitch, although alternative interpretations of those
values may be implemented with the instruments used (for example, pitch 1 may be interpreted as a base pitch, while pitch 2 could be interpreted as a pitch to trill to as part of a trill).
The p6 ﬁeld will be used to enter in the amplitude of the note to be played.
The p7 ﬁeld is interesting in that in a non-computer music setting, the spatial location is
not typically a factor of the note to be played, but is rather a quality of the performer. In
a music system where we might be handling the audio signals generated by instruments
directly instead of delegating the task to another software like Csound, we might have a programming model where a Performer object’s perform method consists of calling an Instrument’s generateAudio method and then the performer processes the generated signal with
its spatial location properties and returns that processed sound to the sound engine. However, since the task of audio processing has been delegated, we will pass the value for the spatial location in as a parameter of the note and the instrument will apply the spatial location
processing of the signal. We will later ﬁnd that although each note within this system will
carry that information, the user of the library will not have to notate that information but

684

Chapter 14

will instead conﬁgure that property on the Performer object and the Performer object will
then ﬁll in that information when notes are generated.
The p8 ﬁeld is the articulation ﬁeld, which has been set up in the example Csound instruments to accept values of 0, 1, and 2, denoting amplitude and ﬁlter envelopes for a standard
attack-decay-sustain-release (ADSR) envelope, a pyramid envelope, and ramp envelope, respectively. The articulation ﬁeld is ﬂexible in that should the user of the orchestral composition library want to extend the instruments to include more articulations, the user may do so
in the programming of the instruments without having to make changes in the programming library.
By delegating audio processing tasks to Csound, we can focus on higher-level musical
abstractions in our orchestral composition library. Interfacing with Csound from our composition library requires only that we be able to generate a text ﬁle in the SCO format that
Csound understands. By using an eight p-ﬁeld note format as the standard for our library’s
output and our instrument designs’ input, we create a system that allows for the experimentation of different musical ideas with different instruments.
14.4

Designing the Programming Library
Having decided to use Csound as the instrument part of our orchestral composition model
and having established the means by which we will communicate with Csound (using
SCO-formatted text output), we will now model the rest of the factors of orchestral composition we have observed by deﬁning a few classes and establishing conventions for using these
classes in ways that parallel the conventions of orchestral composition.
Although the class library here is designed for use with Csound, the general overall design
and architecture is valid to be used with different musical data representations such as MIDI
or OSC or whatever custom music model the user may decide to build.
14.4.1

Note

The Note class is used to represent the Note information given to performers. It is designed
so that when notating musical ideas using this class, the user need only deﬁne the essential
musical parameters inherent to the musical fragment, leaving out parameters which are normally associated with Performers: what instrument to perform this Note on as well as what
the spatial location of the generated sound will be. In acoustic music, notated scores are
given to performers to perform. The performers in turn will play that music on the instrument assigned to them; the spatial location is dependent on where they are sitting. Given
that a comparable instrument on which the notated music can be performed is given to the
same performer, that performer can perform the same music using the different instrument
to get different results. Similarly, given the same music and same instrument but moving to
another location, the performer will yield different end results. It is for these reasons that the

685

Modeling Orchestral Composition

spatial location and assigned instrument are properties that are part of our Performer class
and not as our Note class.
However, because of the decision to use Csound and to use the text note format that does
deﬁne an instrument number and spatial location (p1 and p7), we will need to have the Note
class ultimately converted to that eight p-ﬁeld text format for use by Csound. We facilitate
this when generating string text from our Note classes by having the Performer class which
is performing the Note data pass in the spatial location and instrument number to use in the
generated output.
The following is the header deﬁnition for the Note class:
class Note {
public:
float startTime;
float duration;
float pitch;
float pitch2;
float amp;
int envType;
bool isRest;
Note(float startTime, float duration, float pitch,
float pitch2, float amp, int envType);
// This constructor is used to denote a Rest
// and sets isRest to true
Note(float startTime, float duration);
string getNote(int instrumentNum, float space);
};
The Note class has seven member variables, six of which map to the Csound note format
discussed in the previous sections, and one which is used to determine if the note is a played
note or a rest:
ﬂoat startTime—start time (p2)
ﬂoat duration—duration (p3)
ﬂoat pitch—starting pitch (p4)
ﬂoat pitch2—ending pitch (p5)
ﬂoat amp—amplitude in db (p6)
int envType—which amplitude envelope to use (p8)
bool isRest—determines if this note is to be treated as a rest (a rest generates no note text)
The two forms of the Note constructor methods are each used depending on if a normal
performed note is being notated by the user or if it is a rest. When a Note is constructed as
a normal performed note, Performer and PerformerGroup objects will take that Note data

686

Chapter 14

and create Csound SCO format text. When a Note is constructed as a rest, it will not generate
any Csound SCO text but rather will be used to increment time to function as a silence.
The getNote method is used to ultimately generate the string representation of the Note
and will be what is used as output to be captured into the SCO ﬁle to be used with Csound.
Users of the library will not normally need to call the getNote method themselves but rather
it will be used by the Performer class to facilitate a performance of that note.
14.4.2

Performer

The Performer class represents performers within our orchestral composition music model.
The following is the header deﬁnition for the Performer class:
class Performer
{
public:
string name;
int instrumentNum;
float space;
float baseAmp;
Performer(int instrumentNum, float baseAmp, float space,
string name);
string toString();
string perform(vector<Note> noteList, float startTime);
string performAleatorically(vector<Note> noteList,
float timeVariance, float ampVariance,
float pitchVariance, float durationOfSection,
float startTime);
};
The performer class has four member variables, conﬁgured as parameters to the Performer
object’s constructor method:
string name—used for reference and debugging
int instrument—maps to a Csound instrument ID (only numeric instrument ID’s will be
supported by this library)
n
ﬂoat space—denotes the location within the stereo ﬁeld the performer will be (1.0 ¼ left,
0.0 ¼ center, 1.0 ¼ right
n
ﬂoat ampBase—a ﬂoat multiplier(0.0–1.0) value that a Performer will apply to amplitudes
of notes that a Performer is given to perform; a simpliﬁed way to represent space in terms of
depth (i.e. given that they perform at the same volume relative to each other, a performer
n
n

687

Modeling Orchestral Composition

further upstage playing the same music and same instrument as someone further downstage
will generally be not as loud as the one further downstage)
The Performer object also has three methods:
string toString()—a utility method to display the performer’s properties, useful for debugging compositional projects
n
string perform(vector<Note> noteList, ﬂoat startTime)—the primary performance
method of the Performer class, used to give a Performer object a section of music to perform,
resulting in generating Csound performance information (SCO)
n
string performAleatorically(. . .)—a performance method used to perform a section of
music in an aleatoric manner given a time to start and duration of time to perform, applying
randomization to parameters given the modiﬁer arguments.
n

The performance methods of the Performer class represent the performance techniques
that performers understand how to perform. The user of the library will create and conﬁgure
Performers, deﬁne musical ideas using a vector of Notes, and then have the Performers perform those musical ideas at a given start time. By deﬁning musical material and separating
the time at which the whole block of material is to be performed, we gain the ability to reuse
the same material and have it performed at different times. This closely parallels the way
music is generally conceived, i.e. ‘‘that this motive is played at this time and played again
that time.’’
14.4.3

PerformerGroup

The PerformerGroup class represents sections of performers within our orchestral composition music model. The following is the header deﬁnition for the PerformerGroup class:
class PerformerGroup {
public:
string name;
vector<Performer *> performers;
PerformerGroup(string name);
string toString();
string perform(vector<Note> noteList, float startTime);
string performAleatorically(vector<Note> noteList,
float timeVariance, float ampVariance,
float pitchVariance,float durationOfSection,
float startRange);
string performSurface(float amp, int envType,
float time1a, float pch1a,

688

Chapter 14

float time1b, float pch1b,
float time2a, float pch2a,
float time2b, float pch2b);
};
The performer group has two member variables:
string name—used for reference and debugging
vector<Performer *> performers—holds references to Performers to put in this group; uses
pointers so that different groups may share references to the same Performers.

n
n

The performer object also has four methods:
string toString()—a utility method to display the performer group’s properties, useful for
debugging compositional projects
n
string perform(vector<Note> noteList, ﬂoat startTime)—calls all performers in the group to
perform the given noteList at the given startTime
n
string performAleatorically(. . .)—calls all performers in the group to perform the given
noteList aleatorically passing along randomization parameters, starting at a given time and
randomizing when each performer should start within the startRange parameter
n
string performSurface(. . .)—given the boundary parameters of the surface, calculate the
individually unique glissandi notes each performer member of the group will perform to
create the group glissandi musical surface
n

The performance methods of the performer group build upon the available performance
methods of the individual performers: the group as an object does not do any performing
itself. These group performance methods use one-to-many relationships in that the composer notates an idea for the group, which the group object then interprets as instructions
for each individual performer. The result is that the user of the library can focus on notating
a musical idea that will be performed by a group without having to individually notate and
direct what each performer is to perform. This allows the user to continue to work with the
abstract musical ideas, delegating to the library to convert the group instruction into individual directions for each performer in the group.
14.5

Using the Library for Composition
The general steps to using the orchestral composition library are very similar to composing
for a live orchestra (table 14.2).
In general, the composer using the orchestral composition library will be working with
musical ideas in much the same way that he might work with notating a score for a live
orchestra. One advantage to using the orchestral composition library is that in notating
for a live orchestra, all musical ideas require notating lines for each performer, even if the
musical idea is a singular group sound and conceived as a single idea. With the orchestral

689

Modeling Orchestral Composition

Table 14.2
Comparing the steps of composing for live orchestra and composing with the orchestra library.
Composing for live orchestra

Composing with orchestra library

Decide on what instruments to use for the
piece (woodwinds, brass, strings, percussion,
electronic).

Decide on what Csound instruments to use for the
piece and place them in a Csound orchestra (ORC)
ﬁle.

At the beginning of a score, deﬁne number
and layout of performers of chosen
instruments (some aspects may not be
explicitly deﬁned and left to the conductor
to choose at performance time).

Create a Cþþ program to use the orchestra library and
deﬁne the number and layout of performers of chosen
instrument, achieved by creating instances of the
Performer class and conﬁguring the instances,
optionally grouping into PerformerGroup objects.

Notate a score full of performance
instructions to be performed by the
performers on their instruments, giving
times at which to play and what techniques
to use; instructions for performing extended
performance techniques are deﬁned at the
start of score.

In Cþþ program, call performance methods on
Performer and PerformerGroup objects with Note data
or other arguments; calling different methods is
equivalent to composing for different performance
techniques and the program being written is
equivalent to the notated score for live orchestra;
composer can deﬁne new performance techniques by
adding methods to Performer or PerformGroup classes.

Perform the score with an orchestra, using a
conductor as a source of time to drive the
performance; at this time performers
interpret the instruction into physical
actions to generate the end musical result
with their instruments.

Run the program to generate the Csound score (SCO)
ﬁle that will be the performance instructions for the
instruments in the ORC ﬁle. Run Csound with the
ORC and SCO to create the end musical result.

composition library, the singular group sound idea can be notated and worked with as a
single entity by the composer and the library can handle translating the instruction from
the composer into sets of instructions for multiple performers. With this kind of mapping the
composer can stay closer to working with the overall musical idea rather than constantly
having to notate for one performer after another—switching mental contexts between the
group idea and the singular parts making up that idea.
The following example program demonstrates the use of the orchestral composition
library. Comments are added inline into the program to demarcate different musical examples. Other notes and explanations of the different parts of the program and musical
examples follow.
#include <iostream>
#include <ctime>
#include "Note.hpp"
#include "Performer.hpp"
#include "PerformerGroup.hpp"

690

Chapter 14

using namespace std;
int main()
{
// INITIALIZING RANDOM SEED
srand( (unsigned)time( NULL ) );
/*******************************/
/* SETTING UP PERFORMER GROUPS */
// PERFORMER GROUP A
Performer a1(1, 0.997, -.3, "Performer A1");
Performer a2(1, 1.0, 0.0, "Performer A2");
Performer a3(1, .997, .3, "Performer A3");
PerformerGroup groupA("Group A");
groupA.performers.push_back(&a1);
groupA.performers.push_back(&a2);
groupA.performers.push_back(&a3);
// PERFORMER GROUP B
Performer b1(1, 1.0, -.2, "Performer B1");
Performer b2(1, 0.95, -.15, "Performer B2");
Performer b3(1, 0.9, -.1, "Performer B3");
PerformerGroup groupB("Group B");
groupB.performers.push_back(&b1);
groupB.performers.push_back(&b2);
groupB.performers.push_back(&b3);
// PERFORMER GROUP C
Performer c1(1, 1.0, .2, "Performer C1");
Performer c2(1, 0.95, .15, "Performer C2");
Performer c3(1, 0.9, .1, "Performer C3");
PerformerGroup groupC("Group C");
groupC.performers.push_back(&c1);
groupC.performers.push_back(&c2);
groupC.performers.push_back(&c3);
// PERFORMER GROUP D
Performer d1(1, 0.95, -.1, "Performer D1");
Performer d2(1, 1.0, 0.0, "Performer D2");
Performer d3(1, 0.95, .1, "Performer D3");
PerformerGroup groupD("Group D");
groupD.performers.push_back(&d1);

691

Modeling Orchestral Composition

groupD.performers.push_back(&d2);
groupD.performers.push_back(&d3);
/********************/
/* MUSICAL EXAMPLES */
/********************/
/* EXAMPLE 1 - USING NOTE DIRECTLY */
Note direct(0, 1, 8.00, 8.00, 80, 0);
Note directCopy = direct;
directCopy.startTime = 1.00;
directCopy.pitch = 9.00;
directCopy.pitch2 = 9.00;
cout << direct.getNote(1, 0.0) << endl;
cout << directCopy.getNote(1, 0.0) << endl;
/* EXAMPLE 2 - USING PERFORMER AND PERFORMER GROUP
* PERFORM METHODS */
// DEFINE NOTE DATA
Note a (0, 1, 8.00, 8.00, 80, 0);
vector<Note> noteList;
noteList.push_back(a);
noteList.push_back(Note(1,
noteList.push_back(Note(2,
noteList.push_back(Note(3,
noteList.push_back(Note(0,

1, 8.04, 8.04, 80, 0));
1, 8.07, 8.07, 80, 0));
1, 9.00, 9.00, 80, 0));
3));

// PERFORM NOTE DATA
cout << ";Begin Orchestra Output" << endl << endl;
cout << ";Testing Note" << endl;
cout << a.getNote(1, 0.0) << endl;
cout << endl << ";Testing Performers" << endl;
cout << a1.toString() << endl;
cout << a1.perform(noteList, 5.00) << endl;
cout << a2.toString() << endl;
cout << a2.perform(noteList, 10.0);
cout << a3.toString() << endl;
cout << a3.perform(noteList, 15.0);

692

Chapter 14

cout << endl << ";Testing Performer Group" << endl << endl;
cout << groupA.toString() << endl;
cout << groupA.perform(noteList, 20.0) << endl;
/* EXAMPLE 3 - FOUR PART HARMONY WITH INDIVIDUAL
* PERFORMERS AND PERFORMER GROUPS */
// DEFINE MUSICAL PARTS
vector<Note>
vector<Note>
vector<Note>
vector<Note>

harmonyPart1;
harmonyPart2;
harmonyPart3;
harmonyPart4;

harmonyPart1.push_back(Note(0,
harmonyPart1.push_back(Note(1,
harmonyPart1.push_back(Note(2,
harmonyPart1.push_back(Note(3,

1,
1,
1,
3,

9.00,
9.00,
9.02,
9.00,

9.00,
9.00,
9.02,
9.00,

80,
80,
80,
80,

0));
0));
0));
0));

harmonyPart2.push_back(Note(0,
harmonyPart2.push_back(Note(1,
harmonyPart2.push_back(Note(2,
harmonyPart2.push_back(Note(3,

1,
1,
1,
3,

8.04,
8.05,
8.05,
8.04,

8.04,
8.05,
8.05,
8.04,

80,
80,
80,
80,

0));
0));
0));
0));

harmonyPart3.push_back(Note(0,
harmonyPart3.push_back(Note(1,
harmonyPart3.push_back(Note(2,
harmonyPart3.push_back(Note(3,

1,
1,
1,
3,

7.07,
7.09,
7.11,
7.07,

7.07,
7.09,
7.11,
7.07,

80,
80,
80,
80,

0));
0));
0));
0));

harmonyPart4.push_back(Note(0,
harmonyPart4.push_back(Note(1,
harmonyPart4.push_back(Note(2,
harmonyPart4.push_back(Note(3,

1,
1,
1,
3,

7.00,
6.05,
6.07,
7.00,

7.00,
6.05,
6.07,
7.00,

80,
80,
80,
80,

0));
0));
0));
0));

// PERFORM MUSICAL PARTS
cout
cout
cout
cout
cout

<<
<<
<<
<<
<<

endl << ";Four-Part Harmony - One per part"
groupA.performers[0]->perform(harmonyPart1,
groupB.performers[0]->perform(harmonyPart2,
groupC.performers[0]->perform(harmonyPart3,
groupD.performers[0]->perform(harmonyPart4,

cout
cout
cout
cout
cout

<<
<<
<<
<<
<<

endl << ";Four-Part Harmony - Group
groupA.perform(harmonyPart1, 32) <<
groupB.perform(harmonyPart2, 32) <<
groupC.perform(harmonyPart3, 32) <<
groupD.perform(harmonyPart4, 32) <<

<< endl;
25) << endl;
25) << endl;
25) << endl;
25) << endl;

per part" << endl;
endl;
endl;
endl;
endl;

693

Modeling Orchestral Composition

/* EXAMPLE 4 - GROUP ALEATORY */
// SCORE FOR ALEATORY
vector<Note>
vector<Note>
vector<Note>
vector<Note>

alea1;
alea2;
alea3;
alea4;

alea1.push_back(Note(0,
alea1.push_back(Note(4,
alea1.push_back(Note(8,
alea1.push_back(Note(0,

3, 10.08, 10.07, 70, 1));
4.3, 10.09, 10.06, 70, 1));
4, 10.085, 10.065, 70, 1));
3));

alea2.push_back(Note(0,
alea2.push_back(Note(2,
alea2.push_back(Note(4,
alea2.push_back(Note(6,
alea2.push_back(Note(0,

2, 8.04,
2, 8.05,
2, 8.06,
2, 8.05,
3));

8.04,
8.05,
8.06,
8.05,

76,
76,
76,
76,

1));
1));
1));
1));

alea3.push_back(Note(0, 4, 7.10, 7.11, 75, 2));
alea3.push_back(Note(5, 4.3, 7.095, 7.115, 75, 2));
alea3.push_back(Note(10, 4, 7.105, 7.11, 75, 2));
alea3.push_back(Note(0, 3));
alea4.push_back(Note(0,
alea4.push_back(Note(4,
alea4.push_back(Note(8,
alea4.push_back(Note(0,

3, 7.02, 7.01, 77, 2));
3.3, 7.03, 7.015, 77, 2));
3.6, 7.025, 7.005, 77, 2));
3));

// PERFORMANCE OF ALEATORY
cout << endl << ";Testing PerformAleatorically Method" << endl;
cout << groupA.performAleatorically(alea1, 0.3, 0.1, .2, 35, 55, 5)
<< endl;
cout << groupB.performAleatorically(alea2, 0.2, 0.02, .02, 50,
50, 7) << endl;
cout << groupC.performAleatorically(alea3, 0.01, 0.02, .02, 55,
45, 6) << endl;
cout << groupD.performAleatorically(alea4, 0.1, .05, .05, 60,
40, 8) << endl;
/* EXAMPLE 5 - SURFACES (GLISSANDI SOUND MASSES) */
cout << endl << ";Testing PerformSurface Method" << endl;

694

Chapter 14

// CONTRACTING SURFACE
cout << groupA.performSurface(80, 1, 150.0, 9.10, 150.5, 10.04,
162.0, 10.01, 162.5, 10.01) << endl;
// TWISTED SURFACE
cout << groupB.performSurface(80, 1, 135.0, 8.00, 135.5, 8.05,
150.0, 9.00, 149.5, 7.07) << endl;
// EXPANDING SURFACE
cout << groupC.performSurface(80, 1, 145.0, 8.03, 145.5, 8.03,
160.0, 7.11, 159.5, 8.08) << endl;
// EXPANDING SURFACE PROJECTING UPWARDS
cout << groupD.performSurface(80, 1, 135.0, 6.00, 135.5, 6.02,
160.0, 7.00, 159.5, 7.04) << endl;
cout << endl << ";End Orchestra Output" << endl;
return 0;
}
14.5.1

Initial Setup

This program starts off with a call to seed the random number generator with the current
time, a common call to make before generating random numbers. Afterward is the initial
setup section of the Performer and PerformerGroup objects that we will be using to perform
the music we create. The Performers are all created with a parameter for their panning location and amplitude adjustment to simulate their spatial location as well as what Csound
instrument they are to ‘‘play’’ or generate output for. For these musical examples we have
chosen to use a single instrument type for all performers and groups, modeled somewhat
on the string sections of a live orchestra. Four PerformerGroups are created, each with three
Performers within them. They are laid out so that groupA is spread evenly and wide across
panning spectrum, groupB is laid out slightly to the left of center, groupC is laid out slightly
to the right of center, and groupD is laid out evenly like groupA but not as wide. Each group
will perform music in similar registers to the Violin, Viola, Cello, and Bass sections of an
orchestra.
14.5.2

Example 1: Using The Note Class Directly (0:00)

The ﬁrst example does not use any Performers or Performer groups but instead uses the Note
class directly to create Csound SCO output. This would normally not be used when using
this library but can be useful when working with a sound idea directly that does not involve

695

Modeling Orchestral Composition

any abstractions like Performers or PerformerGroups. It is available to the composer to use
for situations where direct control over the output of a note is desired.
14.5.3

Example 2: Using the Performer and PerformerGroup Perform Methods (0:05)

The second musical example is an arpeggio of the ﬁrst, third, ﬁfth, and octave scale degrees
of a major scale. It is notated as a vector of Note objects. The musical example ﬁrst demonstrates using the musical example with each of the individual performers from groupA, then
using that same musical example calls groupA to perform it all together. Notice that in the
same way that one may notate a musical line or motive and give it to a single performer to
play or a group of performers to play, one can have the same representation and manner of
operation in the orchestral composition library and achieve a similar solo and group audible
result as one would expect from a live orchestra.
14.5.4

Example 3: Four-Part Harmony (0:25)

The third musical example is short four-part harmony (I-IV-V7 -I). It is notated as four lines of
music using four vectors of Note objects. The four parts are ﬁrst played by an individual
member of each of the four PeformerGroups, and then performed a second time with each
of the groups playing each of the parts. This example demonstrates more clearly the audible
differences between using individual performers to perform musical lines and groups of performers. The example also shows the simplicity in switching between directing individual
members of a group to perform a musical line and directing a group of performers to perform
that musical line.
14.5.5

Example 4: Group Aleatory (0:40)

The fourth musical example is a demonstration of aleatoric music performed by groups. Four
different musical fragments are notated and each of the four groups are directed to perform
those fragments, starting at different times and with different parameters for degrees of variation in amplitude, pitch, duration, and a range of start times staggered for each member
within each group. The fragment is given to the group and the group then staggers the start
times and calls each member of the group to perform that fragment aleatorically, each applying their own spatial characteristics to their results. Because the algorithm for the aleatoric
performance makes use of random number generators, each run of the program will result
in uniquely generated output, much like how aleatoric music would be performed by a live
orchestra. By having the ability to have unique performances, the composer can experiment
with aleatoric musical ideas and rapidly test to see if the results match what he or she imagines they will be.

696

Chapter 14

14.5.6

Example 5: Surfaces (Glissandi Sound Mass) (2:15)

The ﬁfth and ﬁnal example demonstrates composing with glissandi sound masses to create a
surface of sound, modeled after musical structures used by Iannis Xenakis in his orchestral
work Metastasis. Unlike the other examples, this one does not use a list of notes but instead
calls the performSurface method on the PerformerGroup with a set of parameters to denote
the two outer boundary lines of the surface, using time-pitch pairs for the starting and ending point of each boundary line. By denoting the start and end points of the boundary lines,
the start and end points of each note for each member of the group can be calculated.
Four types of surfaces are used in the example: a contracting surface where the members
start out at different pitches and converge to a single pitch, a twisted surface where members
start out at different pitches from high to low and end up in opposite order from low to high,
an expanding surface where all members of the group start at a single pitch and end up on
different pitches above and below the starting pitch, and an expanding surface projecting
upward where the overall mass starts at one set of pitches with a small range and ends up at
another set of pitches all pitched higher than the ﬁrst set and also with a larger range.
Conclusion
Orchestral music is a result of both the physical characteristics of the orchestra as well as the
conventions of notating music for that ensemble. By developing a small Cþþ library used in
conjunction with Csound, a model for orchestral composition was created that offers composers a similar experience to writing music for a live orchestra. Examples of composing for
single performers as well as groups of performers demonstrated the ﬂexibility of the library
design to handle different compositional needs. The reader is encouraged to explore further
usage of the library, to extend the library to accommodate new performance techniques, and
to experiment with developing other interfaces for entering in and conﬁguring data, such as
building a graphical user interface.
Notes
1. This library was originally created using the Python programming language. The library and example
are written here in Cþþ to better match the other content of this book. The most recent Python version
of this library is included with the author’s music composition software blue.
2. The Csound orchestra is not a model of orchestral composition but simply the collection of instrument deﬁnitions for a Csound project.

Appendix A: Command-Line Tools Reference
Jonathan Bailey

The command line was once the only means for interaction with a computer and, in some
cases, still provides certain advantages over a graphical user interface for computation. This
appendix functions as both a reference and overview for commonly available and widely utilized commands, tools and techniques within a UNIX-compatible command-line environment. Though not a tutorial, beginners should consider opening a terminal and following
along with the commands outlined in this text to gain greater familiarity with the abilities
of the command-line interface.
The ﬁrst section of this appendix covers basic navigation and usage of the command-line
interface. Next, we delve deeper into how to compile and build programs using gcc and
make, and conclude with some tips on how to create and edit ﬁles from the command line
using the emacs editor.
A.1

Bash Shell Fundamentals
In this ﬁrst section, we cover the basics of using Bash, the most commonly encountered
command-line shell.1 Some of these examples make use of special characters—sometimes
called ‘‘meta-characters’’—that are available from the command line and provide shorthand
notation for performing certain tasks or referencing standard ﬁle system locations. Refer to
table A.1. for a list of these characters. Many of the commands and techniques covered in
this section will work with other shells, though meta-character speciﬁcs, command syntax
and outputted results may vary slightly.
A.1.1 Basic Navigation
There are a number of basic navigation commands built into Bash.
pwd—print working directory
This displays the current location on the ﬁle system. The following example shows that the
author is currently situated in a directory called jonb, located within a directory called
Users, located within the root directory of the computer:

698

Appendix A

Table A.1
Bash shell meta-characters and key shortcuts.
Character or command

Description

*

Wild card; matches all characters

.

Current directory

..

Parent directory

~/
~foo

Home directory
Home directory belonging to user ‘‘foo’’

&

Execute process in the background

Key: ctrl-c

Cancel execution of a progress

Key: ctrl-z

Suspend process

Key: ctrl-d

Send EOF (end-of-ﬁle) character from standard input, or delete next
character from the command shell

Key: Up-Arrow
Key: Down-Arrow

Previous command history item
Next command history item

Key: Left-Arrow

Move left one character

Key: Right-Arrow

Move right one character

jonb@oberheim:~$ pwd
/Users/jonb
cd—change directory
This moves the current user to a new location on the ﬁle system. When no argument is
passed, cd changes to the location of the user’s home directory (deﬁned in the $HOME environment variable). Example:
jonb@oberheim:~$ cd /usr/local/bin
jonb@oberheim:/usr/local/bin$ cd
jonb@oberheim:~$
ls—list ﬁles
This reveals the contents of a directory. When no argument is passed, it lists the contents of
the current working directory. A large variety of ﬂags reveal additional information, including ﬁle permissions, creation data, modiﬁcation date, size, and other ﬁle attributes. Example:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ls
appendix.doc
example_script.sh notes.txt
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ls -al
total 32
drwxr-xr-x 6 jonb staff 204 Jun 19 14:02 .
drwx------ 70 jonb staff 2448 Jun 19 12:13 ..
-rw-r--r-- 1 jonb staff 4 Jun 19 14:02 .hidden
-rw-r--r-- 1 jonb staff 4 Jun 19 12:14 appendix.doc

699

Command-Line Tools Reference

-rwxr-xr-x 1 jonb staff 5 Jun 19 12:14 example_script.sh
-rw-r--r-- 1 jonb staff 8 Jun 19 12:14 notes.txt
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ls -S
notes.txt
example_script.sh appendix.doc
mkdir—make directory
This creates a local directory on the ﬁlesystem. It requires a valid path and sufﬁcient permissions to create the directory in the speciﬁed location.
rm—remove ﬁle
This deletes a ﬁle or directory from the disk. It requires a valid path and sufﬁcient permissions to delete. Flags are provided to force ﬁle removal (-f) and recursively delete nested ﬁles
and directories (-r). Example:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ls
appendix
example_script.sh notes.txt
appendix.doc
my_trash
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ls my_trash/
foo
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ rm -rf my_trash/
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ls
appendix
example_script.sh
appendix.doc
notes.txt
cp—copy ﬁle
This copies a ﬁle or directory from one location on disk to another. Use with r ﬂag to copy
directory contents. It requires valid read permissions for the source ﬁles/directories and write
permissions for the destination directory. Example:
onb@oberheim:~/book$ cp -r ~/Downloads/csound5/ .
mv—move ﬁle
This moves a ﬁle or directory from one location on disk to another. It requires valid read permissions for the source ﬁles/directories and write permissions for the destination directory.
ln—link ﬁle
This creates a hard or symbolic link between ﬁles, similar (but with slight implementation
differences) to an ‘‘alias’’ in Mac OS or a symbolic link in recent versions of Windows. A symbolic or ‘‘soft’’ link is simply a reference to another ﬁle, and any modiﬁcations to the link
itself will not affect the target ﬁle. In contrast, modiﬁcations to a hard link also apply to the
target ﬁle, and hard links often may only be applied to ﬁles, not directories. Example:
jonb@oberheim:~$ ln -s /Applications/ apps

700

Appendix A

Table A.2
Examples of permissions settings.
-rwxrwxrwx

Read, write, and execute for owner, group, and others

-rwx------

Read, write, and execute for owner only

-rw-r-r--

Read and write for owner; read-only for group and others

-rwx-x---

Read, write, and execute for owner; execute-only for group

open—open a Finder window
This opens a Finder window from the speciﬁed location in the ﬁle system (MacOS X only).
A.1.2 Permissions and Accounts
Each ﬁle in a UNIX-like ﬁle system possesses three sets of read, write, and execute permissions (viewed in shorthand as rwx)—one set each for the user that owns the ﬁle, the group
that owns the ﬁle, and the rest of the world (‘‘others,’’ sometimes called ‘‘global permissions’’). These permissions can be viewed using the ls command, as shown in the above
example, and are organized in the following order: owner permissions, group permissions,
and other permissions. Continue below for commands that demonstrate modiﬁcation of permissions. Refer to table A.2 for examples of different permissions schemes.
chmod—modify ﬁle permissions
This changes the permissions of a ﬁle or directory. Example:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ls -al example_script.sh
-rw-r--r-- 1 jonb staff 4 Jun 19 15:31 example_script.sh
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ chmod u=rwx,go=x example_script.sh
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ls -al example_script.sh
-rwx--x--x 1 jonb staff 4 Jun 19 15:31 example_script.sh
chown—modify ﬁle owner
This changes the user or group that possesses ownership permissions over a given ﬁle. This
naturally requires sufﬁcient permissions—otherwise, one could steal ﬁles.
whoami—display current user
This reveals which system account the current user session is operating under.
su—substitute user
This allows a user to become another user given as the argument, after quoting a password or
having sufﬁcient permission by other methods. As a special case if no user name is given it
logs in to the administrative account—known as ‘‘super user’’ or ‘‘root’’—on a system. On
UNIX systems this is user number 1. Example:

701

Command-Line Tools Reference

jonb@oberheim:~$ su
Password:
sh–3.2# whoami
root
sudo—execute a command as super user
This executes a command as the super user, or any other user. There is a complex mechanism to control this; users will normally have to quote the root password, or their own password, or for some commands no password. This is all controlled by the sudoer system,
controlled by the super-user. Often this control is achieved by membership of a special
group, often called ‘‘sudoers’’ or ‘‘wheel.’’ Example:
jonb@oberheim:~$ whoami
jonb
jonb@oberheim:~$ sudo whoami
root
A.1.3 Locating and Viewing Files and Data
echo—view input
This prints out supplied input to the standard output. This is more useful that one might
suppose, as it expands all special characters and shell variables before echoing, so it is a way
to determine the values.
cat—view a ﬁle
This prints out a ﬁle to the terminal, all at once. The name is an abbreviation of concatenate
as it will concatenate a number of ﬁles before printing. Example:
jonb@oberheim:~$ echo "foo" > bar
jonb@oberheim:~$ cat bar
foo
jonb@oberheim:~$ cat bar bar
foo
foo
more—view a ﬁle
This prints out a ﬁle to the terminal, scrolling forward one page at a time. It also incorporates
simple searching.
less—view a ﬁle
This prints out a ﬁle to the terminal, allows navigating forward, backward, and line by line,
as well as various search options. On some systems the command more and less are actually
identical.

702

Appendix A

head—view ﬁle head
This prints out only the beginning of a ﬁle. It defaults to 10 lines but can be controlled with
a ﬂag.
tail—view ﬁle tail
This prints out only the end of a ﬁle, again defaulting to 10 lines.
strings—print all strings in a ﬁle
This prints out string data from a ﬁle, especially useful for obtaining ASCII string data from
binary ﬁles.
sort—sort ﬁle
This prints out the lines within a ﬁle, sorted alphabetically, numerically, or using various
other sort criteria.
grep—ﬁnd speciﬁed text within a ﬁle
This searches contents of readable ﬁles to determine if they contain a given term. grep uses
a simple regular expression for the search; indeed the name stands for general regular expression. The variant fgrep (for fast grep) searches for the exact text and the egrep variant can
be used to match search terms using extended regular expressions.2 The following example
searches ﬁles in all subdirectories (-r for recursive) of the directory ‘‘Opcodes’’ within the
‘‘Csound5.09.0’’ directory for the case-insensitive (-i) term ‘‘waveset,’’ and returns resulting
line and line number (-n). Example:
jonb@oberheim:~/Csound5.09.0$ grep -rin "waveset" Opcodes/
Opcodes/pitch.c:1953:int wavesetset(CSOUND *csound, BARRI *p)
Opcodes/pitch.c:1971:int waveset(CSOUND *csound, BARRI *p)
find—ﬁnd a ﬁle on disk
This locates ﬁles that match a certain criteria, using related to their ﬁle name or type. The
following example locates all ﬁles that end in the case-insensitive extension .c within the
Csound5.09.0 directory. Example:
jonb@oberheim:~$ find Csound5.09.0 -iname \*.c
Csound5.09.0/Engine/auxfd.c
Csound5.09.0/Engine/cfgvar.c
Csound5.09.0/Engine/csound_orc_compile.c
(etc)
The following example makes use of the ability to execute a nested command while searching for ﬁles using find. In this case, we incorporate the use of grep to locate all ﬁles within

703

Command-Line Tools Reference

the current directory hierarchy that end in the case-insensitive extension .c and contain the
case-insensitive phrase "moog":
jonb@oberheim:~$ find . -iname \*.c -exec grep -i "moog" {} \;
static int moogvcfset(CSOUND *csound, MOOGVCF *p)
static int moogvcf(CSOUND *csound, MOOGVCF *p)
(etc)
The reader should note that even though a semicolon terminates the command, it needs
to be ‘‘escaped’’ with a backslash so that it will not be seen as the termination of the find
command. As * is expanded to match all ﬁles, it too must be escaped. Clearly find is a very
powerful command, but one with difﬁcult syntax.
A.1.4 Compressed Formats
zip or unzip
This compresses or uncompresses one or more ﬁles using the PKZIP format. Example:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ls -F
dir1/ file1
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ zip -r stuff.zip dir1/ file1
adding: dir1/ (stored 0%)
adding: dir1/file2 (stored 0%)
adding: file1 (stored 0%)
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ mv stuff.zip ..
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ cd
jonb@oberheim:~$ unzip stuff.zip
Archive: stuff.zip
creating: dir1/
extracting: dir1/file2
extracting: file1
gzip—compression utility
This compresses ﬁles with the Lempel-Ziv compression algorithm, often in conjunction with
the tar command for archiving. Use the gunzip command to uncompress ﬁles. Usually
produces smaller ﬁles than zip.
bzip2—compression utility
This is yet another compression standard that is commonly encountered, employing the
Burrows-Wheeler algorithm. It is also often used in conjunction with the tar command for
archiving. Use the bunzip2 command to uncompress ﬁles. It usually produces smaller ﬁles
than gzip.

704

Appendix A

tar—archiving utility
This is used to archive ﬁles, commonly in conjunction with some kind of ﬁle compression.
The name comes from tapearchive although these days it is rarely used with tape. There is
also an ar command, rarely used. The following example illustrates the use of tar with
GZIP compression to archive and compress a directory, moves the ﬁle to a new location,
and decompresses and extracts the ﬁle contents:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ls -F
dir1/ file1
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ tar zcvf stuff.tar.gz *
dir1/
dir1/file2
file1
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ mv stuff.tar.gz ..
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ cd
jonb@oberheim:~$ tar zxvf stuff.tar.gz
dir1/
dir1/file2
file1
A.1.5 Settings and Preferences
alias—create an alias for a command
This substitutes one command string for another. Remove the substitution using the unalias
command. Example:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ alias lf='ls -F'
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ lf
dir1/ file1
set—set a shell or environment variable
Set a local variable within the current instance of this shell, and do not export that variable
to child processes or other shells spawned from the current shell. Remove the variable with
unset command.3
export—set a shell or environment variable
Set a shell or environment variable and export it to all spawned processes and shells. The following example modiﬁes the PATH environment variable, which determines the search path
for executed commands:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ which testcommand
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ export PATH=$PATH:~/book/bin
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ which testcommand
/Users/jonb/book/bin/testcommand

705

Command-Line Tools Reference

printenv—print all environment variables
This prints out all environment variables for the current user. Printing and setting of environment variables can also be accomplished using the env command.
In addition to manually specifying these shell and environment preferences at the command
line, the user can utilize a special bash ﬁle in their home directory, .proﬁle, as a means for
storing these preferences across sessions. The following contents could be from an example
.proﬁle:
export PATH=$PATH:~/bin
export MANPAGER='less -R'
export VISUAL=/usr/bin/emacs
# aliases
alias l="ls -l"
alias ll="ls -al"
alias enw="emacs -nw"
alias buchla="ssh jonb@buchla"
source—read in shell variables, settings, and commands
This reads a ﬁle of shell commands as if they had been typed at the terminal. It is particularly
useful to reload the shell settings from a speciﬁed ﬁle. For example, after modifying your
.proﬁle ﬁle, reload the new version with the following command:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ source ~/.profile
A.1.6 Pipes, Redirection, and Streams
In addition to providing access to a rich set of command-line tools and programs, the shell
allows users to route input and output between commands, ﬁles, and shell input/output
streams. Three such i/o streams exist in the Bash environment—standard output, standard
error, and standard input—and each stream can be accessed by a unique numeric descriptor.
The ability to access i/o streams by descriptor and to route input and output between different commands greatly increases the power of the shell environment. See table A.3 for a list of
meta-characters related to pipes and redirection within the command shell.
Here are some examples of how redirections and piping can be useful. The ﬁrst is to
request the web root from csounds.com and search the text for references to Barry Vercoe,
suppressing error messages:
jonb@oberheim:~$ curl www.csounds.com 2>/dev/null | grep -i vercoe
The second example is to create a ﬁle called moog_ﬁndings that catalogs all instances of the
case-insensitive string ‘‘moog’’ in Csound C source-code ﬁles and strip out any C-style comment lines:
jonb@oberheim:~$ find Csound5.09.0/ -iname \*.c -exec grep -i
moog {} \; -print face| grep -v "/\*" >> moog_findings

706

Appendix A

Table A.3
Pipe and redirection meta-characters.
|

Direct output from one program to input of another program

>

Direct output from a program to a ﬁle

<

Direct contents of a ﬁle to standard input

>>

Direct output from a program and concatenate to a ﬁle

0

Standard input descriptor

1
2

Standard output descriptor
Standard error descriptor

&

File handle for i/o descriptors

2>&1

Redirect standard error to standard output

2>/dev/null

Redirect standard error to system ‘‘null’’ device (i.e., suppress error output)

A.1.7 System and Process Status
top—print system and process status information
This prints detailed information about current system status, including process owner, CPU
utilization, memory utilization, and execution time.
ps—user process status
This prints status information for running processes. Flags can be supplied to constrain or
expand search results. Here is an example of processes owned by current user:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ps
And here is an example of processes owned by a super user:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ps aux | grep root
As referenced in table A.1, bash provides the ability to launch processes in the background,
thereby providing continued access to the shell and the ability to execute additional commands while the ﬁrst command operates—and to suspend processes currently running in
the foreground. Processes (sometimes called ‘‘jobs’’) running in the background can be listed
using the jobs command, repositioned to the foreground using the fg command, or terminated using the kill command.
jobs—display shell jobs
This prints a numbered list of jobs running in the background.
fg—foreground
This moves a job running in the background to the foreground. Example:

707

Command-Line Tools Reference

jonb@oberheim:~/book$ jobs
[1]+ Stopped emacs
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ fg %1
kill—kill a process
This terminates or restarts a process via process identiﬁer (pid). Use killall command to terminate all processes by command name. Use kill-9 to force quit. Here is an example of this
command:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ps
PID TTY TIME CMD
879 ttys000 0:00.03 -bash
520 ttys001 0:00.29 -bash
1118 ttys001 0:00.09 emacs
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ kill -9 1118
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ps
PID TTY TIME CMD
879 ttys000 0:00.03 -bash
520 ttys001 0:00.30 -bash
[1]+ Killed emacs
jonb@oberheim:~/book$
nice—specify run time process priority
This allows the user to designate a priority level for an executed command. For example, this
is useful to constrain the execution of a process—such as a full-disk ﬁnd—that can otherwise
consume system resources excessively. The super-user can also increase the priority by using
negative priority. Example:
nice -n -10 find / -iname moog.c
time—time process execution
This measures and displays the execution time of a process. Example:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ time sort file1
real
0m0.088s
user
0m0.001s
sys 0m0.004s
who—list system users
This displays who is on the system and which terminal they are accessing.
date—list system time
This displays the current system date and time.

708

Appendix A

A.1.8 Scripting
One of the most powerful features within Bash is the ability to create scripts and small programs, and execute those scripts directly within the command line or from a saved ﬁle.
Though the subject of Bash scripting goes well beyond the scope of this chapter, we include
a few examples of common script below to illustrates how scripts can help to automate and
facilitate certain repetitive or complex command-line tasks.
The basic syntax of shell scripts is in many ways similar to other programming languages,
such as C, but many small but noteworthy differences do exist. Most importantly, the treatment of variables is slightly different in Bash shell scripts. Whereas in C, you may assign to
and read from a deﬁned variable using exactly the same syntax, Bash uses a separate descriptor for reading from a deﬁned shell variable. To set a shell variable ‘‘foo’’ to the value of
‘‘bar,’’ use the familiar syntax
jonb@oberheim:~$ foo=bar
but there must not be any white space around the ¼ sign. However, to read the value of foo
that we have set you must use the $ character as a preﬁx to the variable name:
jonb@oberheim:~$ echo $foo
bar
In addition, bash supports the use of backticks (`) to execute nested commands within a
script. For example, in the following example, backticks are used to echo the string ls to
the command shell, which has the equivalent effect of executing the ls command directly:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ls
bin dir1
file1 test
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ `echo ls`
bin dir1
file1 test
Loop syntax also differs in Bash scripts, in that the keywords do and done must be incorporated into the loop structure to deﬁne the start and end points of the scripted loop. To
learn more about other speciﬁc idiosyncrasies of Bash scripting, consult one of the books
listed in the reference for this appendix. Example: Print all of the valid MIDI note numbers
to a ﬁle.
for i in `seq 0 127`; do echo $i >> midi_notes; done
Example: Convert all WAVE ﬁles in a directory to AIF format using sed and the SoX audio
utility:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ls *.wav
file1.wav file2.wav file3.wav
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ for wav in `ls *.wav`; do aif=`echo $wav | sed
-e s/\.wav/\.aif/`; sox $wav $aif; done

709

Command-Line Tools Reference

jonb@oberheim:~/book$ ls *.aif
file1.aif file2.aif file3.aif
Example: Here is a script to convert MIDI notes to approximate pitch frequencies—i.e., a
command-line version of the mtof program. This script reads in note values from standard
input and makes use of the bash calculator, bc, to perform the mathematical computation:
jonb@oberheim:~/dev/audio$ while read note; do echo 'scale=6;
((220 * (1.0594631 ^ 3.0)) * (.5 ^ 5.0)) * ((1.0594631)^'$note')'
| bc 2>/dev/null; done
A.1.9 Command Help
man—manual pages for commands
This prints help ﬁles for all shell commands. Manual information for some built-in shell
commands may require reading the manual for Bash itself, i.e., man bash, and searching for
the desired command.
A.2

Compiling Code
UNIX-like systems offer a vast array of command-line source code compilers and interpreters
for every conceivable programming language. The most utilized and popular command-line
tool is the GNU C/Cþþ Compiler, gcc—a powerful open-source and cross-platform compiler, assembler and linker for C, Cþþ, and Objective-C. This free tool functions as the
compiler of choice for this book, and the following section will highlight some common
options and techniques for compiling and building software projects using gcc. This section
will also show some basic techniques for usage of the make command to compile and build
larger software projects.
A.2.1 Compilation
Compilation is the process by which code written in a high-level programming language,
such as C or Cþþ, is translated into machine code for a target computing platform. Though
often referred to using the singular term ‘‘compilation,’’ the actual process involves several
steps—‘‘preprocessing’’ C or Cþþ source code to strip comments, include deﬁnitions from
header ﬁles and replace macro and constant deﬁnitions; ‘‘compilation’’ of C or Cþþ code
into assembly code; ‘‘assembling’’ of assembly code into machine binary code; and ‘‘linking’’
of binary objects into an executable program or shared library. Table A.4 lists several ﬂags
and options often used when processing, compiling, and assembling code with gcc. Note
that although gcc can be used to compile both C and Cþþ by itself, we recommend the use
of the gBB program (part of the gcc tools package) for building Cþþ applications to ensure

710

Appendix A

Table A.4
The gcc/gþþ compilation and assembly options.
gcc/gþþ Flag

Description

-c

Compile and assemble into an object ﬁle, but do not link.

-o <file>

Place compiled output into speciﬁed ﬁle.

-g

Compile with debugging symbols.

-Wall

Enable all warnings for the GCC assembler.

-W<warning>

Enable a speciﬁc warning. For example, to warn that a variable is used
before being initialized, use -Wuninitialized. See the GCC manual
(man gcc) for all supported warnings.

-std=<standard>

Compile using designated C Standard. For example, to compile using the
C99 standard instead of ANSI C, use the -std=c99 ﬂag.

-E

Pre-process code and print to standard output without compiling or
assembling. The resulting effect is that of replacing all included headers,
constant deﬁnitions, macros, and other pre-processor directives with
their code equivalents and stripping out all comments.

-S

Translate C (or Cþþ or Objective-C) code into assembly code and output
an assembly source ﬁle, but do not assemble into machine code or link.
Useful for viewing and editing C or Cþþ code as assembly code.

-I<dir>

Include <directory> in the search path for included header ﬁles.

-isystem <dir>

Specify vendor-supplied system include location.

-F <dir>

Include header ﬁles from the speciﬁed framework (MacOS X only).

-iwithsysroot <dir>

Specify base SDK to build against (MacOS X only).

-O(1-3)

Specify the code optimization level—shorthand mechanism for turning
on many of the speciﬁc optimizations that are available as individual
ﬂags.

-D<name>

Deﬁne a macro or constant from the command line. For example
-Dpi=3.14159 would deﬁne an approximation for pi. When value is
omitted, assigned a value of 1.

-arch

Specify processor architecture: i386, ppc, or ppc64.

--version

Print detailed version information.

--help

Print help text.

711

Command-Line Tools Reference

that the correct standard Cþþ libraries and search paths are used when you compile your
programs. (See table A.4.)
Example: Compile, assemble, and link the ﬁle test1.c into the executable program, a.out:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ gcc test1.c
Example: Compile, assemble, and link the ﬁle test1.c into the executable program test with
debug symbols:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ gcc –o test –g test1.c
Example: Compile and assemble the ﬁle test1.c into the binary output ﬁle, test.o, for subsequent linking. Use the C99 standard and print out all warnings. Here is the command line:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ gcc –c –o test.o –std=C99 –Wall test1.c
A.2.2 Linking
In linking (the ﬁnal stage of the overall compilation process), compiled binary resources
are combined into a single executable program or library. Linking can be performed either
‘‘dynamically’’ or ‘‘statically.’’ Static linking embeds all the dependent code that is needed
for a program or library into a single executable or library ﬁle. For example, if you write a
program that makes use of Richard Dobson’s portsf library for opening or saving audio ﬁles,
and you statically link portsf, then the binary code for all of the functions implemented
in portsf will be copied into your program’s resulting binary executable ﬁle, along with the
binary code created from your source code. Dynamically linking, by contrast, establishes
references to shared resources, such as third-party libraries, without requiring a copy of that
code within the resulting binary program or library. When the program is executed, the run
time environment will resolve references to any dependent libraries and load those resources
as needed before execution. There are advantages and disadvantages to both approaches, but
developers normally recommend dynamic linking because of the space saved by sharing a
single common library resource between multiple programs and the freedom from having
to recompile a program whenever a dependent library implementation changes.
Note that linking with gcc/gBB really passes along the linking instructions to the tools ld
and libtool. This ld tool is the standard linking tool and can handle all required linking tasks
within the GNU development environment, and libtool is a specialized front-end to ld that
facilitates the creation of libraries. Most of the features of both ld and libtool are accessible
from the front-end provided by gcc/gBB, as can be seen in the following example. (Also see
table A.5.)
Example: Link binary output ﬁles test1.o and test2.o and the portaudio library into the
program test:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ gcc test1.o test2.o –lportaudio –o test

712

Appendix A

Table A.5
The gcc/gþþ linking options.
gcc/gþþ ﬂag

Description

-print-search-dirs

Prints out search directories for included headers and libraries

-l<library>

Links to binary code from <library>. For example, to build against the
portaudio library, use the option -lportaudio. This has the equivalent
effect of passing a direct path to liblibrary.a on the command line to
gcc/gþþ.

-L<directory>

Includes <directory> in the search path for included library ﬁles

-framework <name>

Includes named OS X framework (MacOS X only)

-o <file>

Places compiled output into speciﬁed ﬁle

-bundle

Outputs linked results in mach-o bundle ﬁle format (MacOS X only)

-dynamiclib

Creates a dynamic library (dylib) instead of an executable ﬁle (MacOS X)

-shared

Creates a shared library (.so, .dll) instead of an executable ﬁle (other
platforms)

A.2.3 The make Utility
A real-world project of any appreciable complexity will undergo compilation many times as
it evolves through the software lifecycle of design, development, testing and release. As you
can imagine, having to manually recompile large projects as they evolve, or as they are
ported and distributed to new platforms, would present an unnecessary headache for programmers. The make command addresses this issue by allowing custom compilation and
linking steps to be stored in a ﬁle, called a Makeﬁle, that is saved to disk for repeated use.
The utility also provides a mechanism for only re-compiling and re-linking resources whenever they are modiﬁed or updated.
The compilation settings stored in a working Makeﬁle are actually quite simple—they
comprise a set of variables, or ‘‘macros’’ in make nomenclature, and compilation rules.
Required syntax for a Makeﬁle macro is very similar to the syntax for shell variables. To
deﬁne a macro, you must use the form name = value. To read a macro, you must use the
form $(name).
Makeﬁle rules contain two parts: the ‘‘dependency,’’ which informs make when to perform a compilation, and the ‘‘shell lines,’’ which inform make how to perform the compilation. The dependency always occurs on a dedicated line and follows the form target:
dependency1 dependency2 . . . . Each dependency must possess a corresponding shell
line, which is preﬁxed by a tab and occurs immediately after the dependency line4:
compiler/linker (flags) file1 file2. For example, the contents of a simple Makeﬁle
to compile and link the program test from the source ﬁle test.c could look like this:

713

Command-Line Tools Reference

CC = gcc
test: test.o
$(CC) –o test test.o
test.o: test1.c
$(CC) –c –o test.o test1.c
When run using the command make test, the contents of this Makeﬁle instruct make to
build the target program test whenever test.o needs to be updated—i.e., it is missing or has
changed. During the ﬁrst compilation, make determines that test.o does not yet exist, and
thus it will recursively resolve that dependency and ensure that the target test.o is built
before continuing. The dependency for test.o is similarly dependent on test1.c, and will
be rebuilt whenever the ﬁle test1.c changes. To build the target test.o, the command line
following that dependency is executed on the shell, using the compiler deﬁned in the macro,
CC.
A specialized and useful type of Makeﬁle rule called an ‘‘inference rule’’ makes reduces the
need for redundant rules for similar types of resources in a Makeﬁle. Consider the following
Makeﬁle:
CC = gcc
LINKER = gcc
CFLAGS = -c -ggdb
test: test1.o test2.o
$(LINKER) –o test test1.o test2.o
test1.o: test1.c
$(CC) $(CFLAGS) –o test.o test1.c
test2.o: test2.c
$(CC) $(CFLAGS) –o test.o test2.c
As you can see, each of the two source ﬁles requires a separate Makeﬁle rule that differs only
by ﬁlename. A version of the same Makeﬁle that makes use of an inference rule to eliminate
the redundancy might work as follows:
CC = gcc
LINKER = gcc
CFLAGS = -c -ggdb
OBJECTS = test1.o test2.o
default: test
test: $(OBJECTS)
$(LINKER) $(OBJECTS) -o test
.o: $*.c
$(CC) $(CFLAGS) $*.c
clean:
/bin/rm -rf *.o test

714

Appendix A

The rules for building each object ﬁle have been replaced by a generic object ﬁle extension
that uses a wildcard character to match the source code ﬁlename with the object. All dependent object ﬁles are now deﬁned in the macro, OBJECTS. Note also the presence of rules for
the targets clean and default. The clean rule simply executes a shell command to delete
all object and program ﬁles, and is very commonly used within Makeﬁles. The default rule
allows the program to be built by simply running the command, make, from the command
line.
A.3

Editing Files
Command-line text editors are much like digital audio workstation programs—engineers
love to talk themselves in circles about which one works the best, and in the end they all
have similar enough capabilities that the most logical approach is simply to pick one and
learn it inside and out. The two main protagonists in the so-called editor war are the two
most common command-line text editors, emacs and vi. Both are fully featured and stable
applications that are capable of performing tasks far beyond anything you actually have to
do in order to get some work done, and the author does not recommend one over the other.
That said, since at a certain point in time, the author learned emacs, and never had a good
enough reason to learn anything else, that’s what we’ll cover in this editor reference.
To launch emacs, assuming the program is installed in your shell, simply type
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ emacs
You can also pass a ﬁlename as an argument to open that ﬁle by default:
jonb@oberheim:~/book$ emacs test1.c
If you pass multiple ﬁles as arguments, they will all be opened into separate ‘‘buffers’’ in
emacs. Think of these buffers as being separate ‘‘documents,’’ each in a separate ﬂoating
window or frame within a traditional GUI text editor.
A.3.1 Basic Commands
In any text editor, it is important to know how to get around. See table A.6 for a set of basic
navigation commands for emacs, some of which will seem intuitive and some of which will
require some getting used-to. Some of these commands refer to a ‘‘Meta’’ key—this is usually
the ‘‘esc’’ key as a preﬁx, but is often remapped to ‘‘alt’’ or ‘‘option’’ in most shell environments for ease. In addition, some commands reference the ‘‘kill ring’’—this is a special buffer
in emacs for text that has been deleted, but it can be reclaimed after deletion by certain
other commands. This becomes a very useful tool for actions such as cutting and pasting.5

Table A.6
Basic emacs navigation and editing commands.
ctrl-x
ctrl-s

Save ﬁle.

ctrl-x

Open a ﬁle.

ctrl-f
ctrl-x

Write current buffer to a new ﬁle.

ctrl-w
ctrl-x

Quit emacs.

ctrl-q
ctrl-x k
Key: Up-Arrow or Control-p

Kill buffer.
Move up one line.

Key: Down-Arrow or ctrl-n

Move down one line.

Key: Left-Arrow or ctrl-b

Move left one character.

Key: Right-Arrow or Control-f

Move right one character.

Meta-f

Move forward one word or token.

Meta-b

Move back one word or token.

ctrl-a

Move to beginning of the current line.

ctrl-e
ctrl-v

Move to the end of the current line.
Page forward.

Meta-v

Page back.

Meta-<

Go to beginning of buffer.

Meta->

Go to the end of the buffer.

Meta-x goto-line

Go to line number.

ctrl-d

Delete the following character.

Alt-d

Delete the following word/token (place into ‘‘kill ring’’).

ctrl-k

Delete the following line, up to the newline character
(place into ‘‘kill ring’’).

ctrl-y

‘‘Yank’’ or return text from the ‘‘kill ring.’’

ctrl-s

Forward search.

ctrl-r

Reverse search.

Meta-%

Replace text.

ctrl-spacebar

Deﬁne the start of a copy/cut region.

Meta-w
ctrl-w

Deﬁne the end of a copy region and copy.
Deﬁne the end of a cut region and cut.

ctrl-x

View list of available buffers.

ctrl-b
ctrl-x b

Move to another buffer.

ctrl-x 2

Split screen horizontally between two buffers.

ctrl-x 3

Split spleen vertically between two buffers.

ctrl-x 1

Return to a single screen.

ctrl-l
ctrl-x u

Re-center page view around cursor line location.
Undo.

ctrl-g

Cancel in-progress command.

Meta-x help

Help subsystem for emacs.

716

Appendix A

Table A.7
Additional emacs commands for developers.
Meta-x compile

Compile code with the speciﬁed compile command.

Meta-x shell

Open a shell within the editor.

ctrl-c ctrl-c

Scroll to next error in the compile buffer.

Meta-x comment-region

Turn the region into comments.

Meta-x gdb

Run the GNU debugger within emacs.

A.3.2 Useful Commands for Development
The emacs editor, long used for development, was originally developed by the same author
of the GNU development tools gcc and gdb. Thus, there are a variety of features in emacs
that are useful for developers, some of which are listed in table A.7.
A.3.3 Running Macros
For automating repeated tasks, emacs also supports the creation of simple keyboard macros.
The process works as follows:
n
n
n
n
n

Enter the command ‘‘Meta-x(‘‘ to signal the start the macro.
Perform some combination of keyboard commands.
Enter the command ‘‘Meta-x )’’ to signal the end of the macro.
Enter the command ‘‘ctrl-x e’’ to execute the macro.
Enter the command ‘‘e’’ to continue executing the macro.

A.3.4 Stored User Preferences in the .emacs File
Upon launch, emacs reads the.emacs ﬁle in the user’s home directory to obtain any preferences and settings, including custom key bindings and deﬁnitions for custom functions. For
example, here is a line that can be placed in a .emacs ﬁle to remap the command Meta-x
goto-line to the key combination Meta-g:
(define-key global-map "\M-g" 'goto-line)
Function deﬁnitions for emacs must be implemented in the lisp programming language,
whose details and syntax are beyond the scope of the book. However, the author recommends self-study of this topic for readers with particular interest in emacs and, as inspiration, has included a custom function deﬁnition below to insert a custom code header into a
source ﬁle. Copy the entire passage below into your .emacs ﬁle and execute using Meta-/ to
see the results.

717

Command-Line Tools Reference

(defun jb-insert-code-header ()
(interactive)
(insert "//\n")
(insert "// " (buffer-name) "\n")
(insert "// (Project Name)\n")
(insert "//\n")
(insert "// Author: Jonathan Bailey, drumwell@gmail.com\n")
(insert "// Created on: ")
(insert (shell-command-to-string "date +%m/%d/%Y"))
(insert "// Copyright Drumwell Group " (shell-command-to-string
"date +%Y"))
(insert "//\n"))
(global-set-key "\M-/" 'jb-insert-code-header)
One of the major features of emacs is indeed its extensibility. With custom lisp code one
can change emacs to ones personal taste, add commands, and change the keystrokes for
others.
A.4

Learning More
The UNIX-compatible command line is far too complex and powerful to cover in full detail
in a short appendix. But many books have been written about both the shell environment as
a whole, and even about distinct commands, including emacs and sed. Further, bash, gcc,
and emacs are only singular examples of the many shells, compilers, and text editors that
are available for use in the command line. Refer to the references section for more links and
books to learn more about this powerful computing environment and tool set.

Notes
1. There is an alternative family of shell interfaces based strongly on the C language, called the C shell;
the common variant at present is the tcsh program. In many ways it is very similar to bash, as it uses
arguments, environment, variables as so forth, but with different syntax. It is a matter of personal choice
which shell one uses.
2. A regular expression is a character sequence used for matching patterns in text strings.
3. This behavior is signiﬁcantly different in the C shell.
4. One can have a dependency with no shell line, as long as it is somewhere. Also, one can have multiple lines each starting with a tab. As there is no tab, we know the dependency line has ended.
5. Note that emacs also has a built-in tutorial, accessed with the ctrl-h t key combination; and an
extensive help and documentation system. One can query any key combination by prefacing it with
ctrl-h k, and one can query the documentation for a function with ctrl-h f.

Appendix B: Debugging Software with the GNU Debugger
Jonathan Bailey

Software bugs—logical, algorithmic, and/or syntactical ﬂaws that cause undesired behavior
or output within a program—are an unfortunate fact of life in the world of programming.
Every software developer writes buggy code, and a mastery of the techniques required to
locate and remediate bugs is essential for success in any programming endeavor. In this
chapter we outline a set of core techniques for debugging software using code examples
from the preceding sections of the book. This overview makes use of the cross-platform and
freely available GNU Debugger, gdb, to illustrate this set of common debugging practices;
however, the underlying concepts apply equally well to any other debugger or integrated
development environment.
B.1

Basic Debugging Techniques
Before we delve into a debugging session using gdb, we must ﬁrst understand something
about what a debugger is and how it works, and how we can make use of such a tool to better
understand the inner workings of our code. Fundamentally, a debugger is simply a piece of
software that runs another program in a manner that better illuminates the run time state
of that program in a controlled setting. A debugger can provide a clearer view of a program’s
internal functionality by allowing the developer to run the compiled code step by step and
to view the program’s data structures and variables as their values change.
In most cases, before a program can be run within a debugger it must undergo a small
amount of additional preparation to allow the debugger to correlate the compiled version of
the program with the original source code. Most integrated development environments support this by specifying different build modes for a project, such as a ‘‘development’’ and
‘‘deployment,’’ but in the gcc/gdb environment we prepare a program for debugging by
specifying the ‘-ggdb’1 ﬂag during compilation. Using Richard Dobson’s frequency-to-MIDI
conversion utility, ftom (located on the DVD), as our ﬁrst example, we can compile ftom.c as
required using the following command2:
$ gcc -ggdb -o ftom ftom.c

720

Appendix B

The debugging information must be stored somewhere, and there are two main mechanisms used in different platforms. One scheme, used on Linux for example, is to write a
larger binary ﬁle with debugging tables at the end of the executable part. The other way is
to create a new ﬁle for this information, as used on OS X. On that platform, listing the contents of the directory containing the source ﬁle and the newly compiled program, we can see
that an additional ﬁle has been created that contains the desired ‘‘debug symbols’’ for debugging the program using gdb.3 We can now load this program into the debugger as follows.
$ gdb ftom
At this point, you should see some version, copyright, and license information for gdb, and a
command prompt that provides the main user interface for the command-line version of
gdb. Entering the help command at the prompt will reveal a list of commands, organized
into various topics, that can be executed from this prompt:
(gdb) help
List of classes of commands:
aliases -- Aliases of other commands
breakpoints -- Making program stop at certain points
data -- Examining data
files -- Specifying and examining files
internals -- Maintenance commands
obscure -- Obscure features
running -- Running the program
stack -- Examining the stack
status -- Status inquiries
support -- Support facilities
tracepoints -- Tracing of program execution without stopping the
program
user-defined -- User-defined commands
Type "help" followed by a class name for a list of commands in that
class.
Type "help" followed by command name for full documentation.
Command name abbreviations are allowed if unambiguous.
As the instructions indicate, to learn more about a ‘‘class’’ of commands, you can enter
help followed by the class name. For example, you can learn more about the set of commands that relay status information about the current debugging sessions as follows:
(gdb) help status
Status inquiries.
List of commands:
info -- Generic command for showing things about the program being
debugged

721

Debugging Software with the GNU Debugger

macro -- Prefix for commands dealing with C preprocessor macros
show -- Generic command for showing things about the debugger
Type "help" followed by command name for full documentation.
Command name abbreviations are allowed if unambiguous.
Again, per the displayed the instructions, to learn more about any individual command,
type help and the command name.
(gdb) help macro
Prefix for commands dealing with C preprocessor macros.
List of macro subcommands:
macro define -- Define a new C/C++ preprocessor macro
macro expand -- Fully expand any C/C++ preprocessor macro invocations
in EXPRESSION
macro expand-once -- Expand C/C++ preprocessor macro invocations
appearing directly in EXPRESSION
macro list -- List all the macros defined using the 'macro define'
command
macro undef -- Remove the definition of the C/C++ preprocessor macro
with the given name
Type "help macro" followed by macro subcommand name for full
documentation.
Command name abbreviations are allowed if unambiguous.
The scope of this overview will cover only a small selection of the available commands
within gdb, but we encourage you to learn more about all of the features of this debugger
by exploring the help command further.
B.1.1

Running the Program and Viewing Memory

The ﬁrst step in actually debugging a program is usually to identify sections of the code that
we would like to review as the program executes, which we can accomplish by setting a
‘‘breakpoint’’ on those particular lines of code in the program. The purpose of a breakpoint
is to inform the debugger to pause the execution of a program whenever the line of code that
contains the breakpoint is encountered during the debugging session. By pausing a running
program temporarily, we can step through the code at a slower pace, reviewing the state of
variables and conﬁrming that the path of execution actually occurs as expected.
To set a breakpoint in our example program, ftom, we start by ﬁrst reviewing the source
code from within gdb by using the list command to display the ﬁrst 37 lines from the
ftom.c. This will reveal the entire program source, numbered line by line, within gdb’s
output.

722

Appendix B

(gdb) list 1,37
1
/* listing 1.2. Calculate frequency of a MIDI Note number */
2
#include <stdio.h>
3
#include <math.h>
4
5
int main()
6
{
7
double semitone_ratio;
8
double fracmidi;
9
double c0;
10
double c5;
11
double frequency; /* which we want to find, */
12
int midinote; /* given this note. */
13
14
/* calculate required numbers */
15
/* find nearest MIDI note to a given frequency in Hz */
16
/* uses the log rule:
17
log_a(N) = log_b(N) / log_b(a)
18
to find the log of a value to base 'semitone_ratio'.
19
*/
20
21
semitone_ratio = pow(2, 1/12.0); /* approx. 1.0594631 */
22
23
/* find Middle C, three semitones above low A = 220 */
24
c5 = 220.0 * pow(semitone_ratio, 3);
25
26
/* MIDI Note 0 is C, 5 octaves below Middle C */
27
c0 = c5 * pow(0.5, 5);
28
frequency = 400.0;
29
fracmidi = log(frequency / c0) / log(semitone_ratio);
30
31
/* round fracmidi to the nearest whole number */
32
midinote = (int) (fracmidi + 0.5); //casting
33
printf("The nearest MIDI note to the
34
frequency %f is %d\n", frequency, midinote);
35
return 0;
36 }
37
As we can see from the output above, the ﬁrst 20 or so lines of code simply deﬁne variables
and contain comments. The ﬁrst real expression is contained at line 21, so we can set a
breakpoint here to view the results of the semitone ratio calculation.

723

Debugging Software with the GNU Debugger

(gdb) break 21
Breakpoint 1 at 0x1e93: file ftom.c, line 21.
Let’s set another breakpoint at the last line in the program, which, as we saw from the
output of the list command, occurs where the printf function is called on line 33.
(gdb) break 33
Breakpoint 2 at 0x1f69: file ftom.c, line 33.
We can now execute the program within gdb using the run command. This will cause
gdb to execute the program as though run from the command line, however gdb will pause
execution whenever a breakpoint is encountered. This will occur almost immediately in our
example because we have placed our ﬁrst breakpoint on the ﬁrst logic expression in the
program.
(gdb) run
Starting program: /path/to/ftom
Reading symbols for shared libraries ++. done
Breakpoint 1, main () at ftom.c:21
As we expect, as soon as gdb reaches line 21, the ﬁrst breakpoint is encountered and the
execution of ftom pauses. We can now view the current contents of the program’s variables
in memory, whose values we cannot at this stage predict because they have not yet been initialized with any valid data. One of several options of viewing these variables is the
print command, which literally prints the data stored in each variable to the debugger’s
console.
(gdb) print semitone_ratio
$1 = 0
(gdb) print c5
$2 = 8.6928873489885679e-311
(gdb) print frequency
$3 = 0
(gdb) print midinote
$4 = -1881141193
We continue running the program up until the next breakpoint using the continue command. The debugger will execute all of the intermediary program code between the current
and subsequent breakpoints and pause again. When we print the same values from
memory as above, we will see the expected modiﬁcations performed by the program code
from line 21 up to, but not including, 33. This is an important point to keep in mind—a
breakpoint on a given line of code pauses the run time execution of a program before that
line of code is executed.
(gdb) continue
Continuing.

724

Appendix B

Breakpoint 2, main () at ftom.c:33
33
printf("The nearest MIDI note to the frequency %f is %d\n",
frequency, midinote);
(gdb) print semitone_ratio
$5 = 1.0594630943592953
(gdb) print c5
$6 = 261.62556530059868
(gdb) print frequency
$7 = 400
(gdb) print midinote
$8 = 67
At this point, we can continue to the end of the program to view the results of the call to
printf.
(gdb) continue
Continuing.
The nearest MIDI note to the frequency 400.000000 is 67
Program exited normally.
(gdb)
B.1.2

Exerting Greater Control over the Debugging Sessions

Setting breakpoints within a program and running between those breakpoints is a useful
debugging technique, but sometimes we’d like to slow down the execution of the program
even further and step through each line of a program at our own pace. Additionally, the
task of manually printing each variable value we wish to monitor could quickly become
cumbersome. Below we will run the program, ftom, again to execute the code and view
data with greater control using the commands step and display.
(gdb) run
Starting program:
/Users/jonb/dev/audio/class/apb/redux/debug/ftom
Breakpoint 1, main () at ftom.c:21
21
semitone_ratio = pow(2, 1/12.0); /* approx. 1.0594631 */
(gdb) display midinote
1: midinote = -1881141193
(gdb) display fracmidi
2: fracmidi = 0
(gdb) step
24
c5 = 220.0 * pow(semitone_ratio, 3);
2: fracmidi = 0
1: midinote = -1881141193

725

Debugging Software with the GNU Debugger

(gdb) s
27
c0 = c5 * pow(0.5, 5);
2: fracmidi = 0
1: midinote = -1881141193
(gdb) s
28
frequency = 400.0;
2: fracmidi = 0
1: midinote = -1881141193
(gdb) s
29
fracmidi = log(frequency / c0) / log(semitone_ratio);
2: fracmidi = 0
1: midinote = -1881141193
(gdb) s
32
midinote = (int) (fracmidi + 0.5); //casting
2: fracmidi = 67.349957715000727
1: midinote = -1881141193
(gdb) s
Breakpoint 2, main () at ftom.c:33
33
printf("The nearest MIDI note to the frequency %f is %d\n",
frequency, midinote);
2: fracmidi = 67.349957715000727
1: midinote = 67
As can be seen, we selected two variables for continuous monitoring using the display
command, which accepts a variable name as argument. Using the step command (and subsequently s for shorthand), we are able to step through each line of code manually and
review the current value for the variables midinote and fracmidi after each line. This not
only saves us the time of printing out the values of the variables manually but also allows us
to view how and when their values changed as the program executes.
B.2

Debugging a More Complex Program
The previous example illustrated several techniques for debugging a fairly simplistic program
that contained a small amount of code and only one function. Most real-world applications
are much larger in size and scope, often containing thousands of lines of code across hundreds of functions deﬁned in many different ﬁles. In the next example, we look at some
additional debugging techniques for evaluating a larger application whose logic and code
spans several ﬁles and different functions, simple_oscil. This program is a simple monophonic synthesizer, based on an oscillator, that runs from the command-line and makes
use of the portaudio library for playback of generated audio, and can be found on the
DVD.

726

Appendix B

Once we have succeeded in building simple_oscil, we can load the program into gdb, as
before, and begin setting breakpoints wherever we want to pause the execution of the program. In this case, because we have multiple ﬁles that comprise the logic for this project, we
must specify a ﬁlename wherever we want to view source from a particular ﬁle within gdb.
Below, we view the code surrounding the function deﬁnitions for main in simple_oscil.c and
create_wave_square function in simple_waveforms.c, using the ability of the list command to accept a function name in addition to the range of line numbers used previously.
(gdb) list simple_oscil.c:main
184
}
185
}
186
187
188
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
189
{
190
simpleOscil data; // data structure that will contain the
defined waveshapes and be passed to portaudio
191
192
if(argc < 4) {
193
usage();
(gdb) list simple_waveforms.c:create_wave_square
34
triangle[i] = 1 - (i-halfway)*2.0/(float)(halfway);
35
}
36
}
37
38
// square wave - 1 until the middle of the period, and then
back down to -1
39
void create_wave_square(float *square, int wave_length) {
40
float halfway = ((float)wave_length)/2.;
41
int i;
42
for(i = 0; i < wave_length; i++)
43
square[i] = (i < halfway) ? 1 : -1;
As we did when viewing code form multiple ﬁles within gdb, we must also specify
ﬁle names when setting breakpoints for multi-ﬁle projects. In the following section, we’ll
show how to set a breakpoint on a function, using the examples create_wave_sine and
create_wave_square in the ﬁle simple_waveforms.c.
B.2.1

Conditional Debugging

Setting a breakpoint on a function name is a useful technique and saves the developer the
trouble of determining lines numbers for code that requires inspection during debugging.

727

Debugging Software with the GNU Debugger

In actual fact, when we set a breakpoint on a function, we are really setting a breakpoint on
the ﬁrst line of code contained in that function. For this debugging session, we will also
make use of additional feature of gdb that allows developers to have greater control over
the debugging session by assigning conditions to breakpoints.
(gdb) b simple_waveforms.c:create_wave_sine
Breakpoint 1 at 0xf2c5: file simple_waveforms.c, line 12.
(gdb) b simple_waveforms.c:create_wave_saw
Breakpoint 2 at 0xf334: file simple_waveforms.c, line 20.
(gdb) info b
Num Type
Disp Enb Address What
1 breakpoint keep y 0x0000f2c5 in create_wave_sine
at simple_waveforms.c:12
2 breakpoint keep y 0x0000f334 in create_wave_saw
at simple_waveforms.c:20
(gdb) condition 1 wave_length < 1024
(gdb) condition 2 wave_length > 1024
The output above shows that gdb associates a number with each breakpoint we set, which
we can view at any time using the info breakpoints (or info b, for shorthand) command. A breakpoint’s number can be used to associate a conditional expression with a given
breakpoint. The expression must be valid within the scope of the location of the breakpoint
in the program—for example, an expression that is dependent on a variable must reference a
variable that resides within the scope of the breakpoint location.
Conditional breakpoints can be very useful in debugging—they will only cause the execution of the program to pause whenever gdb reaches the associated line within the running
program and the condition assigned to that breakpoint evaluates to true. In this case, the
condition that we have set will cause the ﬁrst breakpoint, on the ﬁrst line of the function
create_wave_sine, to pause the program execution only when the program reaches that
function and supplies an argument within wave_length that contains a value of less than
1,024. Correspondingly, the second breakpoint, on the ﬁrst line of the function create_
wave_saw, will only cause a break when the wave_length argument is greater than 1,024.
Assuming that the main body of the program creates wave tables of a constant size (which it
does), these two conditions should prove to be mutually exclusive, and only one of the
breakpoints should trigger during run time.
As we saw in the ﬁrst example, gdb informs the user whenever a breakpoint is encountered, thus we can empirically conﬁrm which breakpoint triggers by simply running the program and reviewing the output. As a quick aside, this program differs from the ﬁrst example
in that we need to supply a set of command-line arguments to the program; if we enter the
run command without any arguments, the program will execute the usage function (which
displays required call-time syntax to the user), and exit, as follows.

728

Appendix B

(gdb) run
Starting program: path/to/simple_oscil
Reading symbols for shared libraries +++++++. . .. . .. . .. . ..
. .. . .. . .. . .. . .. done
usage: simple_oscil <waveform> <frequency> <duration>
(waveforms)
1 - sine
2 - sawtooth
3 - triangle
4 - square
Program exited with code 04.
(gdb) run 1 200 3
Starting program: path/to/simple_oscil 1 200 3
Breakpoint 2, create_wave_saw (saw=0x2d000, wave_length=8192) at
simple_waveforms.c:20
20
for(i = 0; i < wave_length; i++) {
As expected, the initial attempt to run failed because we did not supply the expected arguments to simple_oscil. After specifying a set of valid arguments, the program executed until
breakpoint 2, located on the ﬁrst line of create_wave_saw, was reached. We also see from
the output the values of the two parameters that were passed to the create_wave_saw
function—the value of pointer to an address in memory for the waveform array, saw, and
the desired waveform length, wave_length. That we did not pause the program execution
until we reached the second breakpoint makes sense—elsewhere in the code we deﬁne the
table length for each waveform to be 8,192 and pass that value to both the create_wave_
sine and create_wave_saw functions. Clearly 8,192 is never less than 1,024, and so the
condition we set for the ﬁrst breakpoint will always evaluate to false, which correctly
explains why we did not stop on the breakpoint located on the ﬁrst line of create_wave_
sine.
Previously we looked at two options of monitoring memory within gdb: manual output of
a variable using print and continuous output of a variable using display. A third option
for viewing memory during debugging is to make use of conditional structure similar to a
conditional breakpoint, known as a ‘‘watchpoint.’’ Whereas a breakpoint is always associated
with a line of code within the program, a watchpoint is always associated with the state of a
program variable and does not need to be tied to a speciﬁc line of code. Whenever the variable that a watchpoint is associated with changes, the watchpoint will inform gdb to output
the variable’s current value to the console.
Continuing with our current example, we will set a watchpoint on the value of the current
sample value of the sawtooth wave, saw[i], so we can review each point in the waveform as
it is generated.

729

Debugging Software with the GNU Debugger

(gdb) list create_wave_saw
13
sine[i] = sin(2.0*M_PI*i/(float)wave_length);
14
}
15
}
16
17
// sawtooth wave - ramp from 1 to -1 across the period
18
void create_wave_saw(float *saw, int wave_length) {
19
int i;
20
for(i = 0; i < wave_length; i++) {
21
saw[i] = 1-i*2.0/(float)(wave_length);
22
}
(gdb) watch saw[i]
Hardware watchpoint 3: saw[i]
(gdb) s
21
saw[i] = 1-i*2.0/(float)(wave_length);
(gdb) s
Hardware watchpoint 3: saw[i]
Old value = 0
New value = 1
create_wave_saw (saw=0x2d000, wave_length=8192) at
simple_waveforms.c:20
20
for(i = 0; i < wave_length; i++) {
(gdb) s
Hardware watchpoint 3: saw[i]
Old value = 1
New value = 0
0x0000f381 in create_wave_saw (saw=0x2d000, wave_length=8192) at
simple_waveforms.c:20
20 for(i = 0; i < wave_length; i++) {
(gdb) s
21
saw[i] = 1-i*2.0/(float)(wave_length);
(gdb) s
Hardware watchpoint 3: saw[i]
Old value = 0
New value = 0.999755859
create_wave_saw (saw=0x2d000, wave_length=8192) at
simple_waveforms.c:20
20 for(i = 0; i < wave_length; i++) {
(gdb) s
Hardware watchpoint 3: saw[i]

730

Appendix B

Old value = 0.999755859
New value = 0
0x0000f381 in create_wave_saw (saw=0x2d000, wave_length=8192) at
simple_waveforms.c:12
20 for(i = 0; i < wave_length; i++) {
(gdb) s
21
saw[i] = 1-i*2.0/(float)(wave_length);
(gdb) s
Hardware watchpoint 3: saw[i]
Old value = 0
New value = 0.999511719
create_wave_saw (saw=0x2d000, wave_length=8192) at
simple_waveforms.c:20
20 for(i = 0; i < wave_length; i++) {
(gdb) s
Hardware watchpoint 3: saw[i]
Old value = 0.999511719
New value = 0
0x0000f381 in create_wave_saw (saw=0x2d000, wave_length=8192) at
simple_waveforms.c:20
20 for(i = 0; i < wave_length; i++) {
(gdb) s
21
saw[i] = 1-i*2.0/(float)(wave_length);
(gdb) s
Hardware watchpoint 3: saw[i]
Old value = 0
New value = 0.999267578
create_wave_saw (saw=0x2d000, wave_length=8192) at
simple_waveforms.c:20
20 for(i = 0; i < wave_length; i++) {
(gdb)
As we can see, gdb outputs the value of saw[i] for each step because each time the loop
index, i, increments, a new value of saw[i] is obtained and then assigned a valid point
from the waveform. If we wish to limit the amount of information gdb generates, we can
always associate a condition with the watchpoint, as we did with breakpoints previously.
(gdb) info b
Num Type
Disp Enb Address What
1 breakpoint keep y 0x0000f2c5 in create_wave_sine at
simple_waveforms.c:12
stop only if wave_length < 1024

731

Debugging Software with the GNU Debugger

2 breakpoint keep y 0x0000f334 in create_wave_saw at
simple_waveforms.c:20
stop only if wave_length > 1024
breakpoint already hit 1 time
3 hw watchpoint keep y saw[i]
breakpoint already hit 7 times
(gdb) condition 3 saw[i] > .5
(gdb) info b
Num Type
Disp Enb Address What
1 breakpoint keep y 0x0000f2c5 in create_wave_sine at
simple_waveforms.c:12
stop only if wave_length < 1024
2 breakpoint keep y 0x0000f334 in create_wave_saw at
simple_waveforms.c:20
stop only if wave_length > 1024
breakpoint already hit 1 time
3 hw watchpoint keep y saw[i]
stop only if saw[i] > 0.5
breakpoint already hit 7 times
Finally, though we have not shown it explicitly in this overview, any breakpoint that is set
in gdb may be deleted, disabled and re-enabled, using the commands delete, disable and
enable, respectively, along with the breakpoint number.
B.2.2

A Closer Examination of the Program and Memory

Thus far we have only viewed memory during our debug session, and only in whatever
format gdb has designated for us. However, gdb does provide use with the ability to view
a piece of memory in other formats that we designate. We can also modify memory, as the
following session will illustrate, to alter the program in real time:
(gdb) break simple_oscil.c:extract_data
Breakpoint 1 at 0xf0f3: file simple_oscil.c, line 160.
(gdb) run 1 100 20
Starting program: /path/to/simple_oscil 1 100 20
Reading symbols for shared libraries +++++++. . .. . .. . .. . ..
. .. . .. . .. . .. . .. done
Breakpoint 1, extract_data (data=0xbffff45c, argv=0xbffff4a0) at
simple_oscil.c:160
160
int itemp = atoi(argv[1]);
(gdb) backtrace
#0 extract_data (data=0xbffff45c, argv=0xbffff4a0) at
simple_oscil.c:160

732

Appendix B

#1 0x0000f296 in main (argc=4, argv=0xbffff4a0) at
simple_oscil.c:198
(gdb) x/s argv[1]
0xbffff5d1:
"1"
(gdb) x/a argv[1]
0xbffff5d1:
0x30310031
(gdb) s
161
if(itemp < MIN_TABLE || itemp > MAX_TABLE) {
(gdb) print itemp
$1 = 1
(gdb) set itemp = 2
(gdb) print itemp
$2 = 2
In this session, we began by restarting gdb and reloading simple_oscil to clear out all of
our breakpoints and watchpoints, and then immediately set a breakpoint on the extract_
data function in the ﬁle simple_oscil.c. We then ran the program with the arguments
‘1 100 20,’ which instructed the program to play a pure sine waveform at a frequency of
100 Hz for a duration of 20 seconds. As expected, our ﬁrst breakpoint triggered as soon as
we reached the ﬁrst line of the extract_data function. This function parses and validates
the command-line data passed by the user to simple_oscil and assigns those values to our
program data structure. To conﬁrm the execution of the program according to our expectations, we made use of the backtrace to command to reveal the state of the call stack. The
function call stack shows that the program is currently executing the extract_data function, which was called by the main function.
#0 extract_data (data=0xbffff45c, argv=0xbffff4a0) at
simple_oscil.c:160
#1 0x0000f296 in main (argc=4, argv=0xbffff4a0) at simple_oscil.c:198
At this point, we reviewed the value of the second item in the argv command-line parameter array by using the examine command, x, and specifying a data encoding format.
(gdb) x/s argv[1]
0xbffff5d1:
"1"
(gdb) x/a argv[1]
0xbffff5d1:
0x30310031
This ﬁrst call to x instructs gdb to display the contents of the second argv array index formatted as a character string (/s), and we can clearly view the value we entered represented
in character form as ‘‘1.’’ We then also display this same value as an address in memory
because, as we know, strings values in C are stored as pointers to arrays of characters. We
step one instruction to copy this integer equivalent of this value into the temporary parameter itemp, and then conﬁrm success by printing out the value of itemp. We ﬁnish by

733

Debugging Software with the GNU Debugger

making use of the set command to assign a new value to itemp, which we conﬁrm is 2 by
printing out the value again.
(gdb) s
158 if(itemp < MIN_TABLE || itemp > MAX_TABLE) {
(gdb) print itemp
$1 = 1
(gdb) set itemp = 2
(gdb) print itemp
$2 = 2
On your computer there may be small differences in the gdb output, but these are slight
and unimportant.
B.3

Other Commands
There are a large number of other command understood by gdb, and every user get to be
familiar with a subset that allows working in a personally satisfactory way. In this section
we will outline some of those that the writer has found particularly useful.
We have already seen the use of the step command s to step through a program; a similar
command is next, usually abbreviated to n. While s steps to the next line in the whole program, n goes to the next written line, that is normally when the line number in the current
function changes. Often these two are the same, but not always. In particular, step will step
into a function call, while next will step over the function call. This is especially useful when
the programs call library routines that were not written by you and may not be compiled
with the -g ﬂag.
$ gdb simple_oscil
(gdb) break simple_oscil.c:extract_data
Breakpoint 1 at 0xf0f3: file simple_oscil.c, line 160.
(gdb) run 1 100 20
Starting program: /home/jpff/BOOK/C_baileyGDB(9p)/examples/simple
1 100 20
[Thread debugging using libthread_db enabled]
Breakpoint 1, extract_data (data=0xbffff45c, argv=0xbffff4a0)
at simple_oscil.c:160
160 int itemp = atoi(argv[1]);
(gdb)) s
161 if(itemp < MIN_TABLE || itemp > MAX_TABLE) {
(gdb) list
156 // simple user interaction function that queries input from the
user until they provide an acceptable value,
157 // defined by the ranges set above.

734

Appendix B

158
159 void extract_data(simpleOscil *data, char **argv) {
160 int itemp = atoi(argv[1]);
161 if(itemp < MIN_TABLE || itemp > MAX_TABLE) {
162 printf("Error: enter a valid wave shape (1=sin, 2=sawtooth,
3=triangle)\n");
163 exit(1);
164 } else {
165 data->table_num = itemp-1;
(gdb) s
165 data->table_num = itemp-1;
(gdb) s
168 float ftemp = atof(argv[2]);
(gdb) s
169 if(ftemp < MIN_FREQ || ftemp > MAX_FREQ) {
(gdb) s
175 data->table_inc = ftemp * TABLE_LENGTH/SAMPLE_RATE;
(gdb) s
178 ftemp = atof(argv[3]);
(gdb) s
179 if(ftemp < MIN_DUR || ftemp > MAX_DUR) {
(gdb) s
183 data->duration = ftemp;
(gdb) s
185 }
(gdb) s
main (argc=4, argv=0x7fffffffe168) at simple_oscil.c:202
202 create_waveshapes(&data);
At this point, if we use s the tracing will step into the function create_waveshapes:
(gdb) s
create_waveshapes (data=0x7fffffffe070) at simple_oscil.c:85
85
data->tables = (float**)malloc(sizeof(float*)*MAX_TABLE);
(gdb) s
88
for(i = 0; i < MAX_TABLE; i++) {
(gdb) s
89
data->tables[i] =
(float*)malloc(sizeof(float)*TABLE_LENGTH);
(gdb) s
88 for(i = 0; i < MAX_TABLE; i++) {
(gdb) list
83
// allocate space for the pointers to each array
84
// data->tables => float **;

735

Debugging Software with the GNU Debugger

85 data->tables = (float**)malloc(sizeof(float*)*MAX_TABLE);
86
87
// allocate space for the arrays themselves
88
for(i = 0; i < MAX_TABLE; i++) {
89
data->tables[i] =
(float*)malloc(sizeof(float)*TABLE_LENGTH);
90
}
91
92
// now generate the waveforms within the data structure//
(gdb) list
93
create_wave_sine(data->tables[0], TABLE_LENGTH);
94
create_wave_saw(data->tables[1], TABLE_LENGTH);
95
create_wave_triangle(data->tables[2], TABLE_LENGTH);
96
create_wave_square(data->tables[3], TABLE_LENGTH);
97
}
98
99
// this function simply initializes portaudio, creates a stream
and registers our
100 // callback function, and starts processing. after a delay
corresponding to our
101 // duration, playback is stopped, the stream is closed and
portaudio is terminated.
102
(gdb) b 93
Breakpoint 2 at 0x400fbc: file simple_oscil.c, line 93.
(gdb) c
Continuing.
Breakpoint 2, create_waveshapes (data=0x7fffffffe070) at
simple_oscil.c:93
93
create_wave_sine(data->tables[0], TABLE_LENGTH);
(gdb)
There are two new features here. The ﬁrst is that the break command can be abbreviated to b,
and we have used the continue command or c to continue from the current location until
the next breakpoint or until the program terminates.
At this point we decide that we do not need to inspect the operation of the function
create_wave_sine so we move to the next line with next or n.
(gdb) n
94
create_wave_saw(data->tables[1], TABLE_LENGTH);
(gdb)
If one was stepping through a function and by mistake stepped into an uninstrumented
library function, or one that is not of interest, what can one do? There is a gdb command

736

Appendix B

ﬁnish that runs to the ﬁnish of the current function and then stops as if there were a
breakpoint.
(gdb) s
create_wave_saw (saw=0x60b050, wave_length=8192) at
simple_waveforms.c:20
20
for(i = 0; i < wave_length; i++) {
(gdb) s
21
saw[i] = 1-i*2.0/(float)(wave_length);
(gdb) finish
Run till exit from #0 create_wave_saw (saw=0x60b050, wave_length=8192)
at simple_waveforms.c:21
create_waveshapes (data=0x7fffffffe070) at simple_oscil.c:95
95
create_wave_triangle(data->tables[2], TABLE_LENGTH);
(gdb)
There are many other commands, and an effective help system to help explore them.
B.4

Debugging after a Crash
A common problem is when one runs a program and it crashes for an unknown reason with
a cryptic error message, such as ‘‘segmentation fault.’’ It is possible to use gdb is a simple way
to ﬁnd out the problem. Most modern computers run without the creation of ‘‘core dumps’’
on error, but if you are running that way gdb can read a core ﬁle. This is illustrated in the
program broken.c on the DVD.
More often the process is to run the program under gdb and with no breakpoints, use the
run command:
$ gdb broken
(gdb) run 6
Starting program: /path/to/examples/broken 6
Program received signal SIGSEGV, Segmentation fault.
0x00000000004006a1 in main (argc=2, argv=0x7fffffffe178) at broken.c:36
36
list = list->next;
(gdb) print list
$1 = (struct data *) 0x0
We can see that the program stopped on line 31, and a little investigation shows the null
pointer being followed.
In more complex crashes, it is useful to know not only where the program faulted but also
how that point was reached. Using the broken program with a different option illustrates
this:

737

Debugging Software with the GNU Debugger

(gdb) run
Starting program: /home/jpff/BOOK/C_baileyGDB(9p)/examples/broken
Program received signal SIGFPE, Arithmetic exception.
0x00000000004005fc in fact (n=0) at broken.c:18
18
if (n==0) return fact(1/n);
(gdb) where
#0 0x00000000004005fc in fact (n=0) at broken.c:18
#1 0x0000000000400616 in fact (n=1) at broken.c:19
#2 0x0000000000400616 in fact (n=2) at broken.c:19
#3 0x0000000000400616 in fact (n=3) at broken.c:19
#4 0x0000000000400616 in fact (n=4) at broken.c:19
#5 0x0000000000400616 in fact (n=5) at broken.c:19$ gdb broken
#6 0x000000000040064b in main (argc=1, argv=0x7fffffffe188) at
broken.c:27
(gdb)
We can see the functions that led to the crash, the names of variables, and the line numbers of the call. We can investigate the local variables of each of these functions by using the
command up and then the printing and listing commands. The up command changes
the focus of function in the stack; there is also a down command to allow general navigation
on the stack.
(gdb) up
#1 0x0000000000400616
19
else return
(gdb) up
#2 0x0000000000400616
19
else return
(gdb)

in fact (n=1) at broken.c:19
n*fact(n-1);
in fact (n=2) at broken.c:19
n*fact(n-1);

Conclusion
In this debugging overview, we have looked at a variety of different techniques for debugging
a piece of software: how to compile an application for debugging; debugging features such
as breakpoints, conditional breakpoints, and watchpoints; and how to view and manipulate
memory in a running program in various different ways. These techniques represent a common set for debugging software projects through they are by no means comprehensive and
in reality comprise only a subset of the features of gdb. The majority of bugs, are usually just
a simple discrepancy between what a developer expects either a value in memory, or an execution ﬂow, to be, and what that value or ﬂow actually is when a program runs. This particular set of techniques addresses exactly those issues. Slowing down the processing of data

738

Appendix B

and closely observing the code as it runs - line by line and value by value—should provide a
solid foundation for attacking bugs in your own programs.
Notes
1. On Linux and other systems it is only necessary to use the ﬂag -g in order to get the necessary additional information. The gcc package provides a number of options to control the format of this information. The -g ﬂag uses the operating system native format, while -ggdb uses a gdb-speciﬁc form. There
are other formats for speciﬁc systems. In general, use -g if it works and -ggdb if there are problems.
2. This chapter assumes that both gcc and gdb are located within your path. For more information on
UNIX and command paths, refer to appendix A on the UNIX command line.
3. Under OS X, this ﬁle is a package called ftom.dSym, and may be organized differently on different
platforms.

Appendix C: Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle
Victor Lazzarini

In this appendix, we ﬁrst review the basic methods of accessing ﬁles using the standard C
input and output library, which are universally used. This is followed by a discussion of
soundﬁles and their characteristics, looking at ‘‘raw’’ ﬁles and self-describing formats. We
then examine two popular soundﬁle formats, RIFF-Wave and AIFF. To complete the text, we
introduce a cross-platform library for soundﬁle manipulation, libsndﬁle.
C.1

File Input and Output
The most general way of handling ﬁles for input and output is to use the standard C library.
It provides ways for writing text ﬁles or, more importantly, binary data ﬁles, such as
soundﬁles.
To open a ﬁle, use fopen(). Its prototype is shown here:
#include <stdio.h>
FILE *fopen(char *fname, char *mode);
The fopen() function, like all the standard IO functions, is declared in the header ﬁle
stdio.h. The name of the ﬁle to open is fname. The string mode determines how the
ﬁle may be accessed; see table C.1.
If the open operation is successful, fopen() returns a valid ﬁle handle. This ﬁle handle
will be used with all other functions that operate on the ﬁle. It is ‘‘opaque’’; that is, it is not
to be touched or changed directly. If fopen() fails, it returns a NULL pointer. For example:
FILE *fp;
if ((fp = fopen("myfile", "r")) ==NULL){
printf("Error opening file\n");
exit(1);
}
To close a ﬁle, use fclose(), whose prototype is
int fclose(FILE *fp);

740

Appendix C

Table C.1
The modes of the fopen() function.
Mode

Meaning

r

Open a text ﬁle for reading.

w

Create a text ﬁle for writing.

a

Append to a text ﬁle.

rb
wb

Open a binary ﬁle for reading.
Open a binary ﬁle for writing.

ab

Append to a binary ﬁle.

r+

Open a text ﬁle for read/write.

w+

Create a text ﬁle for read/write.

a+

Append or create a text ﬁle for read/write.

r+b

Open a binary ﬁle for read/write.

w+b

Create a binary ﬁle for read/write.

a+b

Append a binary ﬁle for read/write.

The fclose() function closes the ﬁle associated with fp, which must be a valid handle
previously obtained using fopen(), and which disassociates the stream from the ﬁle. The
fclose() function returns 0 if successful and EOF (end of ﬁle) if an error occurs.
C.1.1 Text File Functions
Four functions are provided for text ﬁle IO. First we have fputs() and fgets(), which
write or read a string from a ﬁle, respectively. Their prototypes are
int fputs(char *str,FILE *fp);
and
char *fgets(char *str, int num, FILE *fp);
The fputs() function writes the string str to the ﬁle fp. It returns EOF if an error occurs
and a non-negative value if successful. The null that terminates str is not written. The
fget() function reads characters from the ﬁle fp into a string str until num  1 characters
have been read, a new-line character is encountered, or the end of the ﬁle is reached. The
string is null-terminated and the newline character is retained. The function returns str if
successful or NULL if an error occurs.
The other two functions are fprintf() and fscanf(). These functions operate exactly
like printf() and scanf() except that they work with ﬁles. Their prototypes are
int fprintf(FILE *fp, char *control-string, . . .);
and

741

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

int fscanf(FILE *fp, char *control-string . . .);
and they read or write to a ﬁle rather than to the standard input/output (console).
C.1.2 Binary File Functions
The standard C library includes two general-purpose ﬁle functions: fread() and fwrite().
These functions can read and write any type of data, using any kind of representation. Their
prototypes are
size_t fread(void *buffer, size_t size, size_t num,FILE *fp);
and
size_t fwrite(void *buffer, size_t size, size_t num, FILE *fp);
The fread() function reads from the ﬁle fp num number of items, each item size bytes
long, into a buffer pointed to by buffer. It returns the number of items actually read. If this
value is 0, no objects have been read. You can use the functions
int feof(FILE *fp);
and
int ferror(FILE *fp);
to see if there was an error or if the end of ﬁle has been reached.
The feof() function returns true (non-0) if the reading orwriting pointer for fp has
reached the end of ﬁle; otherwise it returns false (0). The ferror() function returns non-0
if the reading of or writing to fp has experienced an error; otherwise it returns 0.
The fwrite() function is the opposite of fread(). It writes to ﬁle fp num number of
items, each item size bytes long, from the buffer pointed to by buffer. It returns the number of items written. This value will be less than num only if an output error has occurred.
C.1.3 Reading/Writing Pointer Functions
You can position a ﬁle reading/writing position to the start of the ﬁle using rewind(). Its
prototype is
void rewind(FILE *fp);
You can point to a certain position in bytes along a ﬁle by using
int fseek(FILE *fp, long offset, int whence);
This positions the read orwrite pointer at position offset (in bytes), which is also determined by the parameter whence. There are three options for this parameter:

742

Appendix C

1.
2.
3.
or

SEEK_SET, offset is the absolute position from the beginning of ﬁle.
SEEK_CUR, offset is the position from the current read/write pointer position..
SEEK_END, offset is calculated in relation to the end of the ﬁle, offset can then be negative
positive (extending the length of the ﬁle).
The fseek function returns 0 if successful and the constant EOF if not.
Finally, you can also ﬁnd the current position by using int ftell(FILE *fp).

C.2

Raw Soundﬁles
In this section we will be discussing the basic aspects of sound storage in computer ﬁles.
Soundﬁles are very important for music programming, as they provide a medium for manipulating audio in a computer. They were the ﬁrst type of support for computer music, and
until very recently they were the typical means of input and output of a sound-generating
program. Soundﬁles provide a way of implementing computer musical signal processing in
a platform/device-independent way, without the need to consider more complex issues relating to real-time performance, ADC/DAC, etc.
C.2.1 What’s in a Soundﬁle?
Sound in computers is treated, as everything else, in a digitally encoded way. There are different types of digital encoding, some using compressed data, some uncompressed. The most
common of all these, and the one we will be using, is known as pulse code modulation
(PCM). This type of encoding is the one used in most professional soundﬁles and in other
types of digital audio applications, such as CDs, DATs, and ADATs. PCM data is basically a
stream of binary numbers, which represent samples of a waveform at certain points in time.
Each number (which will be a group of binary digits, one or more bytes long) represents a
speciﬁc amplitude measured at that time point; we call that number a sample. It is important
not to confuse this deﬁnition of a sample as a single number describing a waveform at a time
point with the more colloquial use of the word to mean a sampled signal (as in a ‘‘piano
sample’’).
A soundﬁle holds a certain number of binary numbers, or samples, describing a digital
waveform. This is what we should expect when reading a soundﬁle and what we should
output when writing a soundﬁle. It is, in fact, very simple, just a sequence of numbers. It is
important, however, to point out that these numbers are written in binary, not in ASCII
(text) form. That is the only proviso in handling soundﬁles.
By writing a program that opens a ﬁle for reading/writing in binary, we are able to manipulate audio data. However, in order to do so in a more complete way, we will have to understand the characteristics of the digital signal we are handling. Audio data, the sequence of
samples, is nothing more than a series of zeroes and ones. To interpret it, we need to know

743

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

how many bits (or bytes) make up a single sample (the precision), what time interval the
samples are supposed to be separated by (the sampling period), and how many channels of
audio are represented in the sequence of samples (samples per frame). Once we know these
things, and we are not reading/writing data produced by or meant for a different computer
system, we are ready to make computer music.
C.2.2 Sample Precision
The ﬁrst thing we need to know about our digital data is how many bits (or bytes) were used
in the encoding of each sample. With this information, we will know how to group the bits
in the sample, so when we read a ﬁle, we know that every so many bytes represent a different
number. Generally speaking, the typical PCM-format soundﬁle will represent samples
as integers, either as single byte (8-bit) samples (the lowest precision) or as two-, three-, or
four-byte samples.
The CD/DAT standard precision is based on 16-bit, or two-byte, samples. In the C language
these are called short int(egers) or shorts. Single-byte samples are chars, and three-byte
or four-byte samples are going to be stored in long ints or just ints. (There are no 3-byte,
24-bit data types in C.) Since 8-bit precision is not used in professional computer music
systems, we will ignore it. Because 16-bit is a popular norm, and is more than good enough
for most applications, we will be concentrating on it. Higher precisions can be handled in
similar ways.
Short integer values range between 32,768 and 32,767, so the maximum possible signalto-noise ratio in CD format audiois 96 dB. It is important not to exceed these maximum and
minimum values in order to avoid clipping distortion.
You can open and read a binary ﬁle containing PCM audio samples, stored as 16-bit integers, with the following code:
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
int main(){
FILE *fpin;
short *audioblock;
int samples = 0;
fpin = fopen("soundfile," "rb");
audioblock = (short *) malloc(sizeof(short)*256);
while(!feof(fpin))
samples += fread(audioblock, sizeof(short), 256, fpin);
printf("%d samples read from file," samples);

744

Appendix C

free(audioblock);
fclose(fpin);
return 0;
}
This code, of course, is just an example, and it does not do anything but report how many
samples were read. However, it shows some important aspects of what we have to do to read
audio: open a ﬁle, allocate some memory to hold the samples we read from the ﬁle, and
read them in a loop until we reach the end of the ﬁle. Note that the program reads a block
of samples from the ﬁle. We could have read a single sample at a time. However, this would
not be as efﬁcient as reading a whole block every time we call the fread() function.
The loop conditional control here is the simplest: check if we reached the end of the ﬁle; if
we have not, keep reading. In this program we are overwriting the memory we reserved to
hold samples, but in a real-life situation we would ideally do something with the data before
overwriting it. In order to do so, we normally would have to know a little more about it.
C.2.3 Sampling Rate
The next parameter that deﬁnes what our sample data represents in terms of audio is the
sampling rate (sr). This is the number of samples in one period of time, say a second (in which
case we are measuring it in hertz). This is the inverse of the time lapse between each sample
point. The CD standard is 44,100 Hz. It is generally acceptable. At this sr, one second of a
single channel of 16-bit audio will occupy 88,200 bytes of storage (44,100 shorts).
The sr has two important side effects on the computer system, one having to do with size
of storage and one having to do with real-time capabilities. In general, modern systems are
well capable of handling high sampling rates and have enough disk storage to hold long
soundﬁles. However, the use of high sampling rates (above the usual 44,100 Hz) will require
more storage space and may put some limits on simultaneous playback of multiple ﬁles. For
this course, we will be sticking to 44,100-Hz sampling rate and to 16-bit samples. The sampling rate also limits the frequency range of a system, limiting the highest possible frequency
(before aliasing occurs) to half the sr frequency, also known as the Nyquist frequency (that
is, to 22,050 Hz in the present case).
C.2.4 Audio Channels
The third characteristic of digital audio data is the number of channels present in a soundﬁle. Multiple channels are generally stored in an interleaved way: adjacent samples will
belong to different channels. A group of samples representing a single time point of a multichannel audio data is known as a sample frame. The size of the sample frame is thus equivalent to the number of channels present in the data.

745

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

A two-channel block of data will contain a sequence of two-sample sample frames; each
frame will contain samples for channel 1 (left) and channel 2 (right), in that order. Similarly,
a four-channel ﬁle will contain a sequence of four-sample sample frames. It is very important
to know how many channels we are dealing with, so that the sample streams of different
channels get separated accordingly.
As an example, consider the following code, which takes a one-second extract from a twochannel soundﬁle (sr ¼ 44,100) and splits the channels into two separate ﬁles:
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
int main(){
FILE
*fpin, *fpleft, *fpright;
short *audioblock, *left, *right;
int
frames, samples, end, i, j;
int
sr = 44100;
int
blockframes = 100, blocksamples;
int
channels = 2;
blocksamples = blockframes*channels;
end = sr;
fpin = fopen("soundfile," "rb");
fpleft = fopen("left_channel," "wb");
fpright = fopen("right_channel," "wb");
audioblock = (short *) malloc(sizeof(short)*blocksamples);
left = (short *) malloc(sizeof(short)*blockframes);
right = (short *) malloc(sizeof(short)*blockframes);
for(i=0; i < end && !feof(fpin); i+=blockframes){
samples = fread(audioblock, sizeof(short), blocksamples, fpin);
frames = samples/2;
for(j=0; j < frames; j++){
left[j] = audioblock[j*2];
right[j] = audioblock[j*2+1];
}
fwrite(left,sizeof(short), frames, fpleft);
fwrite(right,sizeof(short), frames,fpright);
}
free(audioblock);
free(left);
free(right)

746

Appendix C

fclose(fpleft);
fclose(fpright);
fclose(fpin);
return 0;
}
C.3

Self-Describing Soundﬁle Formats
The fact that sample data is meaningless without any information as to how it is representing a digital signal points to the need for additional elements to be stored with the sound
itself. So far, we have been handling ‘‘raw’’ soundﬁles, because we know what to expect
from the sample data. However, if we want to make our soundﬁles more ﬂexible and portable, we will have to use a self-describing soundﬁle format. This will store, along with the audio,
information about the sr, the number of channels, the sample width (precision), the number
of sample frames in the ﬁle, and other useful information. The simplest way to do this
is through an agreed soundﬁle header format. One of the ﬁrst formats around was the
SUN/Next .au audio ﬁle format. This carried a ﬁxed-size header containing all pertinent
information at the start of the ﬁle. In this format, the header is deﬁned in a simple C structure. The structure is used to read or write the header information. To create such a ﬁle, all
that is necessary is to ﬁll the structure ﬁelds with the required values and then write the
whole structure to disk. The sound data is written after the header. Accessing .au ﬁles
involves reading the whole header structure before getting the sound data.
The most common formats, AIFF and RIFF-Wave, are slightly different from this. They are
known as ‘‘chunked’’ formats, where the data resides in chunks, rather than being composed
of a ﬁxed header plus sound data. Each ‘‘chunk’’ can be deﬁned by a separate C language
structure and can exist anywhere in a ﬁle (not necessarily at the beginning). However, we
can mimic these types of ﬁles using a ﬁxed-header structure that agglutinates the basic
required chunks plus the sound data.
A complete discussion of AIFF and Wave soundﬁles is presented later in this appendix. In
this section, we will show how a ﬁxed-header ﬁle works by generating a simple RIFF-Wave
ﬁle based on a ﬁxed header.
First it is necessary to deﬁne a header structure:
typedef struct riff_wave_header {
int magic;
/* 'RIFF' */
int len0;
/* file size—8 (in bytes) */
int magic1;
/* 'WAVE' */
int magic2;
/* 'fmt ' */
int len;
/* chunk length (16 bytes) */

747

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

short format;
short nchns;
int rate;
int aver;
short nBlockAlign;
short bits;
int magic3;
int datasize;
} wavehead;

/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*

1 is PCM, rest not important */
channels */
sampling frequency */
nBlockAlign * rate */
nchns * size / 8 */
size of each sample (8,16,32) */
'data' */
sound data size in bytes */

This structure combines two required RIFF-Wave chunks: format (fmt) and data. If we write
to the beginning of a ﬁle, we will mimic a RIFF-Wave with the minimum required chunks in
a straightforward order. This will work without any restriction for newly generated ﬁles. It is
not guaranteed to work for reading all sorts of wave ﬁles, as some might have chunks in a
different order, or possibly other chunks in between the format and data chunk. Nevertheless, it works for simple cases.
Next it is necessary to deﬁne the ‘‘magic numbers’’ that are needed to name the chunks in
the header structure:
static
static
static
static

char
char
char
char

RIFF_ID[4] = {'R','I','F','F'};
WAVE_ID[4] = {'W','A','V','E'};
FMT_ID[4] = {'f','m','t',' '};
DATA_ID[4] = {'d','a','t','a'};

We deﬁne them as ‘‘static,’’ so that there is only one copy each of those variables in a program unit. Now we can write a function that will ﬁll the header structure with the appropriate values:
void update_header(wavehead* header, int sr, int channels,
int precision, int databytes){
header->magic = (*(long *)RIFF_ID);
header->len0 = databytes + sizeof(wavehead) - 8;
header->magic1 = (*(long *)WAVE_ID);
header->magic2 = (*(long *)FMT_ID);
header->len = 16;
header->format = 1;
header->nchns = (short) channels;
header->rate = sr;
header->aver = sr*channels*precision/8;
header->nBlockAlign = (short) (channels*precision/8);
header->bits = (short) precision;
header->magic3 = (*( long *)DATA_ID);
header->datasize = databytes;
}

748

Appendix C

We can use this to write a synthesis program that will output a wave ﬁle that can be read on
any Windows soundﬁle editor:
#include
#include
#include
#include

<math.h>
<stdio.h>
<stdlib.h>
"wave.h" /* header file containing the wavehead struc
and the declaration of update_header() */

int main(int argc, char** argv){
FILE *fpout;
short *audioblock;
int end, i, j;
int sr = 44100;
int blockframes = 256;
int databytes ;
unsigned int ndx = 0;
float dur, freq;
double twopi;
wavehead *header;

/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*

output file pointer */
audio memory pointer */
dur in frames, counter vars */
sampling rate */
audio block size in frames */
audio data in bytes */
phase index for synthesis */
duration, frequency */
2*PI */

if(argc != 4) {
printf("usage: %s outfile dur freq \n", argv[0]);
exit(-1);
}
dur = atof(argv[2]);
freq = atof(argv[3]);
twopi = 8*atan(1.);
end = (int)(dur*sr);
fpout = fopen(argv[1], "wb");
audioblock = (short *) malloc(sizeof(short)*blockframes);
/* set the data size */
databytes = end*sizeof(short);
/* write the header */
header = (wavehead *) malloc(sizeof(wavehead));
update_header(header, sr, 1, 16, databytes);
fwrite(header, 1, sizeof(wavehead), fpout);
for(i=0; i < end; i+=blockframes){
for(j=0; j < blockframes; j++, ndx++){
audioblock[j] = 16000*sin(ndx*twopi*freq/sr);
}

749

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

fwrite(audioblock,sizeof(short), blockframes, fpout);
}
free(audioblock);
free(header);
fclose(fpout);
return 0;
}
The only caveat about this program is that it is not portable to big-endian machines (see
below).
C.3.1 Byte-Ordering Confusion
The ﬁnal reason for using established self-describing formats is to solve the problem of data
portability between machines. This is due to the different byte-ordering conventions used in
Intel-based hardware (e.g. PCs and Intel Macs) and Motorola/PowerPC/Sun/etc-based processors (e.g. PPC Macs). The Intel ordering is known as ‘‘little-endian’’; the Motorola/etc
ordering is known as ‘‘big-endian.’’ They have to do with the way bytes are ordered in a
multi-byte data type.
Little-endian ordering puts the least signiﬁcant byte (LSB) ﬁrst and the other bytes in order
of increasing signiﬁcance. The LSB is the byte where a change of, say, 0 to 1 leads to the
smallest change in actual decimal values; e.g. (for two byte integers),
LSB
MSB
0000 0000 0000
0000 0001 0000
0000 0000 0000

0000 [0]
0000 [1]
0001 [256]

Big-endian ordering puts the MSB ﬁrst and the other bytes in decreasing signiﬁcance order.
File formats are generally either little-endian or big-endian and this generally depends
to which platform they are native: AIFF ﬁles are big-endian, as they are the preferred Mac
format (because traditionally Macs had used big-endian hardware, but now are based on
little-endian Intel processors). RIFF-Wave was designed by Microsoft and is native to the PC
and Windows. When writing programs that deal with these formats, they have to provide
byte-order conversion if the native format is different from the expected ordering. An example of such conversion is provided below.
C.4

RIFF-Wave Soundﬁles
In this section, we will describe the structure of a Wave ﬁle format. This format is based on
the RIFF (Resource Interchange File Format) framework, which has other applications besides

750

Appendix C

audio. As all RIFF ﬁles, the Wave ﬁle format is a ‘‘chunked’’ ﬁle format and is native to the
Windows operating system. In this format (which was created for Intel processors), all integer data is stored in little-endian (least signiﬁcant byte ﬁrst) order.
Chunks are blocks of data, each one storing a different type of information. Each chunk
has its own mini-header, consisting of its ID and the number of bytes of data it contains.
Both header components are 32-bit integers, making the chunk header only 8 bytes long.
(The chunk size is the ﬁle size minus this header size.) All chunks of a Wave ﬁle are subchunks contained in a RIFF chunk. The sole data that this chunk contains is the resource
ID, which is always the ASCII characters WAVE. Since the chunk header is always the same
for all RIFF chunks, it will be excluded from the chunk deﬁnitions in the next sections. We
will assume it to precede any chunk-speciﬁc data.
The usual ﬁle format has the following structure:
[RIFF chunk]

[format subchunk]

[data subchunk]

chunk ID: RIFF
chunk datasize: total ﬁle size minus this header size (8 bytes)
RIFF Type ID: 'WAVE'
chunk ID: fmt
chunk datasize: the size of the format chunk
chunk data (data format info)
chunk ID: 'data'
chunk datasize: the size of audio data
sample data

[other subchunks]
This is the basic RIFF structure. It groups the ﬁles contents (sample format data, samples,
etc.) into separate chunks, with their own headers and data bytes. The chunk header speciﬁes
the type and size of the chunk data bytes. This organization method allows programs to
easily skip over unwanted chunks of data and then continue processing relevant chunks.
Certain types of chunks may also contain subchunks. RIFF ﬁle chunks must be word-aligned
(16-bit aligning). This means that their total size must be a multiple of two bytes (2, 4, 6, 8,
and so on). If a chunk contains an odd number of data bytes, an extra padding byte with a
value of zero must follow the last data byte. This extra padding byte is never counted in the
chunk size. A program must always check for a word-aligned size (even) in chunks when calculating the offset of the following chunk.
C.4.1 Wave File Chunks
A wave ﬁle must contain at least two chunks: the format chunk and the data chunk (or a
wave-list chunk instead). These are the two chunks needed to describe the data format and
to hold the samples themselves. According to the original ﬁle format documentation, the
format chunk must be placed before the data chunk.

751

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

C.4.2 Format Chunk
The format chunk speciﬁes the format of the wave data present in the data chunk. Its ID
is 'fmt ' (four characters, including a space). Its data ﬁelds are made up of two sections:
common ﬁelds and format-speciﬁc ﬁelds. The ﬁrst is deﬁned by the following data structure
(WORD is a 16-bit integer, DWORD a 32-bit integer):
struct {
WORD
WORD
DWORD
DWORD
WORD
}

wFormatTag;
wChannels;
dwSamplesPerSec;
dwAvgBytesPerSec;
wBlockAlign;

wFormatTag is the data format code: 1 for PCM; other codes for different encoding/
compressed data formats. wChannels is the number of interleaved audio channels.
dwSamplesPerSec is the data sampling rate. dwAvgBytesPerSec is the average number
of bytes per second for data transfer and can be used to estimate playback buffer sizes.
wBlockAlign is the alignment of data in bytes, which can be used for buffer alignment.
The format-speciﬁc data is dependent on the format code. For the speciﬁc case of PCM
audio, it takes the form
WORD wBitsPerSample;
wBitsPerSample is the number of bits in a single sample, i.e., the encoding precision. The
lowest allowed precision is 8 bits (in the unsigned range 0–256). PCM data are generally
expected to be integral in the Wave format (i.e., there is no way of distinguishing integers
from ﬂoating-point numbers). Other formats will have different (and possibly more) ﬁelds—
this has to be taken into account when setting the chunk size, which is just 16 bytes for
PCM.
For PCM data, the value of wAvgBytesPerSample is
wChannels * wSamplesPerSecond * wBitsPerSample / 8
and wBlockAlign is
wChannels * wBitsPerSample / 8
These values may change, depending on the encoding or compression format.
C.4.3 Storage of Audio Data
Audio data in a Wave-format ﬁle can be stored using either a single data chunk or, rarely, a
wave-list chunk. The data chunk contains the sample data in the format and compression

752

Appendix C

method speciﬁed in the Wave Format Chunk. Wave ﬁles usually contain only a single data
chunk. If a wave-list chunk is used, then several data chunks can be used, together with
silent chunks.
The data chunk ID is data, its size is the audio data size in bytes, and its contents are
audio samples. Multi-channel data are stored as interleaved samples, in ‘‘frames’’ containing
two or more samples for each channel. As was mentioned above, 8-bit precision samples are
stored as unsigned values. All other sample bit sizes are speciﬁed as signed values. All RIFF
chunks (including WAVE ‘‘data’’ chunks) must be word aligned. If the sample data uses an
odd number of bytes, a padding byte with a value of zero must be placed at the end of the
sample data. Note that the ‘‘data’’ chunk header’s size should not include this byte.
The wave-list chunk contains a series of subchunks (data chunks or silent chunks). Its
chunk ID is wavl. The silent chunk content (its ID being slnt) is deﬁned as
DWORD dwSamples;
dwSamples is the number of ‘‘silent’’ samples. These are a series of samples that must be
silent, in between the samples of each data chunk. The wave-list chunk has rarely been
used; it should be avoided, because many programs do not recognize it.
C.4.4 Fact Chunk
The fact chunk is required only if the ﬁle is storing compressed data. Its ID is fact, and currently it contains only one ﬁeld:
DWORD dwFileSize;
dwFileSize is the number of samples of waveform data in this ﬁle. This chunk was originally designed to be expanded if and when new formats were added to the Wave format
speciﬁcation. New formats would add format-dependent information in new ﬁelds added to
this chunk.
C.4.5 Cue Chunk
This optional chunk identiﬁes a series of positions (cue points) in the sample data stream.
The cue chunk ID is 'cue ' (with a space at the end). The ﬁrst member of the cue chunk is
DWORD dwCuePoints;
dwCuePoints is the number of cue points deﬁned in this chunk. This is followed by one or
more cue point descriptions, deﬁned by the following data structure:
struct {
DWORD dwName;
DWORD dwPosition;

753

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

FOURCC fccChunk;
DWORD dwChunkStart;
DWORD dwBlockStart;
DWORD dwSampleOffset;
}
dwName is the cue-point identiﬁer; it must be unique. dwPosition speciﬁes the position of
the cue in a sequential order. fccChunk is either data or slnt; it speciﬁes which of the
chunks contains the cue. dwChunkStart is used only with wave-list data; it speciﬁes the ﬁle
position of the data or silent chunk relative to the start of the data section of the wave-list
chunk; otherwise, it is zero. dwBlockStart is also used only with wave-list data; it speciﬁes
the ﬁle position of the data section of the slnt or data chunk relative to the start of the
data section of the wave-list chunk; otherwise, it is zero. dwSampleOffset is the sample
position of the cue point relative to the start of the block.
C.4.6 Playlist Chunk
This speciﬁes a play order for a series of cue points. Its ID is plst. It contains a number of
playlist segments:
DWORD play-segments;
Each segment is deﬁned by the following data structure:
struct {
DWORD dwName;
DWORD dwLength;
DWORD dwLoops;
}
Here dwName is the cue point identiﬁer (found in the cue chunk), dwLength is the length of
the play segment in samples, and dwLoops is the number of times the segment should be
played. A series of such playlist segments is stored in the chunk.
C.4.7 Associated Data Chunk
This provides a list of attached information, including labels, to the waveform data. Its ID is
adtl. It can contain four different types of subchunks: labels (labl), notes (note), text
(ltxt), and ﬁle (file). The label and note chunks have the same structure:
struct {
DWORD dwName;
ZSTR data;
}

754

Appendix C

Here dwName is the cue-point identiﬁer to which the label (labl chunk) or text (note)
is associated, and data is a NULL-terminated string containing the label or text to be
associated.
The text chunk is used to associate a text with a data segment of speciﬁc length. It data
structure is as follows:
struct {
DWORD dwName;
DWORD dwSampleLength;
DWORD dwPurpose;
WORD wCountry;
WORD wLanguage;
WORD wDialect;
WORD wCodePage;
BYTE* data;
}
The dwName element is the cue-point identiﬁer to which the text is associated,
dwSampleLength speciﬁes the number of samples in the segment, dwPurpose speciﬁes a
type or code for the text (e.g. 'scrp' for script), wCountry speciﬁes the country code for
the text, wLanguage and wDialect speciﬁes the language and dialect codes for the text,
wCodePage speciﬁes the code page for the text, and data is the associated text characters.
The ﬁnal subchunk to be examined is the ﬁle subchunk, which has the structure
struct {
DWORD dwName;
DWORD dwMediaType;
BYTE *fileData;
}
and is used to store attached information in other ﬁle formats. Here dwName is the cue-point
identiﬁer to which the ﬁle is associated, dwMediaType is the ﬁle type in the ﬁledata ﬁeld, it
can be either a known type or 0, and fileData contains the ﬁle associated with the cue
point.
C.5

AIFF Soundﬁles
Audio Interchange File Format (AIFF) is another common soundﬁle format. It has been
mostly used in the MacOS platform. This ﬁle format is also a chunked format. In general it
is quite similar to RIFF-Wave. One major difference is that all multi-byte integral data in this
format is stored in big-endian format. AIFF ﬁles require only two chunks to be present: the
common chunk and the sound data chunk. These are actually subchunks of the form AIFF
chunk, as shown below:

755

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

[FORM chunk:]
[comm subchunk :]
[sound subchunk:]

chunk ID: 'FORM'
form Type ID: 'AIFF'
chunk ID: 'COMM'
chunk data (common format info)
chunk ID: 'SSND'
sample data

[other subchunks]
C.5.1 Common Chunk
The common chunk is equivalent to the format chunk of RIFF-Wave ﬁles and contains the
ﬁle format information:
struct {
ID
long
short
unsigned long
short
extended
}

chunkID;
chunkSize;
numChannels;
numSampleFrames;
sampleSize;
sampleRate;

Here chunkID (ID is a four-character data type) is 'COMM', chunkSize is the number of
bytes in the chunk (as with the RIFF-Wave 'fmt ' chunk, it does not include the eight bytes
preceding it, so it will be 18 bytes), numChannels is the number of audio channels (multiple
channels are interleaved), numSampleFrames is the number of sample frames (the total
number of data samples divided by numChannels), sampleSize is the number of bits in
each sample (sample data are supposed to be integral), and sampleRate is the sampling frequency (held in a special data type: the 80-bit IEEE Standard 754 ﬂoating-point number,
which is 10 bytes long and will need special translation to a standard double-precision type).
C.5.2 Sound Data Chunk
The Sound Data Chunk contains the sample data:
struct {
ID
long
unsigned long
unsigned long
unsigned char
}

chunkID;
chunkSize;
offset;
blockSize;
WaveformData[];

756

Appendix C

The chunkID is 'SSND', and chunkSize is the number of bytes in the chunk (as with the
RIFF-Wave data chunk, it does not include the eight bytes preceding it, so it will be size in
bytes of the waveform data). The size of the chunk must be even (word-aligned), so extra
padding bytes will have to be added at the end of the waveform data. These bytes are not
counted here. offset is where the ﬁrst sample frame in the WaveformData starts. It is in
bytes, and it is generally zero. blockSize is the size in bytes of the blocks to which waveform data is aligned. It can be set to zero, as most applications will not use it. WaveformData
is an array containing the audio data in the format and precision deﬁned in the common
chunk.
C.5.3 Marker Chunk
This optional chunk is used to deﬁne markers that point to positions in the sample data.
A marker is deﬁned by the following structure:
struct {
MarkerID
unsigned long
pstring
}

id;
position;
markerName;

Here id is a unique ID identifying the marker within a FORM AIFF, and MarkerID is a 16-bit
integer. position is the marker’s position in the waveform data in frames. markerName
ﬁeld is a text string containing the name of the mark. The datatype used here is a Pascal
string, which uses the ﬁrst character of an array as the string length and the remaining characters as the actual string.
The marker chunk itself is deﬁned by the following structure:
struct {
ID
long
unsigned short
Marker
}

chunkID;
chunkSize;
numMarkers;
Markers[];

The chunkID is 'MARK', chunkSize is the number of bytes in the chunk, numMarkers
is the number of marker structures in the Marker Chunk, and Markers is an array of
numMarkers markers.
C.5.4 Instrument Chunk
This optional chunk deﬁnes basic parameters for waveform playback in an instrument.
AIFF audio can be looped, allowing a portion of the waveform to be repeated. A loop is
deﬁned as follows:

757

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

struct {
short
MarkerId
MarkerId
}

PlayMode;
beginLoop;
endLoop;

playMode speciﬁes which type of looping is to be performed: 0 (no looping), 1 (forward), or
2 (forward-backward). beginLoop is a marker ID that marks the begin position of the loop
segment. endLoop is a marker id with the end position of a loop.
The instrument chunk is deﬁned by the following data structure:
struct {
ID
long
char
char
char
char
char
char
short
Loop
Loop
}

chunkID;
chunkSize;
baseNote;
detune;
lowNote;
highNote;
lowvelocity;
highvelocity;
gain;
sustainLoop;
releaseLoop;

Here chunkID is 'INST', chunkSize is 20 bytes, and baseNote is the MIDI note number
of the waveform reference (base) frequency. detune deﬁnes any ﬁne tuning, in cents, within
a range from 50 to þ50. lowNote and highNote are the suggested range of sample placement (in MIDI note numbers). lowVelocity and highVelocity are the suggested range
of MIDI velocities in which this sample should be placed. gain is any attenuation or boosting of the waveform data on playback, in dB. sustainLoop is a Loop structure describing
any sustain-period loop. releaseLoop is a Loop structure describing any release-period
loop.
C.5.5 MIDI Data Chunk
This optional chunk is used to store MIDI data, mainly system-exclusive messages:
struct {
ID
long
unsigned char
}

chunkID;
chunkSize;
MIDIdata[];

758

Appendix C

The chunkID is 'MIDI', chunkSize is the number of bytes in the chunk, and MIDIData is
any MIDI data. There should be as many bytes as chunkSize speciﬁes, plus a pad byte if the
total number of bytes is not even.
C.5.6 Audio Recording Chunk
This optional chunk stores information relating to audio recording devices:
struct {
ID
long
unsigned char
}

chunkID
chunkSize;
AESChannelStatusData[24];

The chunkID is 'AESD', chunkSize is 24 bytes, and AESCChannelStatusData contains
24 bytes as speciﬁed in AES Recommended Practice for Digital Audio Engineering—Serial Transmission Format for Linearly Represented Digital Audio Data.
C.5.7 Application-Speciﬁc Chunk
This is an optional chunk that can be customized by application developers:
struct {
ID
long
char
char
}

chunkID;
chunkSize;
applicationSignature[4];
data[];

The chunkID is 'APPL', chunkSize is the number of bytes in the chunk,
applicationSignature is used by programs for the Apple platform that contain an
application identiﬁer, and data is the application-deﬁned data.
C.5.8 Comments Chunk
This optional chunk is used to store any comments, which can optionally be linked to a
marker ID. Each comment is deﬁned by
struct {
unsigned long
MarkerID
unsigned short
char
}

timeStamp;
marker;
count;
text[];

759

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

Here timeStamp is the computer time of creation of the comment, marker is a marker ID to
link the comment to (otherwise zero), count is the number of characters in the comment
string (and does not include the extra pad byte that might be required), and text contains
the comment itself, possibly with an extra pad byte.
The comment chunk is deﬁned as
struct {
ID
long
unsigned short
Comment
}

chunkID;
chunkSize;
numComments;
comments[];

The chunkID is 'COMT', chunkSize is the number of bytes in the chunk, numComments
contains the number of Comment structures in the chunk, and comments hold comment
data.
C.5.9 Text Chunks: Name, Author, Copyright, and Annotation
These four optional text chunks have the same format:
#define
#define
#define
#define

NameID
NameID
NameID
NameID

struct {
ID
long
char
}

'NAME'
'AUTH'
'(c) '
'ANNO'

/*
/*
/*
/*

chunkID
chunkID
chunkID
chunkID

for
for
for
for

Name Chunk */
Author Chunk */
Copyright Chunk */
Annotation Chunk */

chunkID;
chunkSize;
text[];

Here chunkID is either 'NAME', 'AUTH', '(c) ', or 'ANNO'. chunkSize is the number of
bytes in the chunk. text is a character array containing the chunk text.
C.5.10

Converting to Big-Endian Format

Since AIFF ﬁles are by deﬁnition in the big-endian (BE) byte ordering, it is important to make
sure that integers written to disk are always in that format. This will of course be redundant
on native BE machines (such as the PPC Macintosh), but will be necessary for little-endian
(LE) processors, such as Intel machines. A portable way of converting to BE format is demonstrated here, based on code found in earlier Csound versions. This will not affect natural BE
integers, so the byte swap is done only when a LE integer is input.

760

Appendix C

The 16-bit conversion takes a short in native format and outputs a BE short. This then
can be safely written to disk. the output will not be meaningful for LE machines without
conversion, so this conversion should be used only before disk writing.
The principle involved is to use a two-item char (single-byte) array to do the swap. We will
ﬁll the ﬁrst position of the array with the most signiﬁcant byte (MSB) and then ﬁll the
second position with the least signiﬁcant byte (LSB). The MSB and LSB are extracted from
the input short integer by shifting the bytes to the right and using a single-byte bit-mask
and the bit-wise AND operator (&). Here is the code:
short benshort(short sval)
{
char benchar[2];
char *p = benchar;
// extract the MSB
*p++ = 0xFF & (sval >> 8);
// extract the LSB
*p = 0xFF & sval;
// output in BE format
return(*(short *)benchar);
}
The main part of the conversion requires further explanation. The line
*p++ = 0xFF & (sval >> 8);
does several important things:
1. It takes the input and shifts it eight positions to the right. This shifts the ﬁrst native byte
to the right, e.g.,
0x0F01 >> 8 -> 0xFF0F
2. It uses a bit mask 0xFF to pass only the required byte, e.g.,
0x00FF & 0xFF0F -> 0x000F
3. It stores the byte in the ﬁrst position of the char array, the MSB byte.
4. It increments the char pointer to make it point to the next array position, the LSB byte.
The next line of the code does a similar job, except that, because it does not shift the bytes,
it will actually let the second byte be assigned to the second array position.
Physically, in a LE machine, the following things would happen:
1. An input, say 0x0F01, represented physically as 010F (0000 0001 0000 1111), when
shifted right and masked, would yield 0x0F:
010F (shift eight positions) -> 0FFF
FF00 & 0FFF -> 0F

761

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

2. The LSB byte then, as above, would be extracted by using a bitmask:
FF00 & 010F -> 01
3. Then the MSB and LSB are stored in the right order.
In a BE machine, the byte ordering would remain intact, e.g.,
0F01 (shift eight positions) -> FF0F
FF0F & 00FF -> 0F
0F01 & 00FF -> 01
Similarly, when reading BE integers from the disk, we will have to convert them into a native
format:
short natshort(short sval)
{
unsigned char benchar[2];
short natshort;
*(short *)benchar = sval;
natshort = benchar[0];
natshort <<= 8;
natshort |= benchar[1];
return(natshort);
}
This code gets a BE short and splits it into two bytes (benchar[0] and benchar[1]). It then
takes the MSB (benchar[0]) and assigns it to the natural short LSB, which is shifted to the
left, making it a MSB. Then it combines that byte with the original LSB (using a bit-wise OR
operation). For 32-bit integers a similar procedure can be used, except that instead of moving
two bytes around we will be moving four bytes:
long benlong(long lval) // coerce a natural long into a bigendian long
{
char benchar[4];
register char *p = benchar;
*p++ = (char) (0xFF & (lval >> 24));
*p++ = (char) (0xFF & (lval >> 16));
*p++ = (char) (0xFF & (lval >> 8));
*p = (char) (0xFF & lval);
return(*(long *)benchar);
}
long natlong(long lval) // coerce a bigendian long into a natural long
{
unsigned char benchar[4];
register unsigned char *p = benchar;
register long natlong;

762

Appendix C

*(long *)benchar = lval;
natlong = *p++;
natlong <<= 8;
natlong |= *p++;
natlong <<= 8;
natlong |= *p++;
natlong <<= 8;
natlong |= *p;
return(natlong);
}
C.5.11

Converting Extended Floating-Point Data

The special operation needed to convert extended IEEE ten-byte ﬂoating-point data to or
from a standard C data type is as follows:
unsigned long IEEE2long(unsigned char *ieeefl)
{
unsigned long mant;
unsigned long tmp = 0;
unsigned char exp;
mant = natlong((unsigned long *)(ieeefl+2));
exp = 30 - *(ieffl+1);
while (exp--)
{
tmp = mant;
mant >>= 1;
}
if tmp & 0x00000001) mant++;
return mant;
}
void long2IEEE(unsigned int longval, unsigned char *ieeefl)
{
unsigned long exp;
unsigned char i;
memset(ieefl, 0, 10);
exp = longval;
exp >>= 1;
for (i=0; i<32; i++)
{
exp >>= 1;
if (!exp) break;

763

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

}
*(buffer+1) = i;
for (i=32; i; i--)
{
if (value & 0x80000000) break;
longval <<= 1;
}
memcpy((unsigned long *)(ieeefl+2), &benlong(longval), 8)
}
C.6

libsndﬁle
An alternative to implementing soundﬁle IO from basic principles, as discussed previously,
is to use a library of functions that provides support for a variety of formats. Currently,
libsndﬁle is one of the best such libraries, supporting several soundﬁle types with a transparent interface. The advantage is that all the nasty things about headers, chunks, endian-ness,
and precision are all hidden away and the library provides a single way of accessing all formats. The same code can be used to access a ﬁle, whether it is WAVE, AIFF, SND, or something else.
C.6.1 Basics
The library is designed to resemble the C standard IO library mode of operation. We have a
ﬁle open function, which returns a handle that is our reference to the open ﬁle. This function can open a ﬁle for reading, writing, or both. As usual, I suggest either reading or writing,
rather than trying to do both operations on the same ﬁle. The ﬁle open function is
SNDFILE *sf_open(const char *path, int mode, SF_INFO *sfinfo);
That function takes a name (or full path) as a string , a mode of operation (SFM_READ,
SFM_WRITE or SFM_RDWR), and the address of a SF_INFO data structure. The function
returns a handle (SNDFILE *) to the open ﬁle. The SF_INFO structureholds the format data
for the soundﬁle. Its members are self-explanatory:
typedef struct SF_INFO
{
sf_count_t frames ;
int
samplerate ;
int
channels ;
int
format ;
int
sections ;
int
seekable ;
} SF_INFO;

764

Appendix C

The way to use anSF_INFO object is to declare one instance of such structure for each soundﬁle used, then pass its address to the sf_open function. If the ﬁle is being read, then the
data structure will contain the number of frames, the sampling rate, the channels, and the
format taken from the soundﬁle after the call to sf_open. Otherwise, for writing, you will
ﬁll these attributes with your own chosen values, then pass the structure to sf_open in the
same manner. The soundﬁle data structures on disk will be created accordingly.
You will ﬁll the format attribute using one or more of the libsndﬁle constants. These are
separated into two basic groups—a type and a subtype—which you can combine using a
bitwise OR (|), as follows:
Types
SF_FORMAT_WAV
SF_FORMAT_AIFF
SF_FORMAT_AU
SF_FORMAT_RAW
SF_FORMAT_PAF
SF_FORMAT_SVX
SF_FORMAT_NIST
SF_FORMAT_VOC
SF_FORMAT_IRCAM
SF_FORMAT_W64
SF_FORMAT_MAT4
SF_FORMAT_MAT5
SF_FORMAT_PVF
SF_FORMAT_XI
SF_FORMAT_HTK
SF_FORMAT_SDS
SF_FORMAT_AVR
SF_FORMAT_WAVEX
SF_FORMAT_SD2
SF_FORMAT_FLAC
SF_FORMAT_CAF

/*
/*
/*
/*
/*

Microsoft WAV (little endian default). */
Apple/SGI AIFF format (big endian). */
Sun/NeXT AU format (big endian). */
RAW PCM data. */
Ensoniq PARIS file format. */
/* Amiga IFF / SVX8 / SV16 format. */
/* Sphere NIST format. */
/* VOC files. */
/* Berkeley/IRCAM/CARL */
/* Sonic Foundry's 64 bit RIFF/WAV */
/* Matlab (tm) V4.2 / GNU Octave 2.0 */
/* Matlab (tm) V5.0 / GNU Octave 2.1 */
/* Portable Voice Format */
/* Fasttracker 2 Extended Instrument */
/* HMM Tool Kit format */
/* Midi Sample Dump Standard */
/* Audio Visual Research */
/* MS WAVE with WAVEFORMATEX */
/* Sound Designer 2 */
/* FLAC lossless file format */
/* Core Audio File format */

Subtypes
SF_FORMAT_PCM_S8
SF_FORMAT_PCM_16
SF_FORMAT_PCM_24
SF_FORMAT_PCM_32
SF_FORMAT_PCM_U8
SF_FORMAT_FLOAT
SF_FORMAT_DOUBLE

/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*

Signed 8 bit data */
Signed 16 bit data */
Signed 24 bit data */
Signed 32 bit data */
Unsigned 8 bit data (WAV and RAW only) */
32 bit float data */
64 bit float data */

765

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

SF_FORMAT_ULAW
SF_FORMAT_ALAW
SF_FORMAT_IMA_ADPCM
SF_FORMAT_MS_ADPCM
SF_FORMAT_GSM610
SF_FORMAT_VOX_ADPCM
SF_FORMAT_G721_32
SF_FORMAT_G723_24
SF_FORMAT_G723_40
SF_FORMAT_DWVW_12
SF_FORMAT_DWVW_16
SF_FORMAT_DWVW_24
SF_FORMAT_DWVW_N
SF_FORMAT_DPCM_8
SF_FORMAT_DPCM_16

/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*
/*

/* U-Law encoded. */
/* A-Law encoded. */
/* IMA ADPCM. */
/* Microsoft ADPCM. */
GSM 6.10 encoding. */
/* OKI / Dialogix ADPCM */
32kbs G721 ADPCM encoding. */
24kbs G723 ADPCM encoding. */
40kbs G723 ADPCM encoding. */
12 bit Delta Width Variable Word */
16 bit Delta Width Variable Word */
24 bit Delta Width Variable Word */
N bit Delta Width Variable Word */
8 bit differential PCM (XI only) */
16 bit differential PCM (XI only) */

For instance, if we want to create a WAVE ﬁle with 24-bit encoding, we will use
sfinfo.format = SF_FORMAT_WAV | SF_FORMAT_PCM_24;
With this interface, we can handle several different types of soundﬁles using the same code.
C.6.2 Reading and Writing
For reading and writing to soundﬁles we have a number of options. These functions are divided into two basic ways of dealing with audio samples: (1) as individual samples (items)
and (2) as sample frames. These are just two ways of counting samples, the ﬁrst type of function counts sample by sample and expects a block of samples as one of its arguments, the
second counts frames and expect a block of sample frames.
Then there are functions for each C data type: char, short, int, float, and double.
Most important, these functions always work with native data formats, doing any conversion that is needed (say little-endian to big-endian, or to the bit length required) behind the
scenes. For instance, to write a block of ﬂoats as samples, you would use
sf_count_t sf_write_float(SNDFILE *sndfile,float *ptr,sf_count_t
items);
Here the ﬁrst argument is the soundﬁle handle, the second is the array with the audio data as
ﬂoats, and the third is the number of samples in the array. The function returns the number
of samples written. If instead you wanted to read the soundﬁle data, as a block of frames, into
a short (16-bit) array, you would use
sf_count_t sf_readf_short(SNDFILE *sndfile,short *ptr,sf_count_t
frames);

766

Appendix C

Now, instead of counting in samples, we will count in sample frames, which will contain
one sample for each channel. The function will also return the number of frames actually
read.
If you want to be precision-neutral, so that a 16-bit ﬁle can be treated in the same way as a
24-bit ﬁle, it is probably better to use the ﬂoating-point reading/writing functions (ﬂoat or
double), rather than the integer ones. These will work with samples in the range from 1.0
to 1.0 (by default, but this can be changed) and will scale to or from the desired precision.
A ﬂoat will have enough range to deal with up to 24 bits integral precision; above that it is
better to use doubles. To use these functions in the usual way, we need only make sure that
our data is within the range, which is quite simple.
As with the standard C ﬁle IO, we can fast-forward or rewind the ﬁle position to any place.
But now we can do it speciﬁcally within the waveform data. This is done using the
sfseek(), which will offset the position in the same way as fseek(), but now in relation
to the start of the audio data block:
sf_count_t sf_seek(SNDFILE *sndfile, sf_count_t frames, int whence);
Now, also instead of offsetting bytes, we will be counting in frames. The whence parameter
is also SEEK_SET, SEEK_CUR, or SEEK_END, relating to the start of the waveform data, the
current position, and the end of data, respectively.
C.6.3 An Example Program: Soundﬁle Conversion
This simple example shows how to use libsndﬁle in a simple soundﬁle conversion program.
We will start with a AIFF ﬁle and convert it to WAV, with the desired user-supplied precision.
This program will demonstrate how to check for formats and how to create a ﬁle of a certain
type using the ideas introduced above.
First, don’t forget the libsndﬁle header:
#include <sndfile.h>
The ﬁrst action is to open the ﬁle for reading and to check whether the ﬁle has been open:
if(!(psf_in = sf_open(argv[1],SFM_READ,psfinfo_in))){
printf("error opening input file\n");
exit(-1);
}
Next, check whether we have the right soundﬁle type. Checking the relevant SF_INFO ﬁeld
does this. If the format is right, we proceed:
if((psfinfo_in->format & SF_FORMAT_TYPEMASK) == SF_FORMAT_AIFF){
The SF_INFO structure for the ﬁle we want to write is then ﬁlled with values from the input
ﬁle:

767

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

psfinfo_out->samplerate = psfinfo_in->samplerate;
psfinfo_out->channels = chans = psfinfo_in->channels;
psfinfo_out->format = SF_FORMAT_WAV | (psfinfo_in->format &
SF_FORMAT_SUBMASK);
With this function we open (create) a new ﬁle for writing, making sure it opens correctly:
if(!(psf_out = sf_open(argv[2], SFM_WRITE,psfinfo_out))){
printf("error opening output file\n");
exit(-1);
}
Now all we need do is to copy the data, frame by frame, from one ﬁle to another, until
there is no more data to copy:
do {
count = sf_readf_float(psf_in, buffer, BUFITEMS/chans);
sf_writef_float(psf_out, buffer, count);
}
while(count);
Assuming that the libsndﬁle header (sndfile.h) is in /usr/local/include and that the library
ﬁle is in /usr/local/lib, we would build this example using gcc with the command
gcc -o aiff2wave aiff2wave.c -I/usr/local/include
–L/usr/local/lib -lsndfile
Here is the full program code:
/* aiff2wave.c:
libsndfile example
converts an AIFF into a WAVE file
*/
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <sndfile.h>
#define BUFITEMS 512
void usage();
int main(int argc, char** argv) {
SNDFILE *psf_in, *psf_out;
SF_INFO *psfinfo_in, *psfinfo_out;
float *buffer;
sf_count_t count;
int chans;

768

Appendix C

if(argc < 3) {
usage();
exit(-1);
}
/* memory for SF_INFO structures */
psfinfo_in = (SF_INFO *) malloc(sizeof(SF_INFO));
psfinfo_out = (SF_INFO *) malloc(sizeof(SF_INFO));
/* open input */
if(!(psf_in = sf_open(argv[1],SFM_READ,psfinfo_in))){
printf("error opening input file\n");
exit(-1);
}
/* check to see if format is AIFF */
if((psfinfo_in->format & SF_FORMAT_TYPEMASK) == SF_FORMAT_AIFF){
/* allocate buffer memory */
buffer = (float *) malloc(sizeof(float)*BUFITEMS);
/* Now we initialize the SF_INFO structure
with the same sampling rate. . . */
psfinfo_out->samplerate = psfinfo_in->samplerate;
/* . . . same number of channels. . . */
psfinfo_out->channels = chans = psfinfo_in->channels;
/* and WAV format with the same precision */
psfinfo_out->format = SF_FORMAT_WAV | (psfinfo_in->format &
SF_FORMAT_SUBMASK);
/* now we open the file */
if(!(psf_out = sf_open(argv[2], SFM_WRITE,psfinfo_out))){
printf("error opening output file\n");
exit(-1);
}
/* and we copy the data, frame by frame */
do {
count = sf_readf_float(psf_in, buffer, BUFITEMS/chans);
sf_writef_float(psf_out, buffer, count);
}
while(count);
sf_close(psf_in);
sf_close(psf_out);
free(psfinfo_in);
free(psfinfo_out);
free(buffer);
return 0;

769

Soundﬁles, Soundﬁle Formats, and libsndﬁle

}
else {
printf("Not an AIFF file\n");
sf_close(psf_in);
return 1;
}
}
void usage(){
printf("\nusage: aiff2wave input.aif output.wav\n");
}
C.7

Finding Out More
Another great thing about libsndﬁle is that it is very well documented. To start with, a lot can
be found out just by reading sndfile.h and its comments. But also the library has a very
good reference manual that can be found online (at www.mega-nerd.com/libsndﬁle) or together with the library sources. The reference manual is well written and informative. I
strongly advise anyone interested in using the library to read the documentation, as there
many extra features that are beyond the scope of this text.

Appendix D: An Introduction to Real-Time Audio IO with PortAudio
Victor Lazzarini

Most modern operating systems will provide application programming interfaces1 (APIs)
for accessing audio devices (soundcards) present in the system for input/output (IO). For
instance, on Windows we have the MME (Multimedia Extensions) and DirectX, among other
APIs, for this purpose; on OS X these services are offered by the CoreAudio framework; on
Linux the most common ‘‘back-end’’ API is ALSA (Advanced Linux Sound API). In addition,
we also have other higher-level cross-platform APIs for audio IO that often are built on top
of the basic sound systems, such as the Jack Connection Kit (Linux and OS X, mostly),
PulseAudio (Linux and Windows), and PortAudio (OS X, Windows, Linux).
The major drawback of writing programs using a platform-speciﬁc API is that porting a
program involves major re-implementation of the audio IO parts. For this reason, using
cross-platform APIs is often a good idea, even though sometimes using the back-end API
might allow slight better performance. This appendix will introduce some basic aspects of
real-time audio processing using the PortAudio API for audio IO. PortAudio is part of a set
of cross-platform libraries for media, PortMedia, and can be downloaded and installed from
http://portmedia.sourceforge.net/.
D.1

Preliminaries
What form does the data we are manipulating take? Audio signals can be considered a stream
of individual numbers, samples, produced by the soundcard at a rate of sr (sampling rate)
samples per seconds (for each audio channel). Each one of these will be a representation of
the amplitude of a waveform at a given time and they will be encoded into a certain data
type—a single byte, a short, a int, or a ﬂoating-point (single- or double-precision) number.
Audio samples of more than one channel are grouped into a frame, interleaved, so for
multi-channel streams we will have sr frames of samples per second (instead of single samples). Our job will be to take in blocks of frames (or single samples) from the soundcard in
an array, do something with them, and send an array of processed frames to the soundcard
for output. The size (number of frames) in this buffer will be linked to the IO latency, i.e., the
time it takes for the sound to get in and out of the computer. In general, we will try to make

772

Appendix D

this buffer as small as possible, but this will depend on the system. With smaller buffers the
program might start to drop samples (‘‘drop-outs’’), and we will get clicks and interruptions
in the audio stream.
The previous paragraph probably summarizes all we need to know to start programming
real-time audio IO with the tools we will study here. We will have to set the parameters for
our signal (sampling rate, encoding, number of channels), reserve some memory to place the
audio frames (arrays of data), and process the audio sample by sample. Generally speaking,
after initialization we will open the soundcard for IO using the parameters described above.
PortAudio will then allow us to start a data stream to and/or from the soundcard. When we
are done, we just stop the stream, close the device, and terminate the PortAudio session.
D.2

Programming with PortAudio
We will now go through the basic steps of using the PortAudio API. As with other such
IO systems, this will take four steps: initialization, device opening, IO operations, and
termination.
D.2.1

Initialization

The PortAudio library requires a single header to be placed at the top of the program:
#include <portaudio.h>
Before its use, the library must be initialized with a call to Pa_Initialize(). This returns
an error code of the type PaError:
PaError err;
. . .
err = Pa_Initialize()
The error code is equal to the constant paNoError if the operation was successful. Otherwise
the error string can be retrieved with Pa_GetErrorText(err):
printf("%s \n", Pa_GetErrorText(err));
D.2.2

Opening the Devices

Before we open a device, we can use a function to discover and list all devices in the system.
The following code fragment performs this:
ndev = Pa_GetDeviceCount();
for(i=0; i<ndev; i++){
info = Pa_GetDeviceInfo((PaDeviceIndex) i);

773

Real-Time Audio IO with PortAudio

if(info->maxOutputChannels > 0) printf("output device: ");
if (info->maxInputChannels > 0) printf("input device: ");
printf("%d: %s\n", i, info->name);
}
A ‘‘logical’’ device (that is, the one that gets listed) can be either uni-directional or bidirectional. We can open bi-directional devices for input and/or output, but we cannot
open a uni-directional input device for output and vice versa. A single hardware device
might get listed several times, uni- and bi-directionally, as different logic devices. As
PortAudio can sometimes use more than one back-end API, devices can often get listed
multiple times (for each of these back ends).
After devices are chosen for input and output, we will proceed to set the parameters for
the IO data streams, which will include the selected devices. Filling in some ﬁelds in a
PaStreamParameters structure, as shown below, does this:
PaStreamParameters inparam, outparam;
. . .
memset(&inparam, 0, sizeof(PaStreamParameters));
inparam.device = devin;
inparam.channelCount = 1;
inparam.sampleFormat = paFloat32;
memset(&outparam, 0, sizeof(PaStreamParameters));
outparam.device = devout;
outparam.channelCount = 1;
outparam.sampleFormat = paFloat32;
These stream parameters are set separately for input and output. We start by initializing all
the structure ﬁelds to 0, using memset(). Then we set the chosen device number (devin,
devout), the number of channels, and the sample data type. For generality and simplicity,
we will use a single-precision ﬂoating-point number to hold a sample (paFloat32), and
leave PortAudio to select the IO precision depending on the soundcard and platform. This
also means that the maximum amplitude of our digital signal will always be 1.0 (0 dB
full scale). In addition to the stream parameters used here, there are other ﬁelds in the
PaStreamParameters data structure. These however are not required for our current purposes
(you can check them out in the portaudio.h header ﬁle).
Once the stream parameters are decided, we can proceed to open the streams. We can
open both input and output streams with a single function call:
PaStream *handle;
. . .
err =
Pa_OpenStream(&handle,&inparam,&outparam,SR,BUF,paNoFlag,NULL,NULL);

774

Appendix D

If the call to Pa_OpenStream was successful, the open stream is represented by a handle2
(the ﬁrst parameter). The second and third parameters are used for the input and output
parameter streams, respectively. If one of them is NULL, only one direction is open. Then
we have the sampling rate SR and the data buffer size BUF in frames. This is followed by an
optional IO ﬂags (paNoFlag for no ﬂags). The last parameters are reserved for one of the two
possible modes of IO: asynchronous (or callback-based3) and blocking.4 If the former is used,
then we will pass a callback function here and a pointer to some user data as the last parameter. For blocking mode, these parameters are set to NULL. If the streams are successfully
opened, we can start streaming with the following call:
err = Pa_StartStream(handle);
D.2.3

Blocking IO

The blocking mode may be the simplest mode to understand and implement. It works in a
very similar form to ﬁle IO: two functions are provided, and they will take a buffer and read/
write this data from/to a device. The functions will block execution if there is no data to be
read or if the writing cannot be performed immediately. In both cases, execution resumes
once data is read or written. These functions are used as follows:
float buf[BUF];
. . .
err = Pa_ReadStream(handle, buf, BUF);
err = Pa_WriteStream(handle, buf, BUF);
For instance, a loop to read data from a soundcard and write it back without modiﬁcation
can be coded as follows (where END is the duration in seconds):
while(Pa_GetStreamTime(handle) < END){
err = Pa_ReadStream(handle, buf, BUF);
if(err == paNoError){
err = Pa_WriteStream(handle, buf, BUF);
if(err != paNoError) printf("%s \n", Pa_GetErrorText(err));
} else printf("%s \n", Pa_GetErrorText(err));
}
The function Pa_GetSreamTime() can be used to check the current time of a particular
stream. We use it here to keep the processing loop going for the desired duration.
D.2.4

Callback IO

Callback IO requires the programmer to supply a function that will be called by PortAudio
whenever data is available for IO. The form of the callback is

775

Real-Time Audio IO with PortAudio

int audio_callback(const void *input, void *output,
unsigned long frameCount,
const PaStreamCallbackTimeInfo *timeInfo,
PaStreamCallbackFlags statusFlags,
void *userData)
The callback will be passed the input and output data arrays (of void type, but containing
samples in the format set in Pa_OpenStream) ) as the ﬁrst and second parameters, both of
which will contain frameCount frames (the next parameter). It will also be passed a time
stamp data structure containing the current time, as well as the input/output data time references (which are going to depend on the audio latency). The next parameter is a series of
stream status ﬂags, which can be checked to ascertain the status of the data stream. The last
parameter is the location of the user data5 passed to the Pa_OpenStream() function. The
equivalent code to the blocking IO shown in the previous section would be (note that in
this case we do not have any need for user data, so we pass NULL)
int audio_callback(const void *input, void *output,unsigned long
frameCount, const PaStreamCallbackTimeInfo
*timeInfo, PaStreamCallbackFlags statusFlags,
void *userData){
int i;
float *inp = (float *) input, *outp = (float *) output;
for(i=0; i < frameCount; i++) outp[i] = inp[i];
return paContinue;
}
with a stream open using this function call:
err = Pa_OpenStream(&handle,&inparam,&outparam,SR,BUF,paNoFlag,
audio_callback, NULL);
The program will also require that we make sure it keeps running for the required duration in
seconds. Thus we have to place a time-counting loop that waits until we reach the requested
end time (END now is the duration in seconds), calling Pa_GetSreamTime() to check it:
while(Pa_GetStreamTime(handle) < END);
If we had not included this loop, the program would ﬁnish immediately, as there is nothing
preventing or blocking the execution. PortAudio calls the callback function, so we do not
have direct control of it.
D.2.5

Finalizing

When we are done, we need stop and close the stream. If we are ending our program, we also
terminate the PortAudio session:

776

Appendix D

Figure D.1
A conceptual ﬂow chart for the echo program.

Pa_StopStream(handle);
Pa_CloseStream(handle);
Pa_Terminate();
D.3

A Full Example: Echo
We will now present a real-time audio processing example, an echo program using a very
common DSP structure, the comb ﬁlter (ﬁgure D.1). Programming a comb ﬁlter is relatively
easy; all we need is some memory for the delay (an array) and a read/write pointer that will
access it circularly. We place the audio data in the delay and retrieve at the other end, feeding it back into the delay line. This is shown in the following code fragment:
float delay[SR/2], out = 0.f;
. . .
for(j=0; j < BUF; j++) {
out = delay[rp];
delay[rp++] = buf[j] + out*0.5;
if (rp == SR/2) rp = 0;
buf[j] = out;
}
In the example above, our delay is sr/2 samples long, or half a second. The comb ﬁlter
algorithm ﬁrst writes output sample into a temporary variable, then it ﬁlls in the delay
position vacated by the output sample (with an input sample and the fed-back output) and
increments the read/write index. This is wrapped around if it reaches the end of the delay
line. Finally, the output buffer (which is the same as the input one) is ﬁlled with the current
output sample. The feedback gain is 0.5, which means that each echo will be half of the
amplitude of the previous one.
Two versions of this example, one using the blocking IO and the other using the callback
interface, will be presented. They should work quite similarly, but performance may vary

777

Real-Time Audio IO with PortAudio

from platform to platform. Also, the buffer size BUF can be adjusted according to the
platform/back-end API used. If drop-outs are heard (likely with Windows and MME), BUF
can be increased; for lower latency it can be decreased, if your system allows.
The major difference in the code is, of course, the presence of the callback in the second
example. Because we will do the processing in the callback, the delay line and the read/write
index will have to be passed to it as user data. We will place these two elements in a data
structure, which will be dynamically allocated in the main program; then we will pass the
pointer to it as the last argument to the Pa_OpenStream() function. The callback will
then be able to use it in its processing. In the blocking example shown in ﬁgure D.1, instead,
everything we need is inside the main function.
Compiling these examples is very simple. Assuming PortAudio is installed, as default in
/usr/local/lib, with headers in /usr/local/lib, we have the following command
(on all systems):
gcc -o echo echo.c -I/usr/local/include -L/usr/local/lib -lportaudio
D.3.1

Blocking Example

#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <portaudio.h>
#define SR 44100.
#define BUF 512 /* increase this if you have drop-outs */
#define END 60
int main(int argc, char** argv){
PaError err;
PaDeviceIndex devin,devout, ndev;
const PaDeviceInfo *info;
PaStreamParameters inparam, outparam;
PaStream *handle;
int i, rp = 0;
float buf[BUF], out = 0.f;
float delay[(int)SR/2];
memset(&delay,0,sizeof(float)*SR/2);
err = Pa_Initialize();
if( err == paNoError){
ndev = Pa_GetDeviceCount();
for(i=0; i<ndev; i++){
info = Pa_GetDeviceInfo((PaDeviceIndex) i);
if(info->maxOutputChannels > 0) printf("output device: ");
if (info->maxInputChannels > 0) printf("input device: ");

778

Appendix D

printf("%d: %s\n", i, info->name);
}
printf("choose device for input: ");
scanf("%d", &devin);
printf("choose device for output: ");
scanf("%d", &devout);
memset(&inparam, 0, sizeof(PaStreamParameters));
inparam.device = devin;
inparam.channelCount = 1;
inparam.sampleFormat = paFloat32;
memset(&outparam, 0, sizeof(PaStreamParameters));
outparam.device = (PaDeviceIndex) devout;
outparam.channelCount = 1;
outparam.sampleFormat = paFloat32;
err = Pa_OpenStream(&handle,&inparam,&outparam,SR,BUF,paNoFlag,
NULL, NULL);
if(err == paNoError){
err = Pa_StartStream(handle);
if(err == paNoError){
while(Pa_GetStreamTime(handle) < 60){
err = Pa_ReadStream(handle, buf, BUF);
if(err == paNoError){
for(i=0; i < BUF; i++) {
out = delay[rp];
delay[rp++] = buf[i] + out*0.5;
if (rp >= SR/2) rp = 0;
buf[i] = out;
}
err = (int) Pa_WriteStream(handle, buf, BUF);
if(err != paNoError) printf("%s \n",
Pa_GetErrorText(err));
} else printf("%s \n", Pa_GetErrorText(err));
}
Pa_StopStream(handle);
} else printf("%s \n", Pa_GetErrorText(err));
Pa_CloseStream(handle);
} else printf("%s \n", Pa_GetErrorText(err));
Pa_Terminate();
} else printf("%s \n", Pa_GetErrorText(err));
return 0;
}

779

Real-Time Audio IO with PortAudio

D.3.2

Callback Example

#include
#include
#include
#include
#include

<stdio.h>
<time.h>
<string.h>
<stdlib.h>
<portaudio.h>

#define SR 44100.
#define BUF 512 /* increase this if you have drop-outs */
#define END 60
typedef struct _mydata{
float delay[(int)SR/2];
int rp;
} mydata;
int audio_callback(const void *input, void *output,
unsigned long frameCount,
const PaStreamCallbackTimeInfo *timeInfo,
PaStreamCallbackFlags statusFlags,
void *userData){
mydata *p = (mydata *)userData;
int i, rp = p->rp;
float out, *delay = p->delay;
float *inp = (float *) input, *outp = (float *) output;
for(i=0; i < frameCount; i++){
out = delay[rp];
delay[rp++] = inp[i] + out*0.5;
if(rp >= SR/2) rp = 0;
outp[i] = out;
}
p->rp = rp;
return paContinue;
}
int main(int argc, char** argv){
PaError err;
PaDeviceIndex devin,devout, ndev;
const PaDeviceInfo *info;
PaStreamParameters inparam, outparam;
PaStream *handle;

780

Appendix D

int i;
mydata *data = (mydata *) calloc(sizeof(mydata),1);
err = Pa_Initialize();
if( err == paNoError){
ndev = Pa_GetDeviceCount();
for(i=0; i<ndev; i++){
info = Pa_GetDeviceInfo((PaDeviceIndex) i);
if(info->maxOutputChannels > 0) printf("output device: ");
if (info->maxInputChannels > 0) printf("input device: ");
printf("%d: %s\n", i, info->name);
}
printf("choose device for input: ");
scanf("%d", &devin);
printf("choose device for output: ");
scanf("%d", &devout);
memset(&inparam, 0, sizeof(PaStreamParameters));
inparam.device = devin;
inparam.channelCount = 1;
inparam.sampleFormat = paFloat32;
memset(&outparam, 0, sizeof(PaStreamParameters));
outparam.device = (PaDeviceIndex) devout;
outparam.channelCount = 1;
outparam.sampleFormat = paFloat32;
err = Pa_OpenStream(&handle,&inparam,&outparam,SR,BUF,paNoFlag,
audio_callback, data);
if(err == paNoError){
err = Pa_StartStream(handle);
if(err == paNoError){
while(Pa_GetStreamTime(handle) < END);
Pa_StopStream(handle);
} else printf("%s \n", Pa_GetErrorText(err));
Pa_CloseStream(handle);
} else printf("%s \n", Pa_GetErrorText(err));
Pa_Terminate();
} else printf("%s \n", Pa_GetErrorText(err));
free(data);
return 0;
}

781

D.4

Real-Time Audio IO with PortAudio

Final Words
Real-time audio programming with a cross-platform API such as PortAudio can be made
simple. The examples shown in this text demonstrate the basic ideas behind the use of that
library. However, for more complex systems, other issues may arise, which are beyond the
scope of this text. Nevertheless, by offering a plain introduction to real-time audio programming, I hope to have enabled the user to build on the acquired knowledge, so that more
involved systems can be tackled. Some further examples are provided with the PortAudio
source code. Information on how to download and install this library, and reference documentation, is available at http://portmedia.sourceforge.net/.

Notes
1. Roughly speaking, an API is a set of programming resources (functions, data structures, deﬁnitions,
etc.) that support a certain development task.
2. A handle is basically a pointer to an open stream. This is actually a pointer to a data structure that is
‘‘opaque’’ (that is, we do not and should not need to know what it holds). We pass the address of the
pointer to this data structure (a pointer to a pointer) because the open-stream function will create a variable for this data structure and make the handle point to it. Then this handle can be used as a reference
on all operations on the stream, so we know what stream we are manipulating. These operations are for
IO, to change and check the stream status, etc.
3. A callback is a function that is given to a system for that system to invoke it at a later time. Setting up
callbacks involve writing the code for the function and then passing it as an argument to a function call
that ‘‘registers’’ the callback with the system in question.
4. A way to distinguish these two is to consider the concepts of synchronous and asynchronous IO. In
the ﬁrst case, the IO is ‘‘in sync’’ with the rest of the program, so we wait for input, process it and then
output, blocking the execution when we come to each one of the stages of IO (in practice, the blocking
might only occur at the input), giving the rise to the name ‘‘blocking IO.’’ In the latter case, the IO is
made independent of the rest of the program, so there is no blocking of execution, and waste of CPU
time. Thus, in principle this can be made more efﬁcient. In the case of callback asynchronous IO, the
system will issue callbacks when data is ready for either input or output (or both), so the rest of the program is not idle waiting for data. To understand this, we can think that there are two parts of the
program running in parallel: the main section, with the code we have written in sequential order, and a
secondary one that keeps invoking the callback function whenever it is needed. Although potentially
more efﬁcient, this can be more complex to program, as resources (e.g. memory) might need to be shared
by the callbacks and the rest of the program. In this case, we might need to protect these resources so
that no conﬂicts arise (such as the different parts of the program trying to assign to a variable at the
same time).
5. It is very common for asynchronous systems to have a means of passing some user-allocated data to
the callback. The reason is that in many applications, we will need to have some means of passing data

782

Appendix D

from the main part of the program to the callback and vice versa. The ‘‘user-data’’ argument is designed
for that. All we need do is to pass the pointer to any variable we would like to share between the two.
Often this variable is a data structure holding several items we need to access in the callback or in the
main program. The second example demonstrates this: the callback needs to access some permanent
memory for the delay line, so we store it in a data structure, together with the read/write index and
pass this as user data.

Appendix E: MIDI Programming with PortMIDI
Victor Lazzarini

MIDI programming is supported by most modern operating systems. They provide libraries
for accessing and reading/writing data to MIDI devices. Most modern systems will also provide some means of MIDI playback, either in the form of software, or in hardware (as part of
the soundcard). On Windows XP, there is a General MIDI software synthesis device that can
be accessed by software. On OSX, it is possible to hook up MIDI to software synthesizers running in a different process (e.g. the Apple-supplied GarageBand).
Since the MIDI application programming interfaces (APIs) are different in each system, it is
a good idea to use a portable library that implements a cross-platform interface to MIDI. One
such library, which is part of the PortMedia set of libraries, is PortMIDI. It is available for
Windows, OS X, and Linux, and allows for programs to be ported more easily from one platform to the next. Programming MIDI with PortMIDI is relatively simple. In this text, we will
show how to output MIDI data, listen for MIDI input, and transform a MIDI data stream.
E.1

The Basic Steps
We will start by looking at how to build a PortMIDI program to play some notes to a MIDI
device.
E.1.1

Header File and Library Initialization

The PortMIDI headers are
#include <portmidi.h>
and
#include <porttime.h>
Before PortMIDI is used, we must initialize it by calling
Pm_Initialize();

784

Appendix E

E.1.2

Searching for MIDI Output Devices

First we have to search for any existing MIDI output devices (or ports):
int cnt, i;
const PmDeviceInfo *info; /* holds information on devices */
(. . .)
if(cnt = Pm_CountDevices()){
for(i=0; i < cnt; i++){
info = Pm_GetDeviceInfo(i); /* gets the device info */
if(info->output) /* this is 1 if the device is for output */
printf("%d: %s \n", i, info->name); /* prints the device number
& name */
}
} else printf("ERROR: no device found\n");
Now we have a list of output devices, which is printed to the terminal. One of the devices
can then be chosen from it.
E.1.3

Starting a Timer

Since the duration of MIDI events (notes) is going to be controlled by the program, we need
to have a method of counting time. PortMIDI provides one in the form of PortTime, which is
a small library included in it, with functions to create and use a software timer. We need to
start the timer straight away:
Pt_Start(1, NULL, NULL);
E.1.4

Opening a Chosen Device

Once we have chosen a device from the list, we can open it:
int dev;
PmError retval;
PortMidiStream *mstream;
(. . .)
/* open the device number 'dev' */
retval = Pm_OpenOutput(&mstream, dev, NULL,512,NULL,NULL,0);
/* check if it is properly open, print a message
if it is not */
if(retval != pmNoError)
printf("error: %s \n", Pm_GetErrorText(retval));

785

MIDI Programming with PortMIDI

As can be seen, when we open a device, we pass it the address of a pointer (*mstream). This
can be seen as a ‘‘handle’’ for the open device, which we will use whenever we want to do
anything with it (e.g., write data to it). More abstractly, this is the ‘‘MIDI stream’’ to which
we will be writing. If the device is not properly open, the function will return an error. We
can print the error message by looking it up with a PortMIDI function.
E.1.5

Writing MIDI Data

Now we are ready to play. For instance, let’s play a series of ascending notes, each one lasting
a second, separated by semitones, each one with a different sound. We will have to change
the MIDI program for each note, to select a new tone. First some macros to help us out:
#define
#define
#define
#define

MD_NOTEON 0x90
MD_NOTEOFF 0x80
MD_PRG 0xC0
SBYTE(mess,chan) mess | cha

We can use these in the code below. The MIDI data bytes are packed into a long integer and
then written to the device, which responds to it immediately:
char chan = 0; /* we always use channel 0, for the moment */
long time = 0; /* this will hold the time in milliseconds */
long msg;
int prg = 0;
(. . .)
for(i=60; i <= 72; prg+=4, i++){
/*
encode the MIDI message bytes into one single data item
in this case a PROGRAM message
*/
msg = Pm_Message(SBYTE(MD_PRG,chan), prg, 0);
/* write it */
Pm_WriteShort(mstream, 0, msg);
/* get the current time */
time = Pt_Time(NULL);
/* NOTE ON message */
msg = Pm_Message(SBYTE(MD_NOTEON,chan), i, 120);
Pm_WriteShort(mstream, 0, msg);
/* wait for 1 second */
while(Pt_Time(NULL) - time < 1000);
/* NOTEOFF message */

786

Appendix E

msg = Pm_Message(SBYTE(MD_NOTEOFF,chan), i, 120);
Pm_WriteShort(mstream, 0, msg);
}
In fact, we do not need the msg variable, as we can plug the Pm_Message() code straight
into Pm_WriteShort():
Pm_WriteShort(mstream, 0, Pm_Message(SBYTE(MD_PRG,chan), prg, 0));
time = Pt_Time(NULL);
Pm_WriteShort(mstream, 0, Pm_Message(SBYTE(MD_NOTEON,chan), i,120));
while(Pt_Time(NULL) - time < 1000);
Pm_WriteShort(mstream, 0, Pm_Message(SBYTE(MD_NOTEOFF,chan),i,120));
E.1.6

Finalizing

Once we’re done, we just need to clean up the house with a few function calls:
Pm_Close(mstream);
Pm_Terminate();
E.1.7

Full Program Code: MIDI Playback

#include <stdio.h>
#include <portmidi.h>
#include <porttime.h>
#define
#define
#define
#define

MD_NOTEON 0x90
MD_NOTEOFF 0x80
MD_PRG 0xC0
SBYTE(mess,chan) mess | chan

int main() {
int cnt,i,dev;
PmError retval;
const PmDeviceInfo *info;
PortMidiStream *mstream;
Pm_Initialize();
if(cnt = Pm_CountDevices()){
for(i=0; i < cnt; i++){
info = Pm_GetDeviceInfo(i);
if(info->output)
printf("%d: %s \n", i, info->name);

787

MIDI Programming with PortMIDI

}
printf("choose device: ");
scanf("%d", &dev);
Pt_Start(1, NULL, NULL);
retval = Pm_OpenOutput(&mstream, dev, NULL,512,NULL,NULL,0);
if(retval != pmNoError)
printf("error: %s \n", Pm_GetErrorText(retval));
else {
char chan = 0;
int prg = 0;
long time = 0;
for(i=60; i < 72; prg+=4, i++){
Pm_WriteShort(mstream, 0,
Pm_Message(SBYTE(MD_PRG,chan), prg, 0));
time = Pt_Time(NULL);
Pm_WriteShort(mstream, 0,
Pm_Message(SBYTE(MD_NOTEON,chan), i, 120));
while(Pt_Time(NULL) - time < 1000);
Pm_WriteShort(mstream, 0,
Pm_Message(SBYTE(MD_NOTEOFF,chan), i, 120));
}
}
Pm_Close(mstream);
} else printf("No available output devices\n");
Pm_Terminate();
return 0;
}
E.2

Building and Running a PortMIDI-based Program
E.2.1

Windows (with MinGW/gcc)

Once you have your PortMIDI library installed (say in c:/msys/1.0/local/lib and
headers in c:/msys/1.0/local/include), you can build a program with just this:
gcc –o prg source.c -I/usr/local/include –L/usr/local/lib -lportmidi
–lwinmm
-lportmidi tells the linker to look for PortMIDI, and –lwinmm tells the linker to look for
WINMM (the Windows low-level library on which PortMIDI depends).
Warning: In Windows, using the MinGW terminal, there might be a buffering issue with
printf() and scanf() in MIDI programs. Because printf() output is buffered, it will not

788

Appendix E

be displayed until after the program exits; so the program (shown below) will block waiting
for input (to scanf()), if a device number is entered the program proceeds. When ends, all
messages appear on terminal. One solution is to run the program from the Windows command line; another is to double-click on its icon.
E.2.2

On OS X

Similarly, with OS X, once you have PortMIDI installed, the command line is
gcc –o prg source.c -I/usr/local/include –L/usr/local/lib -lportmidi
This assumes that the header ﬁles are installed in /usr/local/include and the PortMIDI
library is in /usr/local/lib. If the library and headers are installed elsewhere, the –I and
–L options (above) will have to be changed to match the location of these ﬁles.
E.2.3

Playing MIDI on OS X

Generally speaking, if there are no MIDI hardware devices in your system, you will have to
use a software device. Note also that some hardware devices might be just ‘‘output’’—that is,
you have to connect an external hardware synthesizer to them. So the simplest solution to
MIDI playback is to use a software synthesizer. Apple’s GarageBand can be used as follows:
1. Open the utility program Audio MIDI setup.
2. On ‘MIDI DEVICES,’ click on IAC device (this is an inter-application MIDI router).
3. Check ‘‘the device is online.’’
4. Open GarageBand.
5. In ‘‘Preferences,’’ on the ‘‘Audio/MIDI tab,’’ you should see ‘‘MIDI status: 1 device
connected.’’
6. Select ‘‘IAC Device’’ from your MIDI output program. GarageBand should now be able to
play (and record) whatever your program spills out.
You can use other software synthesizers (e.g., Csound) in the same way, if you have them, by
making sure they take their input from IAC.
E.3

MIDI Input
A MIDI input program will generally re-use many of the steps outlined above, except that we
will open devices for input instead and read from them . To show how this is done, we will
develop a program that monitors MIDI input from a device and prints it out to the terminal.
E.3.1

Searching for MIDI Input Devices

Finding input devices is simple. We need only look for the input ﬂag, as in the following:

789

MIDI Programming with PortMIDI

for(i=0; i < cnt; i++){
info = Pm_GetDeviceInfo(i);
if(info->input)
printf("%d: %s \n", i, info->name);
}
E.3.2

Opening an Input Device

Opening an input device follows principles similar to those set forth above, except that now
we use the Pm_OpenInput() function:
retval = Pm_OpenInput(&mstream,dev,NULL,512,NULL,NULL);
E.3.3

Polling the Device and Reading Data

Because we will be reading from the MIDI device, we now need to see if there is data waiting
to be read. MIDI data itself is encapsulated in the following structure, holding the MIDI message and a time stamp in milliseconds:
typedef long PmTimestamp;
typedef long PmMessage;
typedef struct {
PmMessage message;
PmTimestamp timestamp;
} PmEvent;
Portmidi offers the Pm_Poll function to check the device for input. If there is data, then
we proceed. The code below loops for 1 minute waiting for input; if it ﬁnds it, the messages
received are printed:
while(Pt_Time(NULL) < 60000){
if(Pm_Poll(mstream)) {
int count = Pm_Read(mstream, msg, 32);
for(i=0; i<count; i++) {
printf("status:%d, byte1=%d, byte2=%d, time=%.3f secs\n",
Pm_MessageStatus(msg[i].message),
Pm_MessageData1(msg[i].message),
Pm_MessageData2(msg[i].message),
msg[i].timestamp/1000.);
}
}
}

790

Appendix E

E.3.4

Full Program Code: MIDI Monitor

#include <stdio.h>
#include <portmidi.h>
#include <porttime.h>
int main() {
int cnt,i,dev;
PmError retval;
const PmDeviceInfo *info;
PmEvent msg[32];
PortMidiStream *mstream;
Pm_Initialize();
cnt = Pm_CountDevices();
if(cnt) {
for(i=0; i < cnt; i++){
info = Pm_GetDeviceInfo(i);
if(info->input)
printf("%d: %s \n", i, info->name);
}
printf("choose device: ");
scanf("%d", &dev);
Pt_Start(1, NULL, NULL);
retval = Pm_OpenInput(&mstream, dev, NULL, 512L, NULL,NULL);
if(retval != pmNoError)
printf("error: %s \n", Pm_GetErrorText(retval));
else {
while(Pt_Time(NULL) < 60000){
if(Pm_Poll(mstream)) {
cnt = Pm_Read(mstream, msg, 32);
for(i=0; i<cnt; i++) {
printf("status:%d, byte1=%d, "
"byte2=%d, time=%.3f\n",
Pm_MessageStatus(msg[i].message),
Pm_MessageData1(msg[i].message),
Pm_MessageData2(msg[i].message)
msg[i].timestamp/1000.);
}
}
}
}
Pm_Close(mstream);

791

MIDI Programming with PortMIDI

}
}
else printf("No MIDI devices found\n");
Pm_Terminate();
return 0;
}
E.4

Combining MIDI Input and Output
The ﬁnal example combines input and output. Triggered by an input NOTEON message, we
will play a fast, four-note arpeggio sequence of major thirds.
E.4.1

Searching for and Opening Devices

We will open two devices, one for input and one for output. We will do this in a loop, ﬁrst
displaying and selecting the input and then the output:
for(j=0; j<2; j++){
if(j==0) printf("input devices:\n");
else printf("output devices:\n");
for(i=0; i < cnt; i++){
info = Pm_GetDeviceInfo(i);
if(j==0 && info->input)
printf("%d: %s \n", i, info->name);
if(j==1 && info->output)
printf("%d: %s \n", i, info->name);
}
printf("choose device: ");
scanf("%d", &dev[j]);
Once this is done, we can proceed to open the devices, after we start the timer:
Pt_Start(1, NULL, NULL);
retval[0] = Pm_OpenInput(&mstream[0], dev[0], NULL, 512L, NULL,NULL);
retval[1] = Pm_OpenOutput(&mstream[1], dev[1], NULL, 512L,
NULL,NULL,0L);
E.4.2

Polling for Input

The code for detecting input and playing MIDI is similar to the previous examples, except
that now it is combined into one big block, which starts by polling and reading input:
if(Pm_Poll(mstream[0])) {
cnt = Pm_Read(mstream[0], msg, 128);

792

Appendix E

E.4.3

Processing MIDI Data

Now we can process the input MIDI data as needed. For each MIDI event, we create a loop
that checks if the event is NOTEON and, if it is, ﬁlls a buffer with four MIDI events, containing a sequence of notes. This sequence of notes starts at the input note number and goes up
by four semitones every tenth of a second (100 ms).
For each NOTEON we also write a NOTEOFF event. The timings of each event are written
in the event’s time-stamp variable:
for(i=0; i<cnt; i++) {
/* now create the arpeggios in the msgout buffer */
if((Pm_MessageStatus(msg[i].message) & 0xF0) == MD_NOTEON) {
for(j=0;j<4; j++){
/* NOTE ONs with correct timestamp */
msgout[outcnt].message = Pm_Message(MD_NOTEON | chan,
Pm_MessageData1(msg[i].message)+j*4,
Pm_MessageData2(msg[i].message));
msgout[outcnt].timestamp = msg[i].timestamp+100*j;
if (++outcnt == 1024) outcnt = 0; /* increment count, wrap
around */
/* NOTE OFFs */
msgout[outcnt].message = Pm_Message(MD_NOTEOFF | chan,
Pm_MessageData1(msg[i].message)+j*4,
Pm_MessageData2(msg[i].message));
msgout[outcnt].timestamp = msg[i].timestamp+100*j+100;
if (++outcnt == 1024) outcnt = 0;
}
}
E.4.4

Writing to Output

At this stage, when a NOTEON is detected, we will have an output buffer with eight MIDI
events: four NOTEONs and four NOTEOFFs in ascending thirds and with correct time
stamps. In order to play this buffer, we just loop from the beginning to the end, check
whether the events are ready to be played (by looking at their time stamp). Events that
have been already played have their time stamp set to -1. We can check for that:
/* now msgout might have MIDI events, write them if they are due */
for(i=0; i < outcnt; i++){
/* check if they are due by looking at their timestamp */
if(Pt_Time(NULL) >= msgout[i].timestamp &&
msgout[i].timestamp >= 0){

793

MIDI Programming with PortMIDI

Pm_WriteShort(mstream[1], 0, msgout[i].message);
msgout[i].timestamp = -1; /* mark them as played */
}
}
E.4.5

Full Program Code: A Simple Arpeggiator

#include <stdio.h>
#include <portmidi.h>
#include <porttime.h>
#define MD_NOTEON 0x90
#define MD_NOTEOFF 0x80
#define MD_PRG 0xC0
int main() {
int cnt,i,dev[2], j, outcnt=0, end=60000, chan=0;
PmError retval[2];
const PmDeviceInfo *info;
PmEvent msg[128], msgout[1024];
PortMidiStream *mstream[2];
Pm_Initialize();
cnt = Pm_CountDevices();
if(cnt) {
for(j=0; j<2; j++){
if(j==0) printf("input devices:\n");
else printf("output devices:\n");
for(i=0; i < cnt; i++){
info = Pm_GetDeviceInfo(i);
if(j==0 && info->input)
printf("%d: %s \n", i, info->name);
if(j==1 && info->output)
printf("%d: %s \n", i, info->name);
}
printf("choose device: ");
scanf("%d", &dev[j]);
}
Pt_Start(1, NULL, NULL);
retval[0] = Pm_OpenInput(&mstream[0], dev[0], NULL, 512L,
NULL,NULL);
retval[1] = Pm_OpenOutput(&mstream[1], dev[1], NULL, 512L,
NULL,NULL,0L);

794

Appendix E

if(retval[0] != pmNoError && retval[0] != pmNoError)
printf("error in input (%s) or in output (%s) \n",
Pm_GetErrorText(retval[0]), Pm_GetErrorText(retval[1]) );
else {
while(Pt_Time(NULL) < end){
/* Poll for inputs */
if(Pm_Poll(mstream[0])) {
/* if there are MIDI events waiting, read them */
cnt = Pm_Read(mstream[0], msg, 32);
for(i=0; i<cnt; i++) {
/* now create the arpeggios in the msgout buffer */
if((Pm_MessageStatus(msg[i].message) & 0xF0) ==
MD_NOTEON) {
for(j=0;j<4; j++){
/* NOTE ONs with correct timestamp */
msgout[outcnt].message =
Pm_Message(MD_NOTEON | chan,
Pm_MessageData1(msg[i].message)+j*4,
Pm_MessageData2(msg[i].message));
msgout[outcnt].timestamp =
msg[i].timestamp+100*j;
if (++outcnt == 1024) outcnt = 0; /*
increment count, wrap around */
/* NOTE OFFs */
msgout[outcnt].message =
Pm_Message(MD_NOTEOFF | chan,
Pm_MessageData1(msg[i].message)+j*4,
Pm_MessageData2(msg[i].message));
msgout[outcnt].timestamp =
msg[i].timestamp+100*j+100;
if (++outcnt == 1024) outcnt = 0;
}
}
}
}
/* now msgout might have MIDI events,
write them if they are due */
for(i=0; i < outcnt; i++){
/* check if they are due by looking at their
timestamp */
if(Pt_Time(NULL) >= msgout[i].timestamp &&
msgout[i].timestamp >= 0){

795

MIDI Programming with PortMIDI

Pm_WriteShort(mstream[1], 0, msgout[i].message);
msgout[i].timestamp = -1;/* mark them as played */
}
}
}
}
Pm_Close(mstream[0]);
Pm_Close(mstream[1]);
}
else printf("No MIDI devices found\n");
Pm_Terminate();
return 0;
}
E.5

Final Words
MIDI programming with a cross-platform API such as PortMIDI is generally straightforward.
The examples shown in this text demonstrate the basic tasks that are involved in this work.
Although the programs introduced here were mostly simple, they offer all the reader requires
to build more complex applications. Some further examples are provided with the PortMIDI
source code. Information on how to download and install this library is available at http://
portmedia.sourceforge.net/.

Appendix F: Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages
John fﬁtch

F.1

Introduction
This appendix introduces the general topic of computer architecture, which is the term
usually applied to the overall structural design of a computer. In it I will consider a simple
but realistic computer structure and discuss why computer languages came into existence.
While for most of the use of a computer it is not necessary to have any concern about what
is happening inside, some aspects of programming beneﬁt from this knowledge.

F.2

Some Simple History
The question of who invented the computer is sometimes asked. In fact, despite a number
of parochial claims, the current state of the computer has developed from a large number of
small suggestions, experiments, and ideas. The ideas of mechanical or automated calculation
are certainly old, going back at least to the seventeenth century. Among the inventors and
mathematicians who stand a little higher than the rest is the British mathematician Charles
Babbage, who in the nineteenth century attempted to build ﬁrst a mechanical device to print
logarithm tables and then a calculating engine. The story of Babbage’s life, his raising of
money, his spending of even more money, and his dislike of barrel organs and other music
is well recorded in his autobiography, Passages from the Life of a Philosopher (Longmans,
Green, 1864), which is worth a browse at least. His calculating engine never worked, partly
due to the problems of mechanical design and partly because Babbage was constantly changing the design. Whatever else, he did identify components that can still be seen in current
designs; the processing unit (which Babbage called the ‘‘mill’’), some memory, and the storing of a program in some coded format. He also proposed that output should be in the form
of type. Another feature he identiﬁed was input on ﬂat sheets or card with holes in them.
World War II gave a strong boost to the desire for automated calculations. The breaking of
the Enigma code involved the use of electro-mechanical devices with many similarities to
later computers. One of the minds behind this cryptanalysis was Alan Turing, who in the
1930s had made one of the major advances in the mathematical theory of computation.

798

Appendix F

(See A. Turing, ‘‘On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem,’’ Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society series 2, 42, 1936, no. 2: 230–265.) By
the end of the war, with the technical impetus and the availability of army surplus electronics, there was a great ﬂowering of new ideas; among researchers working in the area of
computation were John von Neumann in Princeton, Maurice Wilkes in Cambridge, and
Frederic Calland Williams in Manchester. Who was ﬁrst to reach the basic design of the
modern computer depends on one’s exact deﬁnition of it,1 but it is clear that by the start of
the 1950s this design was agreed upon.
F.3 A Basic Computer Design
The common features of all computers are a control unit, a processing unit for data transformation, some memory for data and programs, and some mechanisms for communicating
with the outside world. In practice the features may be considered as whole, but conceptually these components have separate functions. Here we will not consider the input and
output features; we will concentrate on the others.
It is all too easy to anthropomorphize computers, but at the heart there is very simple
mechanism, called the execution cycle. There are three stages in the simplest form of this
cycle:
1. Fetch an instruction from memory.
2. Arrange to get the next instruction from the following place.
3. Obey the instruction.
To understand the implications of this elementary cycle, we need to consider what we mean
by an instruction and how it is represented inside the machine. This requires some understanding of the organization of a computer’s memory.
The memory is organized into units called words, all of which are the same size in a given
system. It is usual to think of words as pigeonholes—i.e., as little cells that can hold data.
Each word holds a sequence of binary bits—that is, zeroes and ones. Typically, in most common systems, a word will hold 32 such bits. This collection of bits does not have an intrinsic
‘‘meaning,’’ but the computer design will interpret these bits in a variety of ways depending
on the circumstances.
The simplest interpretation of a word is as an integer in twos-complement binary notation,
and that is the main interpretation for the handling of binary data. We will consider where
this interpretation is located after we have considered the other main interpretation: as an
instruction.
F.3.1

Instructions

The instructions that are found in a computer are all simple. They can be divided into three
groups.

799

Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages

The ﬁrst group of instructions is generally called arithmetic. Typically it will include addition, subtraction, and negation of integers, usually multiplication,2 and often division. It may
well also include these operations for the ﬂoating-point representation of numbers. It will
also include a range of Boolean logic operations—and, or, not, and neqv—operating on the
word as an array of bits, with 0 as false and 1 as true.
The second group of instructions can be seen as a subset of the ﬁrst group. It involves the
moving of data between different locations. On most machines there are two classes of location. We have already identiﬁed the memory as a collection of ‘‘pigeonholes,’’ but there will
be a number of registers—fast locations residing within the processing unit. The kinds of
operation one would expect in this group are loading data from memory to a register, storing
a register in memory, and copying data from one register to another.
The third group of instructions are concerned with control. The normal operation of a
computer is to obey a sequence of instructions in sequence. The control operations change
this normal means of operating by ordering the processor to start a new sequence, and
(importantly) doing this conditionally depending on the value of some register.
Some machines add a fourth group of operations to control input and output of data from
the computer, but most modern machines do this with special locations in the memory,
which when written are automatically printed. For the current purposes we need not concern
ourselves with these details.
F.3.2

The Execution Cycle

There is nothing magic about the method of working of computers. All they do is tirelessly
perform the execution cycle. We need one more architectural detail to understand this cycle,
and that is the idea of a memory address. We have already considered the memory as a collection of pigeonholes. We do need some way of referring to a particular slot, which is called
its address. It is usual to ask students to consider houses in a street, and the difference
between the house itself and the house number which forms part of the postal address. This
analogy works better in some parts of the world than others.3 In the computer we use integers as addresses. For our simple computer we will assume that the words of memory are
numbers from 0 up to whatever is necessary. This allows us to indicate a location by using a
number. With this we can examine the execution cycle.
We will have an internal register in the control unit that contains the address of the
instruction to be obeyed next. This register is often called the program counter (PC). At the
start of the execution cycle this register is used to fetch a word value from the memory,
the word whose address in held in the program counter (ﬁgure F.1). After the instruction
has been read from memory into the control unit (ﬁgure F.2), the program counter is incremented to address the next memory location and we have the situation shown in ﬁgure F.3.
The third action in the execution cycle is to decode and execute the instruction that was
fetched. Then the cycle starts again, and then again, and. . . .

800

Appendix F

Figure F.1
Execution cycle, start.

The instructions are not magic either. Each instruction is represented in the word as some
particular bit pattern. Usually part of the word will represent the operation, and the rest of
the work would indicate the arguments. The arithmetic unit may contain a small number
of registers in addition to the program counter; let us say there are eight of these registers,
which we will name r0 through r7 (ﬁgure F.4). Each instruction may refer to two of these
registers and/or a constant. A typical instructions sequence may be the following:
MOVE
LOAD
ADD
STORE

R1,
R2,
R2,
R2,

#1234
16(R1)
R4
0(R1)

The ﬁrst instruction sets the value 1234 into the register 1. The next one then loads a
value from the memory location 16 beyond the value in register 1 (which we know is 1234,
so this loads the value in the location numbered 1250). Then the value of register 4 is added

801

Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages

Figure F.2
Execution cycle, step 1.

the value in register 2, and ﬁnally stores the value in register 2 in the address held in
register 1.
You may be beginning to see that there are problems here, not of deep complexity but of
organizational confusion. The programmer of this kind of machine has to keep a close attention as to where values were place, and to what purpose each register is being put.
You will have noticed that in the above description the operation of adding one to the
program counter is given as a separate phase of the execution cycle, and before the instruction is obeyed. The reason for this is that it allows the instruction to change the program
counter that is to perform a jump. The instruction JUMP #1000 will write the value 1000 to
the program counter as part of the obeying of the instruction, and so when the next execution cycle starts the instruction fetched will be that in location 1000 rather than the instruction following the JUMP instruction.
The last component in the construction is the conditional jump, where the program
counter is altered only if some condition is true. The kind of conditions that can be tested

802

Appendix F

Figure F.3
Execution cycle, step 2.

are the value of a register being zero, or negative, or positive, among a number of other
possibilities.
Consider the following instruction sequence at locations 400–404:
MOV
MOV
MULT
SUB
JMPNZ

R1,
R2,
R2,
R1,
R1,

#5
#1
R1
#1
#402

Here JMPNZ is an instruction that jumps if the register is not zero. This sequence of instructions will calculate the factorial of 5 (!5=5 x 4 x 3 x 2 x 1 x) in register 2.
Although the examples above are simple, they include all the main features of all computers. To complete this model we have to add operations to read and write to the outside
world.

803

Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages

Figure F.4
CPU with registers.

F.4

Features of Modern Computers
The model computer described in section F.3 contains all the salient features of a computer;
but you might feel that some trick is being played on you, as present-day computers is more
complex. Yes they are, but at the heart of the system are the same ideas: instructions, registers, memory, and an execution cycle. In this section, I will give a brief outline of the ways in
which a computer you might purchase now may differ from the model in section F.3.
A slightly frightening feature of the simple computer model above is that it is possible to
overwrite the program, which would make debugging programs excessively difﬁcult, as what
you see may not be what you have. Most recent machines provide some mechanism to protect the part of the memory being used to store program. Clearly this needs some sophistication so one can store programs in the memory before executing them. It is usual for
computers to allow only execution and reading from the program area, and reading and writing (but not execution) from the data area.

804

Appendix F

Many recent computers will have considerably more registers that the eight in the example. For example, MIPS and Alpha processors have 32, and the SPARC has even more. As register access is faster than memory access this just means that the programmer has the
opportunity for writing a faster program if the registers are used well. But this can also be
seen as a further problem for the programmer. Some computers may place restrictions of
the use of registers, like having one that always contains zero, or making the program
counter one of the main collection, or requiring certain operation may only use certain registers. Despite all this complication the overall shape is the same.
A major concern of computer designers is that technology for processor (CPU) construction has been improving very fast, with consequential improvements in processor speed, or
clocking rate. Unfortunately the improvements in memory speeds have been much smaller
that those in the processor speed, and there is a danger of much of the speed improvement
being lost waiting for the slower memory. Consequently most computers use one or more
caches. It is possible to make fast memories, but they are considerably more expensive that
the other kinds, and they may have size limitations. A cache is a fast memory that sits
between the processor and the memory, so that whenever a request is made for a word
of memory, a check is made to see if it is in the cache, and if so it is used in preference to
waiting for the main memory. When data is written to memory, a copy is retained in the
cache in case it is used again. Because of the way we humans tend to write programs, calculating with one collection of data and then going to a different data collection, this caching
procedure works remarkably well, with over 80 percent of memory reads being already in the
cache in many applications. You will have noticed that if the cache is small the above process must be extended to a strategy for removing values as well.
Many computers also use a three-address architecture rather than the two-address mechanism described above. All this means is that the basic shape of an arithmetic instruction
indicates three locations (the two sources and the destination). Then one sees instructions
like
ADD

R1, R2, R3

This instruction is to add the values in registers 2 and 3 together and place the result in register 1. This is not a major conceptual change, but it does increase the opportunity for careful
use of registers. Machines of this class also tend to have a larger number of registers.
Since the days of the ﬁrst electronic computers there has been constant progress in making
faster machines. One of the more recent techniques is to use dual dispatch, in which two
instructions are fetched from memory at the same time and both are obeyed at the same
time. This can double the speed, but at the cost of making the programming harder, as
instructions are not obeyed in a simple linear fashion.
In this section I have suggested that the model of section F.3 may be reﬁned and developed, but none of these reﬁnements and developments remove the underlying principles of
instruction fetch, program counter increment, and instruction execution. Most of the
changes introduce problems for the programmer, but bring with them an increase in speed.

805

Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages

Interested readers should look at a standard book on processor design—e.g., J. Hennessy and
D. Patterson, Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, third edition (Morgan Kaufman
2003), which emphasizes the same message. We need a better way to write programs.
F.5

Organization of Memory
We saw in section F.3 that the standard computer model has ‘‘memory,’’ and that memory is
just a set of pigeonholes with numeric addresses. This memory structure is often said to be
‘‘ﬂat,’’ and it is not very helpful in the writing of programs. Usually it is necessary to impose
some additional order on this ﬂat structure. There are many ways in which this can be done,
but two common organizations are enshrined in C, in Cþþ, and in other popular programming languages. These two are the stack and the heap.4
F.5.1

A Stack

Formally a stack is a structure that has three operations:
push(value)
value = pop()
boolean = isempty()
The result of a push of a value followed by a pop is to recover the value. The common
physical-world analogy is to a sprung-loaded plate rack such as may still be found in some
cafeterias. When a plate is added, the whole pile of plates sinks, and only the top one is
accessible. When a plate is removed, the pile ﬂoats up to reveal the plate below, but no
more. And it is possible to remove all the plates so the pile is empty. This structure is also
known as a ﬁrst-in/last-out structure, as the ﬁrst value added to the stack is the last removed.
Some people prefer the term last-in/ﬁrst-out, which describes the same process.
Stacks are convenient structures in many parts of computing. There are obviously used in
recursive programming, but they have other uses.
Consider how to implement a stack on the ﬂat memory. The simple idea is to start at some
location in memory and to maintain a variable that has the address of the top of the stack
(initially the start value). Then we can implement push by storing the value and incrementing the address of the top of stack (TOS), and pop is to decrement the pointer and read the
value. We can implement isempty by comparing the TOS with the initial value. In simple C,
creating a stack of integers, this becomes the following:
int *tos;
int *base;
void initialize_stack(int *base_address)
{
base = tos = base_address;
}

806

Appendix F

void push(int value)
{
*tos = value;
tos++;
}
int pop(void)
{
tos--;
return *tos;
}
int isempty(void)
{
return (tos==base);
}
This code has two problems. First, pop has to check ﬁrst that the stack is not empty, because
then the operation would be an error. This is called underﬂow, and here is the solution:
int pop(void)
{
tos--;
if (isempty()) abort();
return *tos;
}
The second problem (much more serious) is overﬂow. The formal, mathematical deﬁnition
of a stack has no limit to its maximum size, but in the real world there are limitations. To
accept this would require a maximum size for the stack when we initialize, and to make the
equivalent check is push for too many values. The revised code is
int *tos;
int *base;
int *limit
void initialize_stack(int *base_address, int size)
{
base = tos = base_address;
limit = base + size;
}
void push(int value)
{
if (isfull()) abort();
*tos = value;
tos++;
}

807

Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages

int pop(void)
{
tos--;
if (isempty()) abort();
return *tos;
}
int isempty(void)
{
return (tos==base);
}
int isfull(void)
{
return (tos==limit);
}
In practice many computers provide hardware assistance to these operations, sometimes in
the form of PUSH and POP instructions. Some computers provide a separate memory for a
stack, or offer other forms of help.
Use of a falling stack (rather than the rising stack described above) is common. In a falling
stack, the pointer is decreased in a push and increased in a pop. With this one can start the
stack at the top of memory, and the program at the bottom of memory, and minimize the
chance of a collision (although checking is still necessary). The hardware assistance may
encourage this form, and there is a rather detailed practical reason for preferring a falling
stack in compiler writing, but that is beyond the scope of this chapter.
You may ﬁnd it helpful to rewrite the simple stack code above to use a falling stack, where
the initialization code is presented with a base address and a size. Take care, as it is not quite
so simple as you may suspect.
Stack structures are so common in programming languages that one often sees references
to ‘‘The Stack.’’ But stacks are useful memory organizations beyond the use in programming
languages.
F.5.2

The Heap

The second major memory organization is the heap. The abstraction is that the user can request an area of memory of a ﬁxed size, and will be passed a pointer to memory at least as
large as the requested size. When the user decides that the memory is no longer required,
the user passes the area back to the heap so it can be recycled. In C these two operations are
characterized by the functions malloc and free. (In Cþþ they are the operations new and
delete.) Implementing this is much harder than implementing a stack and has been the subject of much research and experimentation. For the purposes of this chapter we will consider
two strategies: ﬁrst ﬁt and best ﬁt.

808

Appendix F

F.5.2.1 First Fit
The strategy in ﬁrst ﬁt is to return the ﬁrst chunk of memory that is found that is large
enough, splitting a chunk if it is too big. The danger of this is that the memory will slowly
get split into small chunks and a large request cannot be satisﬁed. The partial solution to this
is to amalgamate adjacent free chunks to reduce the fragmentation.
One way to implement this is to create a header for each block with the size and a ﬂag to
say if it is in use. We can scan the memory in address order, looking for a sufﬁciently large
block; the size tells if it is allocatable and also where the next block starts. In C this ﬁrst
implementation, without amalgamation becomes
#define FREE (0)
#define USED (1)
int *heap_start;
int *heap_end;
void initialize_heap(int *base, int size)
{
*base = size;
*(base+1) = FREE;
heap_start = base;
heap_end = base+size;
}
int *alloc(int size)
{
int *p = heap_start;
while (p<heap_end) {
/* Need two words for the header, so size+2 */
if (*(p+1)==FREE && *p>=(size+2)) {
if (*p>=size+5) { /* split block */
int *ans = p+*p;
*p -= size+2;
*ans = size+2; /* construct header */
*(ans+1) = USED;
return ans;
}
else { /* return entire chunk */
*(p+1) = USED;
return p;
}
}
p += *p;
}
return NULL; /* Out of memory */

809

Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages

}
void dealloc(int *p)
{
int *hdr = p-2;
*(hdr+1) = FREE;
}
This program is not as simple as the stack programs above, and we still need to handle
amalgamation.
There are two approaches to rejoining adjacent blocks. One can do it when a memory is
freed, by checking the next block (if there is one):
void dealloc(int *p)
{
int *hdr = p-2;
int *next = hdr+*hdr;
*(hdr+1) = FREE;
if (next<heap_end && *(next+1)==FREE)
*hdr += *next;
}
But one would also want to amalgamate with the previous block if it existed and was free.
We have to determine whether the previous block requires a scan from the start. But there
is a memory scan in the allocation function, so the second and better approach is to amalgamate at allocation time, and do nothing special when freeing. This lazy approach is very
efﬁcient, as it amalgamates only if necessary:
int *alloc(int size)
{
int *p = heap_start;
int *nxt;
while (p<heap_end) {
/* Need two words for the header, so size+2 */
if (*(p+1)==FREE) {
if (*p>=(size+2)) {
if (*p>=size+5) { /* split block */
int *ans = p+*p;
*p -= size+2;
*ans = size+2; /* construct header */
*(ans+1) = USED;
return ans;
}
else { /* return entire chunk */
*(p+1) = USED;

810

Appendix F

return p;
}
}
nxt = p+*p;
if (nxt<heap_end && *(nxt+1)==FREE) {
*p += *nxt;
}
else p += *p;
}
else p += *p;
}
return NULL; /* Out of memory */
}
void dealloc(int *p)
{
int *hdr = p-2;
*(hdr+1) = FREE;
}
With ﬁrst ﬁt there can still be fragmentation of memory, but it is fast and relatively simple.
F.5.2.2 Best Fit
The second memory-allocation structure we will consider is best ﬁt, in which we allocate the
chunk on memory that is the closest in size to what is considered acceptable. It may seem
that this requires a complete scan of all blocks to ﬁnd it, but if we maintain a list of free
chunks, ordered by increasing size, on allocation we just need to scan this list until we ﬁnd
a chuck large enough, and that will be the best ﬁt. If the ﬁt is not exact then the chunk is
split and the additional segment is added back to the list in the correct location. Freeing store
is also a matter of adding the chunk back in the correct place. Amalgamation is usually done
at freeing time with a complete scan of the list to see if any free chunk is adjacent to the one
to be freed.
The header information now must have the size and the address of the next chunk in the
chain. Here is the code:
int *free_list;
void initialize_heap(int *base, int size)
{
*base = (int)NULL;
*(base+1) = size;
free_list = base;
}

811

Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages

static void add_to_list(int *old)
{
int *p = free_list;
int *last = (int*)&free_list;
int size = *(old+1);
while (p!=NULL && *(p+1)<size) {
last = p; p = (int*)(*p);
}
*old = (int)p;
*last = (int)old;
}
int *alloc(int size)
{
int *p = free_list;
int *last = (int*)&free_list;
while (p!=NULL) {
if (*(p+1)>=size+2) { /* Found a chunk */
if (*(p+1)<=size+5) { /* use whole chunk */
int *ans = p;
*last = *p;
return ans;
}
else { /* split chunk */
int *ans = p;
int *extra = p+size+2;
*(extra+1) = *(p+1)-size-2;
add_to_list(extra);
return ans;
}
}
last = p;
p = (int *)*p;
}
return NULL;
}
void dealloc(int* old)
{
retry:
{
int *p = free_list;
int *last = (int*)&free_list;
while (p!=NULL) {

812

Appendix F

if (old + *(old+1) == p) {
*last = *p;
*(old+1) += *(p+1)+2;
goto retry;
}
if (old == p+*(p+1)) {
*last = *p;
*(p+1) += *(old+1)+2;
old = p;
goto retry;
}
last = p;
p = (int*)(*p);
}
add_to_list(old);
}
}
It does not take much effort to see that the freeing process is considerably more complex.
There are ways of making it faster, but it is more complex to perform the amalgamations.
Usually fragmentation is less with ﬁrst ﬁt but the additional cost is rarely worthwhile.
The code for both cases can be made clearly with the use of a struct to deﬁne the header
layout, and different casts.
Worst ﬁt is like best ﬁt, except that the largest chunk is always used, with the intention of
leaving large chunks. The code is similar, with a free list in decreasing size, but there is less
searching, as the ﬁrst chunk on the free list is always the one to use. There are many other
systems and variants; interested readers are referred to D. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, volume 1, Fundamental Algorithms, second edition (Addison-Wesley, 1998).
F.6 Evolution of Computer Languages
Writing programs at the level of sections F.3 and F.4 above is called assembler programming.
To do it well requires deep concentration and attention to minute detail. If computers are
your hobby, there are few aspects of computing that are closer to the real machine. Coding
this way has similarities with cryptic crossword puzzles and similar intellectual games. I
loved doing this when I young, but the effort took its toll and I rarely do it now. It is still a
signiﬁcant skill in DSP programming, especially in the innermost, most efﬁciency-critical,
sections of code, such as ﬁlters, where performance is everything. But for most people this
is just another hurdle to creating a solution.
Microprogramming is programming in an even smaller language in order to deﬁne what
instructions do. Less common now than in the 1980s, micro-programmed machines where
implemented using a language that was at a lower level than assembler. In this type of

813

Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages

language one would, for instance, deﬁne the operations of an addition statement. These languages frequently did many things at the same time, and had obscure restrictions. This form
of programming is even harder than dealing with assembler and should be labeled ‘‘for geeks
only.’’5
What can be done to make programming possible for everyone? The answer is the development of higher-level languages. The problem with the assembler languages outlined above
is that they are computer oriented. The way in which the language expresses processes is
closely related to what the computer does: moving data, adding registers, or storing data.
While humans can work in this way, understanding the actual activity inside the computer,,
there is an alternative. This is to devise ways of expressing processes which are closer to
our way of thinking, but still can be fairly easily mapped onto the simple execution model.
These ways are what are commonly called high-level languages, or programming languages.
The idea is that we prefer to use names for values, rather than the memory address, and
that we use symbolic ways of expressing the operations. What kind of symbol really depends
on what kind of computation is required. The ﬁrst programming languages were still close to
the actions of the computer, the autocodes, but it is usual to credit the ﬁrst high-level languages: LISP (designed to support mathematical logic), COBOL (for commercial programming), and FORTRAN (for numerical calculation).6 What can be seen from this is that the
programming languages are not just aimed at humans, but at the particular language and
ethos of a domain. There have been a large number of these domain-speciﬁc languages; there
was an attempt to catalogue these some years ago,7 and there have been some updates,8 but
the list is now very large.
In this book we are concentrating on two languages, C and Cþþ, which are widely used in
efﬁcient programming of ‘‘systems programming,’’ which is to say these are the commonest
languages used to implement other systems, including audio systems and language systems.
(See section F.7.) C ﬁrst came to prominence as the language in which the ﬁrst UNIX
systems were written. C was a direct descendant of B, which was a version of BCPL, which
originated in Cambridge, England before migrating to Cambridge, Massachusetts. BCPL has
its origins in the language CPL, which has Algol60 and LISP in its heritage. Again we see
that computing is a subject that develops internationally, many people having made
contributions.
For most people who aspire to write computer programs one of these high-level languages
is the sensible approach. That is why this book exists. However to bridge the so-called
semantic gap between the simple execution cycle of the computer and the human-oriented
programming language we need one more technological component: the compiler.
F.7

Compilers
Compilers are programs designed to translate programs from one language to another, typically from a high-level programming language to assembler or machine language. For most

814

Appendix F

purposes the programmer does not need to know how a compiler works, but there is some
advantage to understanding the processes, if only to convince ourselves that it is not magic.
The operations of any compiler can be divided into two major sections: the front end and
the back end. The front end deals with the language, checking the syntax and some semantics of the input in the source language; the back end performs the translation of the program into the target language.
F.7.1

Compiler Front Ends

The front end can be further subdivided into three main components: lexical analysis,
syntax analysis, and semantic analysis. The names give the clue to the activity of the front
end, which is to analyze the program, eventually removing the way in which the program
is expressed and leaving the meaning alone.
F.7.1.1 Lexing
The lexical analysis, or lexer, has the task of breaking the stream of characters into tokens,
which are the logical equivalent of words and punctuation in natural languages. This is a
fairly simple task, but increasingly compilers are using automated processes to create the
lexer. The best known of these tools is LEX,9 but there are many others. The underlying
mechanism of these automated lexers is one of the basic methods in computing, the ﬁnitestate machine. Finite-state machines (FSMs) are sufﬁciently important that it is worth considering them. Aside from their use in parsers, they can be used in many ways, including a
number of forms of algorithmic composition.
The idea behind the FSM is that there is a concept of the current state. By looking at the
next object in the input a transition is made to a different state. The only rules are that the
number of states is ﬁnite and that the transitions are all determined by the pair of values
(current_state, input_value), and after a transition we move to the next input. As a
simple example consider recognizing simple words. One starts is an initial state, and looks at
the input. If it is white space then change to that same state. On a letter in the input we
change to a state we might call ‘‘word started.’’ In the word started state, we loop on letters
and exit on anything else. This can be succinctly expressed by means of a diagram such
as ﬁgure F.5. It is not too hard to extend such a diagram to more complex situation (for
instance to ﬂoating-point numbers) (ﬁgure F.6).
When one has created the transition diagram, it is then just a case of simple coding. For
example, if the states are numbered, one could have a variable current_state and a simple
loop like the following (for the ﬁrst case):
#define ERROR_STATE -99
#define END_STATE -1
int FSM_word(void)

815

Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages

Figure F.5
FSM for words.

Figure F.6
FSM for ﬂoating-point numbers.

816

Appendix F

{
int current_state = 0;
int ch;
while (current_state != END_STATE) {
ch = getchar();
switch (current_state) {
case 0:
if (isletter(ch)) current_state = 1;
else if (isspace(ch)) current_state = 0;
else current_state = ERROR_STATE
break;
case 1:
if (isletter(ch)) current_state = 1;
else current_state = END_STATE;
break;
case ERROR_STATE:
printf("Syntax error: not a word\n");
return 0;
}}
return 1;
}
From this simple example it is not hard to see that the program is very repetitive and follows
a simple format. A faster but less clear coding of this FSM would be to construct a table,
indexed by the current state and the current character and containing the next state. The
code would then become the following:
int FSM_word(void)
{
int current_state = 0;
int ch;
while (current_state != END_STATE &&
current_state != ERROR_STATE) {
ch = getchar();
current_state = word_table[current_state][ch];
}
if (current_state == ERROR_STATE) {
printf("Syntax error: not a word\n");
return 0;
}
return 1;
}

817

Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages

This would be the same for all FSMs, but with different tables. Constructing these tables can
be tedious, but that is what LEX and similar programs do for you.
Finite-state machines such as are used in lexing have been used in algorithmic composition systems. It is fairly easy to see how these processes can be turned into transitions
between different note sequences that depend on some input. A FSM can control which transitions are permitted, but can use external control to select the actual progress of the sound.
Beginning and ending sections can be controlled, and a structure of climaxes can be imposed
on the process.
With a random number generator to get the stream of inputs, one could create a stochastic
process reminiscent of the screens used by Iannis Xenakis in his Markovian Stochastic Music.
(See Xenakis, Formalized Music, revised edition, Pendragon, 1992.) The lexer will usually also
remove comments, as these are only for human use.
F.7.1.2 Parsing
The parsing stage of the compiler checks for the grammar of the programming language and
builds a representation of the source that is more abstract that the textual form; this representation is usually in the form of a tree. For most designed languages (that is, artiﬁcial rather
than natural languages) the technology for parser construction is well understood.10 There
are many systems that can be used to generate the necessary code; the commonest are
YACC and Bison.11 These systems take a description of the language and create a program
capable of parsing source programs. There are simpler texts covering mainly these aspects;
one is J. Bennett, Compiling Techniques: A First Course Using ANSI C, LEX and YACC, second
edition (Addison-Wesley, 1996).
One would expect the parser to change the sequence
a = b + 3 * c + d;
b = fn(e-f);
to the tree shown in ﬁgure F.7. Notice that this tree is unambiguous. All precedence of
the addition and multiplication operator has been resolved and the variables have been
identiﬁed.
F.7.1.3 Semantics
The last stage of the front end is to check the semantics. This can involve many things, but
will certainly include checking that all variables are declared, that the types of variables
match, and resolving which variable of a given name is meant. In Cþþ, the semantics will
also resolve overloading of operators and methods.
F.7.2

Compiler Back Ends

At the ﬁnish of the front end, the source program will have been transformed into an internal representation of its meaning. The syntax, layout, and comments will have been

818

Appendix F

Figure F.7
Parse tree.

removed. The variables will have been associated with their declarations and a variety of similar operations will have been performed. This internal representation usually takes the form
of some kind of tree structure and makes up the input to the back end.
There are fewer tools to assist in the back end than in the front end, and the three components are more likely to be intertwined. The following description is therefore lacking in
detail. Compiler back-end construction still has many aspects of an art.
F.7.2.1 Machine-Independent Optimization
In addition to generating machine-level code, a compiler will usually attempt to optimize
the program. This is a misnomer. What is achieved is to improve the code, without any
hope of obtaining the optimal coding. We can expect the machine-independent optimizer
to perform a small number of simple tasks, such as recognizing where calculations are performed more than once, calculations that are not used, and constant folding (simplifying
simple arithmetic operations which appear in the code). While these all seem small, the
overall effect can be quite dramatic. It is also why teachers emphasize to students that clear
coding is preferred to hand optimization. Thus,

819

Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages

#define ONE (1)
#define ZERO (0)
a = ONE * b;
c = ZERO* d;
will be treated the same as
a = b;
c = 0;
The other area in which machine-independent optimizations are concentrated is in the
compilation of loops. Programmers often speak of the ‘‘90-10 rule’’—that 90 percent of
the time taken by a program is represented by 10 percent of the code. It is easy to see that
these ‘‘hot spots’’ are to be found in loops.
There are a number of ways in which loops can be improved, such as detecting calculations in the body of a loop that are not changed from loop to loop and pre-calculating. For
example, a loop written by the user as
for (i=0; i<n+100; i++)
m[i] = k[i+3]*(j+23);
will be transformed into
TMP1 = n+100;
TMP2 = j+23;
for (i=0; i<TMP1; i++)
m[i] = k[i+3]*TMP2;
Even more interesting is that while the variable i goes from 0 to n+100, the value i+3 will
go from 3 to n+103 in step. The loop can be changed to
TMP1 = n+100;
TMP2 = j+23;
for (i=0, TMP3=3; i<TMP1; i++, TMP3++)
m[i] = k[TMP3]*TMP2;
This is more efﬁcient than the code we started with, but much less clear.
There are other optimizations that can be performed on this sequence—optimizations that
cannot be expressed in the source language.12
F.7.2.2 Code Generation
One would expect the compiler to generate code, but in many ways this is the least signiﬁcant task. As long as the optimizations and semantics have been done clearly, the generation
of code is straightforward. The one thing that is not obvious is how to use the registers that
any particular machine provides. A good strategy for this will have a real effect on the performance of the resulting code. This subject is too far into computer science for this book, but it

820

Appendix F

is perhaps of interest that that the currently most used technique is based on graph theory
and is called the register coloring algorithm. It casts the problem of which registers to use into
the problem of coloring a graph so no connected node are the same color. This problem can
also formulated as that of coloring a map so no adjacent country have the same color, and
doing this with a limited number of colors.13
F.7.2.3 Machine-Dependent Optimization
The last component of compilation is to use particular knowledge of the target computer to
use special features of the machine, odd instructions that can be used only in special cases,
replace instruction sequences with ones known to run faster, and similar detailed operations.
Naturally these are the hardest to classify, as for each machine they are different.
F.8 Conclusion
This chapter has shown the underlying mechanisms by which computers work, and in particular the fundamental execution cycle. Computers need not be seen as mysterious black
(or gray) boxes, but have a simple logical structure. In order to improve programmers’ productivity and allow them to think at a raised abstract level, programming languages were
introduced. Initially these were fairly ad hoc and often specialized to one computer, but we
have developed a number of platform-independent general languages. For developing systems, C is currently the most widely available language.
A compiler performs the translation of the high-level (user-oriented) language to the lowlevel (machine-oriented) language. Much of the internal workings of compilers is complex
and follows other technologies. In this chapter references have been make to texts that
would allow you to get even deeper knowledge, but realizing the kinds of actions compilers
do can assist in writing user programs. Optimizations of code are the responsibility of the
compiler, while the user should write with clarity. The part the human plays in creating software is focused on selecting the best representations, data structures, and algorithms.
If you look at your C compiler, you should ﬁnd that it is possible to select different compiler optimizations. This chapter should assist in understanding what they do.
Notes
1. I was a student of Sir Maurice Wilkes, and I tend to support his claim.
2. But not always, as multiplication is a slower and more difﬁcult operation than addition.
3. In my home town, many houses do not have numbers at all, and where I previously lived in US every
house was numbered but most numbers were not housed.
4. Note that the term heap has two related meanings. It is used for a general memory system, and also for
a particular organization. It is being used in the generic sense here.

821

Computer Architecture, Structures, and Languages

5. I have written a great deal of micro code in my time, and it remains to me the most enjoyable style of
programming. It is not for everyone!
6. On LISP see J. McCarthy, ‘‘Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their Computation by
Machine, Part I,’’ Communications of the ACM 3, 1960, no. 4: 184–195. On COBOL see Common Business
Oriented Language, technical report, CODASYL, 1959. On FORTRAN see J. Backus et al., ‘‘The FORTRAN
Automatic Coding System,’’ in Proceedings of the Western Joint Computer Conference, 1957.
7. J. Sammet, Programming Languages: History and Fundamentals (Prentice-Hall, 1969).
8. J. Sammet, ‘‘Roster of Programming Languages for 1974–75,’’ Communications of the ACM 19, 1976,
no. 2: 655–669; J. Sammet, ‘‘An Overview of High-Level Languages,’’ Advances in Computers 20, 1981:
199–259.
9. On LEX, see M. Lesk and E. Schmidt, ‘‘LEX—Lexical Analyzer Generator,’’ in UNIX Research System
Programmer’s Manual, tenth edition (Saunders College Publishing, 1990), volume 2, and http://ﬂex
.sourceforge.net/.
10. Interested readers are referred to A. Aho, R. Sethi, and J. D. Ullman, Compilers: Principles, Techniques
and Tools (Addison-Wesley, 1986) (the detailed ‘‘Red Dragon Book’’) and to the less detailed ‘‘Green
Dragon Book’’ by the same authors: Principles of Compiler Design (Addison-Wesley, 1977).
11. On YACC see S. Johnson, ‘‘YACC: Yet Another Compiler-Compiler,’’ in UNIX Research System
Programmer’s Manual, tenth edition (Saunders College Publishing, 1990), volume 2. On BISON see The
Bison Manual, available at http//www.gnu.org/manual/bison/index.html.
12. The optimization to which I refer is called induction variable usage, and relates in this example to i
only being used to address memory and so we could use a TMP variable for &m[0] and add to that to go
to the next array element. On a byte-addressed machine, this can not be expressed by the programmer.
Again the interested reader is referred to a standard compiler text.
13. Aho et al. explain the algorithm in Compilers.

Appendix G: Glossary
John fﬁtch with Richard Dobson, Victor Lazzarini, and Richard Boulanger

Computing is at the forefront of the creation and use of jargon. In this glossary we bring together
short descriptions of key words in computing found in this book. Readers interested in learning more
on the subject are referred to the dated but still amusingly accurate Computer Contradictionary by
Stan Kelly-Bootle (MIT Press, 1995).
0dBFS Standing for ‘‘zero decibels full scale,’’ this term is commonly used to deﬁne the
absolute maximum value for a digital signal (‘‘digital peak’’) in a number representation; likewise the peak signal level to which analog equipment is calibrated. By convention, maximum level is stated as 0 dB; any signal exceeding 0 dB will be clipped. All other levels are
expressed relative to 0 dBFS. For ﬂoating-point samples, 0 dBFS is usually 1.0; for 16-bit samples it is 32,768 (corresponding to the maximum negative 16-bit value, 215 ). Because of the
response of the ear, the decibel is the most appropriate measure of sound level. The term is
also widely used to indicate not a peak sample value (or reference voltage) but a peak signal
power expressed as an RMS (root-mean-square) value. This leads to a subtle but important distinction between 0 dBFS (sine) and 0 dBFS (square). Intuitively we can understand signal
power as determined by the area under the curve, when the waveform is drawn. Clearly,
this area is less for a sinusoid than for a square wave (the latter indeed giving the maximum
theoretical power achievable as the full available area is used). The difference is 3 dB, so if
0 dBFS (square) is 1.0, 0 dBFS (sine) is approximately 0.707. Usually the intended usage will
be clear from the context. In Csound, the special name 0 dBFS is used to deﬁne the peak
sample value; when the term is used by mixing engineers, the full-scale sine power reference
is assumed. There is a sound reason for this: a sinusoid reaching digital peak presents the
highest power level that can be passed to an ADC without clipping.
Absolute value In mathematics, the magnitude of a number regardless of sign. The absolute
value of þ1.5 is 1.5; the absolute value of 0.7 is þ0.7. One is said to ‘‘take the absolute’’ of a
number. It is represented in C by two library functions: abs() for integers and fabs() for
ﬂoating-point values. The latter is a relatively expensive computation. A typical use is in
ﬁnding the overall or average amplitude of a signal. Audio waveforms are bipolar—samples

824

Appendix G

have both positive and negative values. If these were simply added (and there is no DC
offset), the result would simply be zero. This ‘‘signedness’’ should be disregarded in ﬁnding
the signal level; the absolute value of each sample should be taken.
ADC Analog-to-digital converter—a device used to convert an electrical current, such as
that produced by microphone and ampliﬁer, into a stream of bits that can be manipulated
by a computer. A computer soundcard will contain one or more ADCs. In common parlance,
the ADC is used as another name for an input soundcard.
Address A location in computer memory has both its contents and an address. The address
is a number that identiﬁes the location uniquely and can be used by a program as identiﬁcation.
AIFF See Audio ﬁle formats.
Algorithm A ﬁnite set of unambiguous rules to solve a problem in a ﬁnite time.
Alias In operating systems and programs, an alternative name for a disk ﬁle, a memory
location, or a the name of a macro.
Allocate To identify and acquire a piece of free memory and associate it to a program. This
is most often done by means of malloc, calloc, or new.
ALSA Advanced Linux Sound Architecture, a software layer that includes a collection of
device drivers for various soundcards in the Linux OS. It provides the lowest-level audio
input and output application programming interface. OSS (Open Sound System) offers similar functionality but is not as commonly found in the most popular Linux distributions.
ALU Arithmetic and logic unit, the component of the computer hardware that performs the
operations on values. The arithmetic component performs addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. The logic performs bitwise operations from Boolean algebra, such as AND,
OR, NEQV, or NOT. (See CPU.)
Ambisonics A way of recording and playing true surround sound, also known as B-Format.
Invented in the 1970s by Michael Gerzon of the University of Oxford Mathematical Institute, it is ﬁrmly based in the theory of spherical harmonics. The mechanism is complex and
still being developed, but it is not the same as 5.1 or a similar discrete speaker format. A special multi-capsule microphone can be used to record an entire three-dimensional soundﬁeld—the principle is that the capsules are as close to coincident as possible, so that they
record the exact soundﬁeld at a single point in space, which in turn is reproduced by means
of the decoder. The ﬁrst multi-capsule microphone was the Calrec Soundﬁeld; others have
appeared more recently, and some engineers use a set of closely matched discrete microphones. The audio signals are not related to speaker positions but rather to the underlying
spherical harmonics, and a B-Format decoder is used to render the audio to a particular
speaker layout. A special advantage of B-Format is that it is ‘‘speaker-agnostic’’—a given

825

Glossary

stream may (in principle) be decoded to as many speakers as are available, including the
standard stereo pair.
B-Format supports both two-dimensional and three-dimensional conﬁgurations. (All current cinema surround formats, despite being described as three-dimensional, are horizontalonly.) As a rule of thumb, the more speakers used, the better the localization, with a
much-reduced tendency for sounds to ‘‘pull’’ into the nearest physical speaker. The theory
requires that speakers be arranged in a regular geometry, such as a hexagon, a cube, or a
dodecahedron. Some small departures from this are possible; for example, there are ways
to decode to the popular 5.1 layout, though the quality is compromised. A further special
aspect of B-Format is that all the speakers are driven (for example, where speakers are opposite across the array, one will push where the other pulls); thus all the speakers contribute to
the overall sound pressure level (SPL).
B-Format is deﬁned as a series of orders. The ﬁrst order uses four channels, the second
order nine channels, and the third order 16. Some channels can be disregarded for playback
over a horizontal-only array. Still higher orders are possible, and are a current research topic.
ANSI C Kernighan and Ritchie originally wrote the C language for their own software development, particularly for the UNIX operating system. A number of confusing parts and
potential sources of error were addressed by a committee of the American National Standards
Institute, which in 1989 produced a language deﬁnition (often called ANSI C or C89). It was
quickly adopted by the International Standard Organization (ISO) and by the software community. Very little of the earlier Kernighan-Ritchie C language remains. The ANSI committee
continued with a revised standard, producing a new language C99 in 1999. Aspects of this
language are common, but the whole language is not so universally adopted.
API The Application Programming Interface. A programmer need not know everything
about a library or a package; all that is necessary is to know how to call it. The API will
usually consist of a number of functions with deﬁned arguments and possibly some data
structure deﬁnitions (in the C language, struct). This deﬁnition allows the application
developer to use the package; at the same time, it allows the developer of a package to
modify and improve the system as long as the API does not change.
AquaTerm A Mac OS X graphics terminal (a plotting front end) written using Objective-C
and the Cocoa API.
Argument A value passed to a function or method, or a space-separated string supplied to a
program by means of the command line.
Array

A collection of like-typed data that is accessed by means of a numerical index.

ASCII Strictly, ASCII is the initials of the phrase American Standard Code for Information
Interchange, the commonest mapping of the textual characters of English, together with
some pictorial (not alpha-numeric) and other characters. There are a total of 128 characters

826

Appendix G

in this code, including some ‘‘control’’ characters, originally for example for starting a tape,
ending transmission, and a number of esoteric operations. It does include the typewriter-like
carriage return (CR ¼ 13), line feed (LF ¼ 10), or form feed (more commonly known as page
throw) (FF ¼ 12). The actual code is shown in table G.1.
ASIC An Application-Speciﬁc Integrated Circuit—a custom chip that can perform special
processing.
Assembler A program that translates assembly language programs into machine code.
Sometimes also used for assembly language.
Assembly code

See Assembly language.

Assembly language A low-level machine-oriented language that reﬂects, in text, the basic
machine instructions. Originally it would have had one line of text for one machine instruction, but today assembly language often contains macros.
Asynchronous Two processes can be synchronous (that is, both happening at the same rate
and time) or asynchronous (where there is no order in which the two processes work).
AU See Audio ﬁle formats.
Audio ﬁle formats There are many ways in which plain PCM (pulse code modulation)
audio can be stored in a ﬁle. They fall into three main categories: uncompressed, lossless
compressed, and lossy compressed. Some ﬁle formats (tending to be proprietary) are specialized to one or another of these (e.g., the .mp3 ﬁle format for compressed audio). However,
the majority of ﬁle formats of importance to the musician are, strictly speaking, container
formats that can support a wide variety of audio representations, including both plain PCM
audio and a variety of compressed formats. Popular container formats include the common
RIFF-based formats of WAV and AIFF and more recent introductions such as Apple’s new
CAF format. These formats include a header and a number of ‘‘chunks,’’ all of which have
the same general structure of a name, a length, and data. Standard chunks are deﬁned for
the audio data itself (whether raw PCM or compressed), metadata (author, album, date, copyright, and so forth), looping information, and much else. The differences between WAV and
AIFF lie in the names of the chunks (e.g., ‘‘data’’ for WAV and ‘‘SSND’’ for AIFF) and the byte
order of the data.
Lossless compression formats are more specialized and, as the name suggests, give smaller
ﬁles, but the original data can be reconstructed exactly. Notable in this class are FLAC,
Shorten, ALAC, and WMA. These formats use a variety of mathematical and audio processes
to reduce the data requirements, and normally achieve about 58 percent compression. The
last group (which includes the above-mentioned .mp3 format) uses psychoacoustic principles to remove parts of the audio that perceptually a human cannot hear, then uses DSP to
reduce the data considerably. MP2 and OGG, the best-known algorithms, achieve compressions of about 15 percent of the raw PCM, depending on the type of sounds involved. It is a
matter of taste and dispute as to whether lossy compression matters, but it is worth noting

827

Glossary

Table G.1
The ASCII codes.
DEC

HEX

CHAR

DEC

HEX

CHAR

DEC

HEX

CHAR

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42

00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
0A
0B
0C
0D
0E
0F
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
1A
1B
1C
1D
1E
1F
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
2A

NULL 0\0 0
SOH
STX
ETX
EOT
ENQ
ACK
BEL 0\a 0
BS 0\b 0
HT 0t 0
LF 0\n 0
VT 0\v 0
FF 0\f 0
CR 0\r 0
SO
SI
DLE
DC1
DC2
DC3
DC4
NAK
SYN
ETB
CAN
EM
SUB
ESC
FS
GS
RS
US
SPACE
!
‘‘
#
$
%
&

43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85

2B
2C
2D
2E
2F
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
3A
3B
3C
3D
3E
3F
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
4A
4B
4C
4D
4E
4F
50
51
52
53
54
55

þ
,

.
/
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
:
;
<
¼
>
?
@
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U

86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127

56
57
58
59
5A
5B
5C
5D
5E
5F
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
6A
6B
6C
6D
6E
6F
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
7A
7B
7C
7D
7E
7F

V
W
X
Y
Z
[
\
]
^
_
‘
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
o
p
q
r
s
t
u
v
w
x
y
z
{
|
}
~
DEL

0

(
)
*

828

Appendix G

that the typical listening environment should factor into this determination. When one is
listening to music while traveling on an airplane or a bus, the situation (noise level) is quite
different from listening in one’s home studio with good monitor speakers.
Audio Units An audio plug-in architecture developed by Apple for Mac OS X. It provides
a common structure for the development of audio applications that support externally
provided components (plug-ins). It is a part of the overall CoreAudio API. See also VST and
LADSPA.
Backing store Shortly after the invention of computers, it became clear that there was a
need to store data between program runs. The earliest machines used punched tape or
punched cards (in particular the Hollerith card, originally used in the US census), but these
are inconvenient for larger collections of data. This need gave rise to the development of
backing store, ﬁrst as magnetic tape and later as magnetic drums and disks. The term is used
loosely for all data recording mechanisms except main memory.
Bash The Bourne Again Shell, a command language interpreter closely associated with GCC
and the GNU tools. The name is a pun on the surname of Steven Bourne, the original author
of the UNIX shell, sh.
Bebugging Testing can show the presence of bugs but not their absence. How conﬁdent
can we be that a software package is free of bugs, or at least low in bugs? If (as is common
in commercial programming) the testing team is independent of the creating team, we can
use bebugging to estimate the bugginess of the code. In bebugging, the writing team deliberately inserts a ﬁxed number of known bugs before passing the code to the testers, then
observes how many of these added bugs are detected by the testers. If only half of them are
found, it may be assumed that the testers have found only half of the inadvertent bugs. If 90
percent are found, it may be assumed that 90 percent of the real bugs have been found. If all
N bugs are detected then one may assume that about 1/(2N) of the bugs remain.
B-Format See Ambisonics.
Big-endian See Little-endian.
Binary ﬁle A computer ﬁle could be in text format, or it could be in binary, using the bit
representation of numbers directly.
Binary format Most modern computers work in binary; that is, numbers are represented
internally in radix 2, where a digit can have one of only two possible values, i.e. 0 and 1.
This is considered in more detail in the item on number representation below, but one particular implication is that when storing data on a backing store it can be maintained in this
binary format which uses fewer bits than a representation in ASCII characters. Such binary
representations are highly robust in the presence of noise, which makes them ideally suited
not only for computer manipulation but also for storage on magnetic media such as tape and
disk.

829

Glossary

Bit The smallest unit of information that can be held and processed. This is a single binary
digit, which can only have the value 0 or 1. It is sometimes suggested that this ‘bit’ an abbreviation for binary digit, but this seems unlikely. More complex values and data items can be
constructed from a number of bits, using binary arithmetic, vectors of bits, or other arrangements. When worrying about time-critical or space-critical computations, one often counts
the number of bits being used to represent something. There is also bit-twiddling, a nowdeprecated but nevertheless interesting style of computing that cares about the size of a program to such an overarching extent that mathematical games are played with bits. (Exercise
for the over-enthusiastic reader: Consider how to swap two values held in variables without
using a temporary.)
Blocking IO A type of IO operation that blocks (stops) program execution while waiting for
data to be completely sent or received to or from its source or destination. Conversely,
in non-blocking IO the program does not wait for input or output to be completed. (See
Asynchronous.)
Bluetooth A short-range wireless communication system for personal area networks (PAN).
Its range is about 10 meters. Using the 2.4-gigahertz radio band, it can achieve speeds of up
to 1 megabit per second. It is used to attach mouses and keyboards without wires, to facilitate data exchange with mobile (cell) phones, and to enable Nintendo’s Wii remote game
controller to ﬁnd applications.
Boolean algebra Invented by the nineteenth-century Irish mathematician George Boole,
Boolean algebra is used to manipulate expressions whose variables are TRUE or FALSE and
whose operators are NOT, AND, OR, NEQV, and IMPLIES. This scheme is universally used
in binary computers, where each bit has two states (0 and 1, or FALSE and TRUE). It helps
in translating logical arguments into mechanical processes.
Buffer A generic name used for a memory space used to momentarily store data that is
going to be subsequently processed in one way or another (for instance, sent to an output).
An important use is storing data delivered in bursts (e.g., from a disk drive, or over a computer bus such as PCI), for continuous access under the control of a clock. Buffers are characterized by the order in which data is written and read. By far the most common is the
First-In-First-Out (FIFO) buffer. As its name indicates, the order of the data is preserved, experiencing only a delay. The alternative is a FILO buffer (First-In-Last-Out), more commonly
referred to as a stack.
Bug An inadvertent error in a computer program or (by transference) in any process.
Bus An electrical mechanism to communicate binary signals between components of a
computer. It is also used for a software mechanism that fulﬁls a similar role in system design.
Byte A small collection of bits. The number is usually eight, but not always. It is usually
synonymous with the number of bits used to store a character on the particular machine,

830

Appendix G

Figure G.1
Cache memory.

and for most architectures that number is eight. Older readers may remember that the PDP10
used seven bits for characters, although this was user-adjustable.
C A programming language, created by Dennis Ritchie, used in major platforms for systems
implementation. It is particularly important for audio programming.
C99 See ANSI C.
CBB An object-oriented computer language, originally based on C, that can easily work
and integrate with C.
Cache One of the recurring problems in computer architecture is the mismatch of speed
between the central processing unit (CPU) and the main memory. As technology evolves,
both of these components are getting faster, but at different rates. Processor speeds are far
outstripping affordable memory. The cache is a piece of hardware that seeks to ameliorate
this. It is basically a section of fast (and therefore expensive) memory with associated logic
(in the case of most modern CPUs, incorporated into the chip itself) so that whenever the
processor reads a value or writes a value to memory a copy of the address and value are stored
in the cache. If the value is used again, it can be recovered from the cache much faster than
from the main memory (ﬁgure G.1). Cache works because of two effects: temporal and spa-

831

Glossary

tial locality. If we use a value it is likely that we will use it again soon, and we are likely to use
values stored close to it in the near future. Surprisingly, this works extremely well, and relatively small amounts of cache give greatly improved performance. Some recent machines use
more than one level of cache, which gives rise to terms like L2 (‘‘level-two’’) cache.
Callbacks The usual style of programming is imperative; one gives a sequence of operations
to perform. An alternative structure is to have a main program that does nothing but wait (in
a so-called idle loop); then, when something happens (e.g., a character typed on the console,
or a mouse is clicked), a callback function is invoked. When the callback function has done
its task, control returns to the idle loop in the main program. This style is frequently used in
GUI implementations as an alternative to polling (in which the main program repeatedly
asks every component if it needs attention). Callbacks are sometimes called ‘‘software interrupts.’’ They are, nevertheless, frequently associated with responses to a hardware-mediated
event, such as a notiﬁcation from a soundcard (or rather, from its driver software) that a new
buffer of audio is available. The callback system is central to the operation of an interactive
digital audio workstation (DAW), in which all the audio processing (including all inserted
plug-ins) is processed inside a single callback function under the control of the audio hardware. Such a callback will typically be run in a high-priority thread, so that under high CPU
load the GUI elements may become sluggish, but the audio stream will continue without
breakup.
cmusic A music-programming language inspired by the MUSIC-N paradigm, written in the
C language by F. Richard Moore. One of its main aspects was the way it took advantage of
the UNIX principle of interconnecting programs and shell scripting.
Codec A conﬂation of the words ‘coder’ and ‘decoder’ that properly describes a system that
combines both encoding and decoding functions (e.g., both ADC and DAC) within one
device. Nevertheless, it is often used more colloquially to refer to one or the other separately
(‘‘output to the codec’’). In a second related usage, it refers to any plug-in module required by
an application (such as a DAW or a web browser) to decode (or encode to) an otherwise
unrecognized ﬁle or data format.
Command-line interface The alternative to a GUI. One types commands to a terminal with
arguments and ﬂags, rather than using a mouse and buttons. Though older in style, it has
signiﬁcant advantages for developers.
Compile Programs written in a textual source form must be translated into a language that
can be obeyed by the computer hardware. The process of translation is compilation, and the
translated object is called compiled code (to distinguish it from source code).
Console When computers were ﬁrst developed, there was a control desk called a console
from which one started programs and stopped the machine. During the transition to multiple users and time sharing, there still remained the operator’s console, often as a teletypewriter, overseeing the operation. Personal computers retain this idea of the main

832

Appendix G

controlling input and output, the console, though now it often consists of a screen and a
keyboard. By transference, and following the ideas of virtual machines, each program is said
to have a controlling console, the (virtual) terminal that started the program, or some even
more complex scheme. The console initially provides the main input (standard in) and
receives the main output (standard out).
Controller A system or device that provides control information for a certain operation,
such as a MIDI controller (that sends MIDI information to software) or hardware controllers.
A controller thus involves two elements: the physical hardware and the software and/or electrical protocol (e.g., MIDI, OSC, Bluetooth) by which the physical hardware communicates
with the receiver.
Core One of the earliest forms of main memory used the magnetic ﬁelds of small doughnutlike rings of ferrite, which were known as cores. By passing three wires through the hole in a
ring, it was possible to selectively read or write individual bits. This technology, long since
superseded, gave rise to the colloquial use of core to mean main memory. This has largely
fallen into disuse, except in the phrase core dump. On UNIX-like systems, when a program
fails it might produce a dump of the state of the memory in a ﬁle called core. Modern memories are more likely to be made from electrostatic charge, or from transistor states.
Core Audio The audio IO software layer on OS X, handling access to devices (soundcards)
for which Core Audio device drivers exist. It comprises a collection of APIs for dealing with
real-time audio programming, including the management of instrument and effect plug-ins
connected in the form of a signal ﬂow graph.
Core MIDI
Audio.

The MIDI IO software layer on OS X, performing an equivalent function to Core

CPU The Central Processing Unit—the component of the computer’s hardware that performs all processing and control. It incorporates the arithmetic and logic unit and the mechanisms for getting the next instruction to obey, and performing jumps and similar activities.
The name comes from the time when computers had other processing units, usually associated with input and output, and the CPU was the main one, at the center of a ring of devices.
With machines having more than one main processor, the name is rather anachronistic.
Crash A program that fails in an unexpected way is said to have crashed. The cause could
be a bug, a memory leak, or some unexpected external event.
Csound A music-programming language written originally by Barry Vercoe as an update to
his music11 system. As music11 had been written for a speciﬁc machine (the DEC PDP 11),
it was due to become obsolete with the advent of new computers. With Csound, we have a
system written in the C language and thus portable to any modern platform. The language
was adopted by a large user and developer community, underwent a lot of development, and
is currently on its ﬁfth version.

833

Glossary

CVS Concurrent Versions System, a suite of programs for managing source control. It
allows a number of programmers to cooperate on a single multi-ﬁle program. Each user has
a copy of the code, and there are extensive mechanisms for checking code into the system,
dealing with merging changes, and maintaining records of activity, both for documentation
and to allow undoing of changes.
DAC Digital-to-analog converter—a device used to convert a stream of bits, as produced by
a computer, into electrical current that can be ampliﬁed and transduced by a loudspeaker. A
computer soundcard will contain one or more DACs. In common parlance, the DAC is used
as another name for an output soundcard.
Data structure Any construction to organize data; often associated with the struct in C,
it can also involve arrays, pointers, and tables.
Debugging strategies There is only one real way to debug a program, and that is to think.
As an aid to this thinking process there are symbolic debuggers like gdb, or one could add
print statements at intervals in the code to help determine the sequence of operations, or
one could obey the program by hand (i.e. without a computer) to see what happens. But
ultimately what is needed is thought.
Denormal In IEEE ﬂoating-point arithmetic there is a normalization process performed by
the hardware to ensure maximal precision. There are, however, bit patterns that are not valid
as normalized IEEE numbers, and these are said to be denormalized. This can indicate underﬂow (numbers too small to represent) or overﬂow (numbers too large to represent).
Decrement

To subtract by a ﬁxed amount, usually 1.

Directory A non-terminal node in the tree of computer ﬁles. This is a special type of ﬁle
that contains references to ﬁles and directories.
Direct Memory Access, Buffers, and FIFO When sending data to or from a peripheral device,
such as a disk, the obvious program of a loop sending the words of data to the device is slow
and wasteful, as the processor runs much faster that the disk can receive data. This bottleneck can be alleviated by the use of Direct Memory Access (DMA), in which additional hardware allows data to be transferred between memory and disk without the use of the CPU
other than to initiate the transfer. This can be combined with a FIFO buffer (or queue) of
data blocks so the processor is only used occasionally and could continue with other work.
Buffering is a similar concept to smooth the rates of creation and consumption of data.
Disk One of the main physical methods of bulk storage is a rotating disk covered in some
magnetic material. Data can be written onto this surface in a number of concentric tracks by
magnetizing the surface. Large disks use a number of these disks, called platters, on the same
spindle. Having a reading head for each surface makes it possible to read data in parallel. On
fast disks the heads do not actually touch the platter; they ‘‘ﬂoat’’ just above it, close enough
to sense the magnetic ﬁeld. A ‘‘head crash,’’ in which the head touches the rotating platter,

834

Appendix G

usually leads to scratching of the magnetic surface and subsequent loss of information. In
order to allow the heads to get very close to the disk, it is important to ensure that the air is
very clean (the heads are much closer to the surface than the width of a human hair); for this
reason, disk enclosures are usually sealed, and efﬁcient air ﬁlters are used.
Disk, ﬂoppy Similar technology to a hard disk, but there is usually one platter, it is ﬂoppy
rather than rigid, and the head does touch the surface. This limits the speed of rotation, and
the density of data that can be reliably written.
Distributed Systems, clusters, and grids Computers are still getting faster, but there are
problems which require more computing power than a single processor can provide. It is
possible to have a small number of processors sharing the same memory, disks, and console,
to form a shared-memory multiprocessor system. Dual-processor systems are now fairly common, and Linux for one is distributed in a symmetric multiprocessor version; this provides a
multi-processing system in a direct fashion. There is, however, a limit to how many processors can share memory, and to go beyond a few it is necessary to consider a distributed
system or cluster—e.g., a network of machines, each with its own memory.
Double See Number representation.
Double-buffering Using two buffers. While one is being emptied, the other is being ﬁlled.
When the ends of both buffers are reached, their roles are exchanged.
Driver A software package that mediates operating system requirements with a device, usually a disk or a mouse.
Drum An alternative to a disk: a rotating cylinder with a magnetic surface. Otherwise similar in operation to a disk, a drum was capably of faster rotation than early disks. For that reason, drums were used for the highest-performance applications. They have fallen out of
fashion, as large ones are hard to make. Also, the moment of inertia of a cylinder is larger
than for a disk, and so they take longer to reach full speed after start-up. The term ‘drum’
is still sometimes found in descriptions of some ultra-fast disks and some virtual memory
applications.
Emacs An extensive and extensible screen editor, originally a set of macros for the teco
editor. It is programmable in a Lisp scripting language, and a large number of plug-ins support different computer languages and systems.
Encapsulation Hiding details of a data structure, and providing just operations that act on
it, in effect making an API for the data.
Endless loop See Loop, endless.
Environment variable In most operating systems, programs are run not only with arguments (see Command line) but also with an environment. This environment is expressed as
a set of string values associated with names. A program can interrogate this environment,

835

Glossary

and sometimes can add to it or change it. The names are called environment variables. In each
system a number of standard names are deﬁned (the most common being PATH, which lists
directories to be searched for programs); the user may freely add more names.
When one program launches another, the latter normally inherits the environment of the
caller; however, it is common (not least for security reasons) to limit the variables that are
made available in this way. When working from the command line (i.e. within a command
shell program), it is possible to deﬁne new temporary environment variables (which may
then be passed to any invoked program); when the session is closed, the new variables are
lost. To be persistent, an environment variable, has to be placed in a special text ﬁle, according to the conventions of the operating system. When a new command session is launched,
it reads this ﬁle (which may also contain executable instructions) as part of its startup
procedure.
FIFO First-In-First-Out. See Buffer.
Filing system A way of organizing data on a disk or a similar backing store, usually supported by software embedded in the operating system. Most ﬁling systems provide a name
for a ﬁle of data, and usually ﬁles can be collected in folders or directories. There are many
additional features, including shortcuts, links, and multiple names. The term ﬁling system is
also applied more narrowly to low-level organization and software design. On Windows the
major ﬁling systems used are VFAT, FAT32, and NFTS; Linux uses ext3, Reiser, XFS, and JFS;
Apple uses HFS. There are many other ﬁling systems, all with advantages and disadvantages.
Firewire (IEEE 1394) IEEE 1394 is a serial communication system, similar to USB, but
without a rigid computer-device division, thus supporting peer-to-peer communication.
Also hot-pluggable, it is widely used in video cameras. It was initially faster than USB, but
recently faster versions of both interfaces have been appearing. Although the name Firewire
is owned by Apple, IEEE 1394 identiﬁes it as an independent standard protocol.
Firmware A computer is physically made from hardware, and runs software. However, there
is an intermediate component—programs that are ﬁxed and then installed in a hardware
format, permanently in a ROM or a PROM. They may alternatively be stored in an EPROM,
which permits multiple burn/erase/rewrite cycles, enabling the ﬁrmware to be updated
in situ. These programs are used to control disks, and in some machines to implement some
of the logic of the processor. Once written and debugged, they are changed only rarely,
when bugs or improvements are found. This not-completely-soft ware is called ﬁrmware.
The best-known example is the BIOS of an IBM-compatible PC, stored in a PROM. Many
early personal computers (including the original Apple Macintosh) had full operating systems (and even programming languages such as BASIC) not loaded into volatile memory
but permanently stored in a large PROM chip. This remains the case with many ‘‘embedded’’
systems, such as mobile phones and similar small-scale devices.

836

Appendix G

Figure G.2
The ﬁve-box model of computer architecture.

Five-box model A simple model of the architecture of computing systems. The ﬁve boxes
are memory, arithmetic/logic unit, control unit, input, and output (IO), connected as shown
in ﬁgure G.2. The memory is connected to the arithmetic and logic unit for data and to the
control unit for instructions.
Flags In the command-line interface, and by transference in graphical interfaces, there is a
distinction made between arguments (user parameters) to an operation and ﬂags that control
how the operation is to be styled or achieved. By long tradition, a ﬂag is preceded by a
hyphen (except on Windows, where a slash is used). Initially, ﬂags were single letters, but
now they may be words preceded by pairs of hyphens (--).
Flash Memory A low-volume mass storage system on non-volatile memory. Similar to RAM,
it is slower to read and much slower to write. But the data remains when removed from
power, in contrast with RAM. Flash memory has become common in memory for digital
cameras and audio players, and in so-called data keys.
Floating-point data See Number representation.
FLTK Pronounced ‘‘Fulltick,’’ this is a graphics toolbox written for use in Cþþ. It is very
easy to use to create simple user interfaces with windows, buttons, and text input. It comes
with a window design tool, Fluid, that writes most of the Cþþ code for you. FLTK (which
stands for Fast and Light ToolKit) is not very fast when it runs, but is quick to write.
Fluid Fast Light User Interface Designer, a graphical editor used to produce FLTK source
code. It is the quick and easy UI builder for FLTK.

837

Glossary

Fork Each time you run a program on the computer, it is run in a protected environment,
rather like a virtual computer, with input and output streams to communicate and system
calls. The process of creating such a virtual computer is called forking. Initially it is created
as a clone of the parent. In most operating systems there is an operation to perform this forking (the function fork). The term ‘fork’ is also used to describe variations of software packages, where a clone with some unique features is made in order to try some experimental
ideas, or where there is disagreement on the development of the core system.
FPGA Field-Programmable Gate Array. This device represents several steps of advance from
the custom ROM chip. The latter is created in a chip-fabrication facility from data supplied
by the customer. The FPGA, in contrast, is a chip containing a very large number of rudimentary semiconductor building blocks (gates) and interconnections that as supplied do
nothing. Instead, computational elements such as adders and multipliers, and interconnections such as data and address busses, can be created by the application programmer using a
combination of hardware and software to program the device. In such a way, the device may
become a bespoke processor of any kind—e.g., a CPU, a DSP, or a codec. FPGAs are now
established and increasingly popular as alternatives to a standard DSP chip. Early devices
were limited in speed compared to standard hardware, but this limitation is fast disappearing. Many commercial audio products are now based not on off-the-shelf CPU or DSP chips
but on one or more custom-programmed FPGAs.
Full duplex This term generally refers to devices that can send and receive data concurrently
(i.e., a full-duplex soundcard, from which audio can be recorded and to where it can be
played at the same time).
Function In mathematics, a function is a mapping from an ordered set of arguments to a
value. Strictly it must be such that the same arguments always give the same answer. This
idea is incorporated into computing with less formality. A function should return a value,
and a subroutine does not, but this usage is not observed as much as it once was.
GCC The Gnu C Compiler, an implementation of a C compiler that is used in the opensource community and increasingly elsewhere. It conforms largely to the ANSI standards,
and it comes with POSIX libraries. An important component of the GNU project, it continues to develop new compilation techniques. It has been implemented on a large number
of processors and operating systems, and for that reason it has been the preferred C compiler
in this book. Lately the acronym stands for GNU Compiler Collection, as it works as a frontend that supports various languages. The same code base is used for g++, the GNU Cþþ
compiler, and there are variants for Fortran, Pascal, Objective-C, Java, and Ada.
Gnuplot An interactive, command-line-driven, two- or three-dimensional plotting program.
GUI A Graphical User Interface—a part of a computer program, often clearly separate from
the calculating component, whereby the users select and conﬁgure their requirements for

838

Appendix G

the program, e.g. using check boxes, buttons, and pull-down menus. Older (and more sane)
programs used a command-line interface.
In a GUI the connection between the user and a piece of software is entirely by means of
pictures, buttons, and other visual metaphors. The user is expected to use a mouse or some
other pointing device to select options or controls, or to scroll through large amounts of
data. In turn, the processing component of the software presents its information graphically,
typically only archiving to disk in response to a user request.
The principal elements on which a GUI is based are described by the acronym WIMP
(Window-Icon-Menu-Pointer). The GUI is often seen as the antithesis of the command-line
interface (CLI).
Hacker Originally, and still in computer circles, a hacker was a good programmer who
could deploy ‘‘hacks’’—modiﬁcations to programs or systems—in a timely and clever way.
Many older programmers would be proud to be called hackers. It later was misapplied to programmers who broke the security of computer systems (although the ﬁrst such were indeed
hackers).
Hardware A term used collectively for the physical parts of a computer system. See Software
and Firmware.
Harvard architecture The simple ﬁve-box model of a computer attaches the memory
directly to the central processing unit. In practice, for efﬁciency reasons a caching system is
used in this data part so that the slow speed of memory is not a hindrance to the faster CPU.
This architecture was originally called the Princeton architecture in recognition of its adoption by the pioneers at that university. An alternative is to have two data paths between
memory and processor, one for data and one for instructions. This is close to the original
computer design from Harvard, and so this memory design is called the Harvard Architecture. The idea has been extended by ADI’s Super Harvard Architecture (SHARC).
Heap This term has two almost independent meanings. The more common meaning is
in contradistinction to a stack. When a program requires memory, this memory must be
allocated somewhere. If the memory is a local variable in C, it is allocated on a stack. If the
memory has to persist beyond the function in which it is created, it must be allocated from
the heap. This is a (usually) large amount of memory that is reserved for heap allocation,
using the functions malloc, calloc, and realloc. The other meaning applies to a special
memory organization—a type of binary tree in which both the left and the right descendants of any node are less than or equal to it. A consequence of this structure is that the
largest element is always the root of the tree. Heaps are used for organizing queues with
priority and for the non-recursive Heap Sort algorithm. For the details of how this structure
can be implemented efﬁciently, see any recent standard textbook on algorithms and data
structures.

839

Glossary

HID Human Interface Device, a device that connects a human to a computer system. It
is often used as part of the USB-HID interface for low-speed devices such as a mouse or a
keyboard.
Host The computer that is host to a program.
Hung A program or component is ‘‘hung’’ if it does not respond to a message, and does not
produce any output. This state is sometimes described as ‘‘catatonic.’’
IC An integrated circuit or chip is a miniaturized microcircuit consisting of semiconductor
devices and some passive components usually manufactured in a thin layer of silicon
material.
IDE Integrated Development Environment. There are two primary styles. The ﬁrst (exempliﬁed by Microsoft’s Visual Studio) presents a single ‘‘parent’’ window containing multiple
‘‘child’’ windows or panes internally aligned, which can be resized relative to one another.
In the second style, a number of visually independent windows are created (e.g., for source
code editing, debugging, and compiling) and may be freely moved and overlapped. The bestknown example of this style is the original Metrowerks compiler for the Macintosh; some elements of this IDE are retained in Apple’s Xcode environment.
Increment
Index

To add a ﬁxed amount, usually 1.

See Array.

Initialization

Setting up the initial values and states in a program or a process.

Instance There is a distinction between a type or an object and a particular example of that
type or object. This is akin to the relationship between an int and the number 42. We say
that 42 is an instance of the type int. This term is most often used in object programming
to distinguish the deﬁnition of an object (which is abstract) from the instance of an object.
An instance is, by deﬁnition, associated with a location in physical memory, whether on the
stack (as a local variable) or on the heap (by means of static or dynamic memory allocation).
Instantiate
Integer

To create an instance of an object. See Instance.

See Number representation.

Interactive Allowing interaction with a user (as distinct from batch, where the calculation
does not involve human intervention).
Interpreter An interpreter evaluates a program directly, rather than translating the program
into a binary form (compiling) and then running the binary executable.
Interrupt The simple model of computation, as demonstrated in the classic ﬁve-box model
of computing, is one of obeying instructions, and then getting the next instruction. The
problem with this form is that the computer program either does not react to the external

840

Appendix G

world, or it has to take time to look at all the external activities to see if they require attention (‘‘polling’’). Instead, most computers use a hardware process called an interrupt. When
an external device wants attention—say a character is typed on the keyboard—the main
processing loop is interrupted, and the computer is forced to obey code from a location ﬁxed
for each device. The original program is suspended in such a way that the program can
resume when the external event has been handled. It is important that while the system is
actually dealing with the interruption the calculation is not too lengthy, as the system
cannot handle a further interrupt from that device. Most computers have a hierarchy of
interrupts, with a number of levels or priorities, so some interrupts can be interrupted by
higher priority interrupts. In practice, the handling of interrupts is largely tied into the way
in which the operating system works. To gain a deeper understanding of interrupts, see
a book on operating systems (e.g., H. Deitel, An Introduction to Operating Systems, AddisonWesley, 1984, or W. Stallings, Operating Systems: Internals and Design Principles, sixth edition,
Prentice-Hall, 2008) or a processor handbook. Interrupts are used on nearly all operating systems, but in time-critical computations interrupts can lead to uncertainty as to how long
processes take, and so such systems may rely on polling rather than interrupts, as it is easier
to make such a system have a guaranteed response.
IO Standing for Input and Output, this term generally refers to either the operation of sending or receiving data to/from somewhere or the place where the data emanates from or is
sent to (e.g., IO ports). Sometimes written as i/o.
Iteration
loop.

From the Latin iterare, to repeat; used to describe repeated actions, usually in a

Jack Short for the Jack Connection Kit, this refers to a software layer that runs as a server (or a
system service) and is designed to allow audio and MIDI interconnection in a system. Jack
allows programs to seamlessly connect to other programs and/or to input and output
devices. Originally designed for Linux, it is now fully supported on OS X, and to a lesser
extent on Windows. From a program perspective, Jack works as an alternative to a direct
IO to a soundcard. The software will take its input from and send its output to a Jack server
running on the system. This will then allow signals to be patched in a variety of ways. In
general, software needs to be Jack-enabled to talk directly to the server, but there are generic
connections that can be used for programs that have not been designed to use it (such as a
Core Audio plug-in on OS X).
Java A programming language that is object oriented, similar to Cþþ, but compiles to virtual instructions, which can be interpreted on (almost) any computer. This is a ‘‘write once,
run anywhere’’ language.
Keyword A keyword is like a ‘‘reserved word,’’ but it may be positional and therefore not
reserved. Where keywords are not reserved, they can be used as variable names, which leads
to legal (if unlikely) statements such as if if > then then then = if. This can sometimes

841

Glossary

cause problems even for the C/Cþþ programmer. In C ‘this’ and ‘class’ are not keywords and
can therefore be used as variable names. Indeed both have frequently been found in older C
programs. If such code is later compiled as Cþþ, the compiler will report errors. Programmers writing in C but with such usage in mind should consider avoiding these and
other Cþþ keywords.
LADSPA Linux Audio Developer’s Simple Plug-in Architecture, a plug-in and host architecture and an API for audio effects that is free software and is supported by many FOSS programs, including Audacity and Ardour. It provides a common structure for the development
of audio applications that support externally provided components (plug-ins). LADSPA was
developed by a group of Linux audio developers, but is not restricted to that OS, as plug-ins
and hosts exist in other platforms. See VST and Audio Unit.
Library Writing programs can be fun, but writing big programs becomes tedious if one has
to write all the code oneself. One of the main ways in which we can make use of others’ work
is to use libraries. A library is a collection of functions that we can use easily with our own
program. C comes with a standard library, which every C system must provide. This includes
basic operations such as input and output, mathematical functions, and some basic algorithms (e.g. qsort). To use the library routines, we must know the arguments, the types
and number of the function, and the result type. The actual implementation of the function
is of no concern to the user.
Various programmers publish additional libraries, usually providing a collection of operations for a class of calculations. In this book, some programs have used the portsf library
for writing soundﬁles, and there are other useful libraries. Of course one must take account
of their provenance, but overall they provide a signiﬁcant resource.
There are two classes of library: those that are linked into the running binary (a static
library), and those that are shared between all programs on a machine. This second class of
libraries appears as shared or dynamic libraries—.dll ﬁles in Windows (DLLs); .dylib ﬁles
in OS X; and .so ﬁles in Linux. They are often referred to as plug-ins.
A library is a collection of functions and subroutines, usually provided as a precompiled
binary with a deﬁned API (q.v.). Most often a library is dedicated to providing one kind of
service, such as real time audio, graphics, or reading the state of a game’s controller.
Link Either an alternative name or the process of resolving external and library names in
the compilation process.
Linker The program that performs linking of different binary modules, resolving names to
locations.
LINUX An operating system kernel, largely compatible with UNIX. In 1991, it was a private
project of a Finnish student, Linus Torvalds. As it was open-source and did not have direct
commercial protection, it became widely accepted as the basis for free and open-source
software, and an operating system that should properly be called GNU/Linux. There are a

842

Appendix G

number of distributors, all of whom add individual aspects, but the compatibility across the
distributions remains high, and this assists in its development. Because it is well documented, comes with a wealth of development tools, and is very productive, it is largely
favored by dedicated software developers (geeks). It is less popular in the community of
pure users, as it is perceived as harder to use in desktop mode than Windows or OS X. This
is a contentious issue.
Little-endian On the island of Lilliput, in Jonathan Swift’s novel Gulliver’s Travels, there
were two political parties: the Little-endians, who open their boiled eggs at the little end,
and the Big-endians, who open them at the big end. In computing, this question is applied
to whether the bits and bytes in a word are ordered from top to bottom or from bottom to
top. Which is preferable is similar to Lilliputian politics. Intel has espoused little-endian processors, IBM and Motorola processors were big-endian, and some processors (including MIPS
and NS) attempted to be neutral.
Loop, endless See Endless loop.
lvalue, rvalue Two somewhat esoteric terms associated with the design and implementation of languages, but which can occasionally appear as part of a compiler error message.
An lvalue is a symbol that can be used on the left-hand side of an assignment, e.g. the
name of a variable. Similarly, an rvalue is a symbol that can be used on the right-hand
side of an assignment. Errors arise when lvalues and rvalues are mixed up. An explicit
number (constant) can only be an rvalue, so the statement 1234 = samp; issues an error.
Why are such errors more likely to arise in Cþþ programs than in C programs? Cþþ enables
arcane type deﬁnitions and constructions (through the use of templates and other mechanisms), so that, on occasion, it is not obvious whether a certain symbol or name is an
lvalue or an rvalue.
Machine code The native language, in binary, of the underlying hardware. Not usually seen
directly by programmers, it sometimes is seen reﬂected in an assembler or a debugger.
Macro An abbreviation; a word that is to be replaced by (‘‘expanded into’’) some other text.
Macros can have arguments, and an expansion can include other macros. There are a
number of macro systems; notable among them is the C Pre-Processor (cpp). Also widely
used for this purpose is the language m4.
Make Writing complex software usually requires many separate source ﬁles, header ﬁles,
and private libraries, and it is hard to keep track of what needs to be rebuilt when source
code changes. The simple option is to remake everything every time something is changed,
but that is very inefﬁcient for large systems. (It takes a signiﬁcant number of minutes to
remake all of Csound, for example.) The alternative is some kind of make system. The original system uses the time stamps of ﬁles and a Makeﬁle that records the dependencies.
Recently, tools have been added to help create makeﬁles, using compiler options (-M in

843

Glossary

gcc) or other more advanced conﬁguration tools. Use of make is highly recommended for all
but the most trivial throwaway program.
Member A particular data item or method is said to be a member of an object if it belongs
to that object alone.
Memory leak A memory leak is said to occur when a program obtains some memory, then
loses all references to its address. Repeated memory leaks can lead to very large programs and
to memory exhaustion.
Method A kind of function thas is attached to an object and can be invoked only on that
object. It is the encapsulation mechanism used in Cþþ, in Java, and in many object-oriented
languages.
Microcode The concept of assembly-language and machine-language programming is
described in appendix F. But how is the low-level machine language itself implemented? It
can be made directly out of hardware, using physical implementations of the Boolean logic
operations. Alternatively, writing programs in an even simpler lower-level language could
do it. This language is likely to control the ﬂow of data inside the processor, or to provide
step-by-step control of the simplest operations. The code that does this is called microcode.
Microcode may be similar in style to assembler, but more usually it is horizontal, meaning
that a number of operations are initiated at the same time. Writing microcode is akin to writing very short functions, but with many opportunities for optimizations and ‘‘clever’’ ways
of achieving the result. Each function can implement one of the machine instructions, so
any small improvement in microcode has a signiﬁcant impact on user programs. Writing
microcode has great similarities to cryptic crossword puzzles and mathematical games. It is
difﬁcult and slow. The method of microcode comes into fashion and goes out of fashion
according to the inventions of electrical engineers. At this writing, it is just coming back
from a decade of eclipse.
Microcontroller

A very simple processor that is used to control electrical objects.

MIDI The Musical Instrument Digital Interface, introduced in 1983. It is a particularly simple and restricted encoding of note-based music with a bias toward modern Western scales.
Its primary purpose—to enable control of one keyboard-based synthesizer by another—was
soon extended to include computer-based control, recording, and playback. The speciﬁcation, published by the MIDI Manufacturers Association, deﬁnes an electrical connection, a
wire allocation, and the transmission speed for communicating MIDI data. The transmission
time for a typical three-word MIDI message is approximately 1 millisecond. Despite its
ineluctable association with music keyboards (through the use of messages such as NOTE
ON and ALL NOTES OFF), the protocol in essence describes little more than the changing
state of a number of switches and incremental controllers. This has enabled MIDI to be
used for activities almost entirely unrelated to music, such as controlling stage lighting.

844

Appendix G

Monitor This term usually refers to the physical screen used on a computer, but it is also
used for a virtual screen. It also refers to a particular synchronization method.
Multi-tasking In the early days of computing, one way to use a rare and expensive computer was to book time during which the programmer had complete access to the machine.
An early development was to allow more than one programmer to use the computer at the
same time by means of multi-tasking, in which the computer had two or more programs in
executable state at the same time and while one program was waiting for data another program could be processing. Now all major operating systems use multi-tasking. It is sometimes
useful for a single problem to be divided into a number of tasks, but the mechanism for communications between these tasks is usually complex unless it is just by means of ﬁles. A
related method—easier for the programmer—is to use multiple threads. See Multi-threading.
Multi-threading Multi-threading is like multi-tasking, but the tasks share the same memory. This means that the threads can communicate by writing and reading variables. There
are still problems when two threads both expect to write to the same variable as one cannot
be sure in which order they will run, and this is even more unpredictable if the two threads
both expect to update the same variable, as the read and write may interleave with the other
process.
In POSIX-compliant systems there is a standard set of functions for creating threads, often
called the pthreads library. One might assume that this kind of programming is just for
geeks, but there are a number of occasions in audio processing where threads make for a
simple design. A complete example can be found in appendix I.
Music V A music-programming language written by ‘‘the father of computer music,’’ Max
Mathews, in the FORTRAN language. It can be seen as the culmination of the Bell Laboratories Music I–Music IV family of software. It was the ﬁrst music-programming language to be
written in a portable language, although versions of Music IV had been ported to FORTRAN.
Thanks to its portability, Music was implemented and customized in computer music centers
around the world in the 1970s and the 1980s. The so-called Music-N languages established
the Unit Generator model of audio programming, which is now ubiquitous. It is seen in
text form in languages such as Csound (in which each opcode is an Unit Generator), and
graphically in applications such as PD and Max/MSP.
Number representation—integers Most computers represent integers in radix 2, also
known as binary. A number N can be represented uniquely by a string of digits dn in any
radix r 4 1 by means of the formula N ¼ d0 r 0 þ d1 r 1 þ d2 r 2 þ    þ dn r n , where each dn is in
the range from 0 to r  1. If we consider the radix 2, then each digit must be either 0 or 1,
which is convenient for representation in a computer. A number is converted into binary by
repeatedly outputting a 0 if the number is even, or 1 if odd, then replacing the number
by dividing it by 2. For example, if we have a 32-bit basic word, we can represent 232 different values, from 0 to 4,294,967,295. However, this makes no allowance for negative

845

Glossary

Table G.2
Examples of eight-bit integer representations.
Decimal

Sign-magnitude

Ones-complement

Twos-complement

42

00101010

00101010

00101010

-42

10101010

11010101

11010110

0

00000000

00000000

00000000

-0
127

10000000
01111111

11111111
01111111

00000000
01111111

-127

11111111

10000000

10000001

-128

error

error

10000000

-1

10000001

11111110

11111111

numbers. There are three ways to extend this representation to signed integers: a sign bit,
ones complement, and twos-complement. The last of these is the commonest. It represents
a negative N by creating the representation of N; then each bit is inverted (a 0 is replaced
by a 1 and a 1 by a 0); ﬁnally the number 1 is added. This may seem rather complex, but it
has two advantages over other methods. First let us represent 42. We start by considering
an eight-bit representation of 42:
42 ¼ 0 þ 1  2 þ 0  22 þ 1  23 þ 0  24 þ 1  25 þ 0  26 þ 0  27 .
In the more usual order of digits, 4210 ¼ 001010102 . To negate this, we ﬂip the bits and
add 1,
00101010 ! 11010101 ! 11010110,
so the answer is 11010110.
The two advantages of twos-complement representation are that the top bit acts like a sign
bit (a 0 indicating a positive number and a 1 a negative number) and that there is only one
representation of zero. The simpler ones-complement representation that is like the method
above, but without adding it suffers from having a positive and a negative value for zero.
There are simpliﬁcations in the arithmetic operation over the sign-magnitude representation
that takes the top bit as a sign and uses the simple positive representation. In table G.2 this is
summarized with some eight-bit representations of integers.
Number representation—ﬂoating-point The format described above does not give a representation of the numbers between 0 and 1. Early computer programmers used a representation called ﬁxed-point, but the usual way of representing these fractional values is as
ﬂoating-point numbers. A ﬂoating-point number is really a fraction, but in a fashion unlike
traditional fractions. One bit is assigned to the sign, as it is a sign-modulus representation.
The interesting part is the modulus. It is made from two numbers, e (the exponent) and m
(the mantissa), and it represents m  ReM . The conditions on the positive unsigned number

846

Appendix G

Figure G.3
IEEE ﬂoating-point number formats.

m are that m  RM is less than or equal to R but greater than R1 , and the constant M is
designed to make this possible—essentially, to turn the integer into a fraction. At various
times different values of R have been used (16, 8, 10), but the commonest value is 2, which
has a number of advantages. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers reﬁned the
representation when using 2, and that structure is used almost everywhere. As can be seen in
ﬁgure G.3, IEEE ﬂoating-point representation comes in two sizes, corresponding to ﬂoats and
doubles. In both cases the radix is 2, but the number of digits given to the (signed) exponent
differs, and the mantissa is signiﬁcantly different. The additional saving that the IEEE format
introduces is that, as m has a size constraint of being between 1 and 1/2 after scaling with M,
it follows that the top bit is always set and so does not have to be stored in the word, in effect
adding one hidden bit to m.
Object A uniﬁcation of a data structure and the actions that operate on that
data.
Objective-C An object-oriented computer language, originally based on C. It differs from
Cþþ, and it is rarely found outside Macintosh computers.
Object-oriented programming A style of programming that emphasizes the object as a
fundamental structure of the program. Some languages (Cþþ, Java, Objective-C, Smalltalk)
enforce this style rather than just recommending it. (Readers may sometimes encounter
references to ‘‘object-orientated programming.’’ The extra syllable in the ugly word ‘orientated’ is unnecessary and has nothing to commend it.)
OGG

A lossy compression format that is open-source and patent-free. See Audio ﬁle formats.

Opcode An Operation code, originally meaning a computer instruction; also used for virtual instructions in higher-level operations, such as in Csound.

847

Glossary

Operand

An argument to an operator.

Operator A function, but usually written in an inﬁx notation with the characters +, , and
/. In computing, operators tend to be distinguished from functions only by syntax.
Parameter

See Argument.

Path A ﬁle usually resides in a directory, and that directory resides in another directory—to
some depth. The path to the ﬁle is the list of directories that are used and ending in the ﬁle
name. In normal usage the components of the path are separated by a / (or, on Windows, a
\). If one takes the path from the current directory, this is a relative path; if one takes the path
from the root of the ﬁles, this is the full path. The expression of relative paths is supported by
two standard shorthand notations: ./ (for the current directory) and ../ (for the parent directory, or ‘‘up one level’’); the latter can be concatenated multiple times to ascend the directory hierarchy level by level, possibly all the way back to the root directory. To simplify
running programs from multiple directories, an environment variable, PATH, is used to specify
in which directories to search for the command that a user types on the command line.
PCM Pulse code modulation. There are a number of ways in which audio can be encoded
inside a computer. The commonest is PCM, in which the continuous value of the air pressure whose ﬂuctuations cause sound are sampled at regular time intervals (hence the sampling rate). These values form a regular data stream that can be routed directly to a
soundcard or to a ﬁle. WAV and AIFF are examples of standard audio ﬁle formats (q.v.) supporting particular cases of PCM audio data.
Pipe A software pipe is a mechanism for passing the results of one program to another
program, usually by directing the standard out (see Standard input and output) of the ﬁrst program and the standard in of the second. This is a very convenient way to do many things
without having to invent ﬁle names for the intermediate data. In the UNIX command-line
systems this is indicated by the character |. (For example, to search for all lines starting
with ‘Author’, sort them into alphabetical order, and remove duplicates in UNIX, one would
type grep Author datafile | sort | uniq.) There are many creative uses for pipes in a
command-line interface that would be quite difﬁcult with a GUI.
Plug-in A program might allow additional code, not from the original authors, to be incorporated into a program. Such external incorporations are called plug-ins, as they plug into the
existing framework. Having a plug-in system allows third-party extensions and improvements to a basic system.
Pointer

A value that is the address of a location, rather than simply a number.

Port Any (virtual) plug into which something can be connected. More often, it is used to
describe a virtual plug or location for connecting computers by means of a network. All communications are multiplexed over the transport system, then associated at each end with a
port.

848

Appendix G

PortAudio A cross-platform API for audio IO. It supports various operating systems (e.g.,
Linux, OS X, Windows) and, in these systems, various lower-level audio APIs (ALSA, OSS,
Jack, Core Audio, MME, DirectX, ASIO).
PortMIDI

A cross-platform API for MIDI IO.

Precedence The order of operations, by importance. In particular, it pertains to operators,
including addition and multiplication. The operator * has a higher precedence and thus
must be performed before the þ. Precedence is what makes 2 þ 3 * 4 result in the value 14
rather than 20.
Preprocessor Many computer languages incorporate a preprocessor that transforms
the text of a program (usually) into a textual form with modiﬁcations—expanded macros,
conditional compilation enforced, and so on. In C, the cpp program is just that, the C
PreProcessor. By transference it can mean any textual changes to a program made by another
program before compilation.
Processor The component of a computing system that obeys instructions or processes
instructions and data.
Pseudocode It is sometimes useful to describe an algorithm in a language not intended for
computer evaluation, but in a similar style. Such descriptions are called pseudocode.
Python A scripting language, syntactically similar to C. It supports multiple programming
paradigms (e.g., object-oriented and functional), and it features a fully dynamic type system
and automatic memory management. Its use of indentation to delimit blocks is unusual, but
it is considered easy to write, and its popularity is increasing.
Qt A cross-platform graphics toolkit that can produce high-performance graphics, widgets,
and interfaces.
Random number A number that cannot be predicted a priori. It may have a range or a distribution (frequency of a particular number being presented). On a computer, true random
numbers are hard to calculate without some external input from a human or some other
unpredictable entity. Instead pseudo-random numbers are often used; such numbers are not
truly random, because if you know the algorithm you can predict its value, but it is not easy
to break the code.
Raw soundﬁle A soundﬁle without any header information such as sample rate or number
of channels. Such a soundﬁle is usually in PCM format, but the user has to know the details.
See Audio ﬁle formats.
Recursion Using a function inside itself. A function that calls itself is said to be recursive.
Mathematically, this is the correct way to model computation (as in Recursive Function
Theory—the solution to a problem depends on solutions to smaller instances of the
same problem). It also relates to mathematical induction and is very useful in proving pro-

849

Glossary

grams to be correct. A classic example is factorial: factorial(n) = (n==1 ? 1 : n *
factorial(n-1));
Register Fast memory is expensive memory, but it is possible to create a small number of
extremely fast memory locations inside the arithmetic and logic unit or the central processing unit. These memories are called registers, and their correct use is a major factor in
the efﬁciency of a program. Using them for the most commonly used values makes a real difference. The responsibility to use them rests with the compiler, but as a user in C one can
give hints to the compiler by declaring variables as register as well as their type. Only
rarely is this worthwhile; most compilers can make better deductions than programmers,
but there are rare occasions when the programmer knows, for example, that a particular
function is called a very large number of times.
Reserved words In a computer language, certain words are reserved to the system and cannot be used as variable names—for example, in C, the words int, for, while, and double.
RMS Root-mean-square, a measure of the power of a signal (rather than its amplitude). The
name directly describes the computations required for its calculation. For a given block of
samples (which could be a whole soundﬁle), each sample is squared (negative values thus
becoming positive), the average (or mean) is found by summing the squared values and
dividing by the number of samples, and the RMS value is found by taking the square root
of this sum. This can then be converted to a dB value using the computation dBval ¼ 20 *
log10(RMSval). The RMS value is relative to digital peak (0dBFS, q.v.); thus if the RMS of a
single cycle of a full-scale sinusoid is taken, the result will be 3 dBFS.
Rvalue See Lvalue.
Scons A system conﬁguration and building system written in Python that incorporates the
concepts of makefiles together with ﬁtting the build to the details of the operating system.
It is used in the building of Csound and maintains the cross-platform structure.
SConstruct The conﬁguration ﬁle for Scons. It is equivalent to a Makeﬁle. See Make.
Script (shell script) A script is a list of commands stored in a ﬁle so they can be performed
rapidly in the speciﬁed sequence. A particular case is the shell script, a sequence of any commands supported by a given shell. This might be Bash in UNIX or OS X (where the script ﬁle
typically has a .sh extension) or the standard DOS console on Windows (where the script
ﬁle will have the extension .bat—hence the usual term in Windows, ‘‘batch ﬁle’’). It goes
without saying (almost) that UNIX-style shells such as Bash are considerably more powerful
than the DOS shell, with a range of control constructs and variable deﬁnitions rivaling C
itself; many shell scripts are in effect substantial programs in their own right.
Shared libraries, plug-ins, .dylibs, DLLs, and .so ﬁles One objection to the simple C
model of programs is that every program would contain a copy of the basic libraries (stdio,
stdlib, etc.) and so memory use in a multiprogramming computer would increase. The

850

Appendix G

solution is to have shared libraries; that is, libraries that only require one copy that can be
used by all active programs. This does impose some restrictions in the design, such as no
library-static data, but the gain in memory utilization is signiﬁcant. Each operating system
implements shared libraries in a slightly different fashion. On Linux they are .so ﬁles
(shared versions of .o ﬁles); on Windows they are called Dynamic-linked Libraries (DLLs)
.dll ﬁles; on Mac OS X they are referred to as plug-ins and are .dylib ﬁles.
Shell A command program, especially an interactive command-line program. Examples of
shells include the DOS console in Windows (the program itself being cmd.exe) and the
Bash and tcsh shells in Linux and OS X. See Script.
Software A term used collectively for the non-physical parts of a computer system. It refers
generally to programs in the wide sense.
Stack An abstract computer structure that has two basic operations, push and pop. Push
gives an object to the stack, and pop removes an object from the stack and gives it to the
caller. The important feature is that pop always gives the last object pushed, and thus the
structure is a First-In-Last-Out entity (this is the same as a Last-In-First-Out entity). Formally
the stack obeys the identity pop(push(S))= S. It is also useful to have a way of peeking at
the top of the stack, and a way of checking if the stack is empty (in which case a pop would
give an error).
Stacks can be implemented inside C inside an array, with the additional checking for stack
overﬂow, attempting to push a value onto the stack when there is insufﬁcient room, or by a
linked list structure. But the particular stack that has the largest implications for the user is
the system stack.
In an implementation of C, there is a need for a stack to record the nesting of function
calls. (One expects to have the abstract stack behavior, such that calling a function pushes
the current location, and returning pops the location so then the program continues from
the call.) This same stack is also used for local variables; so when a function is called, new
variables are allocated on the stack, and once the function exits, these locations are removed.
This explains why it is a serious programming error to take the address of a local variable and
then return it after the function has exited, as the location is no longer valid, and will be
reused for other values.
Standard C Libraries ANSI C requires that certain functions be available from a C program
as libraries. These are supposed to be reliable and ubiquitous. They include functions of
input and output (stdio), mathematical operations (math), strings operations (string),
and character types (ctype). These are in effect an API for all C programs, for all platforms
used in the same way.
Standard input and output The ANSI C standard speciﬁes that every program should be
started with one input stream and two output streams attached. These are called standard in
(stdin), standard out (stdout), and standard error (stderr). A simple program can read from

851

Glossary

stdin and write to stdout knowing that they exist. The default for most systems is that
these two are connected to the keyboard and the screen, respectively, and can be used
together with pipes (q.v.). stderr is used for error messages and it also defaults to the screen.
It is initialized to be unbuffered, so any message written to stderr will appear immediately
and not when a line is complete. It is good practice to use stderr for errors and stdout for
results. Note that, although they both use the terminal, they are conceptually separate, and
one can pipe stdout without changing stderr.
Stderr

See Standard input and output.

String An ordered set of characters. In C, a special character, the NUL character (notated as
\0), terminates a string.
Structured programming A term for some early-1970s ideas on how to make complex software systems. The original ideas focused on top-down programming and ﬂow diagrams, and
this principle developed in the early 1980s into Software Engineering.
SVN Subversion, an alternative ‘‘source control system’’ that allows a number of programmers to cooperate on a single multi-ﬁle program. Subversion is more recent than cvs
and is usually preferred. (See CVS.)
Synchronous

See Asynchronous.

Terminal Every interactive program has a controlling terminal (similar to a console). It may
consist of the keyboard and the screen, or it may be a virtual terminal. The keyboard-screen
combination is also called the terminal. The term originates from the terminal traditionally
being the end point of the results.
Text editor A program that allows editing, changing, insertion, and deletion of textual
information, including programs. The alternatives include binary editors (which edit binary
data) and link editors (which create working programs from binary and libraries).
Thread Simple programs have a concept of program location (often kept in an internal register called the program counter). If a program wishes to have the illusion of running two functions simultaneously, a thread system can be used. Each thread has its own program counter,
and the operating system chooses which thread to run on the basis of its own planning.
If the two threads are completely independent, having independent programs and data,
they are usually called processes, and in multi-processing systems (such as UNIX and later
Windows systems) it is these processes that constitute programs apparently running at the
same time. Unless there is more than one central processing unit, in reality only one thread
can be running, but if the processor is shared between them (switching between them at
high speed) the illusion is very good. If two or more threads share both program and data,
they are often called lightweight threads. This becomes a useful programming tool—for
example, one thread can be checking the user interface while the other synthesizes some
sound.

852

Appendix G

Transcendental number A real number that cannot be deﬁned as the root of a polynomial
equation. Notable examples are p and e. There are in fact more transcendental numbers than
algebraic numbers, but they do not often occur in normal use, apart from those two.
UI User interface. See GUI.
UNIX A seminal software system in the history of software was the MIT Multics operating
system. It was designed from the outset to support many users with a high degree of security
of programs and data, and a high degree of user privacy. It was a complex system, and it ran
on what was at the time a large computer. A desire for an operating environment on a simpler minicomputer led Brian Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie to conceive of a single user operating system that still provided a secure ﬁling system and protections. This system became
UNIX. It was developed largely at Bell Laboratories and was proprietary to AT&T. Popular
among computer researchers, it was further developed with additional software, especially
at the University of California at Berkeley. It was the inspiration for much of Linux and
indeed other operating systems. Although proprietary rights mean that much is no longer
common, the underlying principles it introduced remain, and can be seen in Windows,
OS X, and (overwhelmingly) in Linux.
Usage message A statement that lists the required arguments that are expected, and the
optional arguments that are accepted. It is often the case that when a program is provided
with incorrect arguments, it responds with a usage message.
USB Universal Serial Bus, a standard for attaching electronic objects to computers. Various
versions provide various data speeds. Many desktop and laptop computers provide USB
sockets, which make it easy to add hardware to a computer. It is important that USB is a
‘‘hot-plug’’ system—that is, devices can be plugged in or unplugged without the need to
restart the computer. The speciﬁcation also provides for power to be distributed from the
computer to the device over the same connection. The power available is small, but it is sufﬁcient to power Bluetooth, Ethernet, ASCII keyboards, mouses, and ﬂash memory devices.
All modern operating systems have the necessary code to recognize and communicate with
USB devices.
Variable In the words of an old joke, a variable does not. It is a named location in machine
memory in which values are stored, read, or modiﬁed under user control.
Vector A one-dimensional array.
Vi A screen editor descended from the original UNIX ed command and from Steven
Bourne’s E3 editor. It has acquired extensibility, but not so much as emacs.
Virtual memory Some programs require a very large amount of memory, more than can be
afforded. One solution to this problem is to use virtual memory. Because of spatial locality,
one usually only needs part of the memory in any small period of time, so the data not currently being used can reside on a much cheaper drum or disk. (See Cache.) In hardware vir-

853

Glossary

tual memory, when the program attempts to access memory that is not actually present an
interrupt routine arranges that a new part of the memory is loaded from the disk, saving
some unused part if necessary. This swapping is usually arranged in ﬁxed-size chunks called
pages. If there is sufﬁcient real memory and a good implementation of the virtual memory
system, the time spent swapping is small relative to the total run time. But if things go
wrong, the system is said to be thrashing, as pages are read and written more frequently
than is desirable.
Virtual memory ideas can also be implemented in software, but it takes much more programming and design to make it work well.
A similar concept to virtual is transparent. If you can see the memory and it is there, it is
called real. If you can see it but it is not there, it is called virtual. If you cannot see it but it
is there, it is said to be transparent. If you cannot see it and it is not there, it is vaporware (or
a salesman’s press release).
VST Virtual Studio Technology, a plug-in, host architecture, and API for digital audio effects
and software synthesizers. It provides a common structure for the development of audio
applications that support externally provided components (plug-ins). Steinberg Media Technologies Gmbh developed VST, and its license does not allow the redistribution of the API
header and source ﬁles; developers must obtain these from the vendor directly. For similar
APIs, see LADSPA and Audio Units.
Waterfall model The waterfall model of software development postulates ﬁve stages:
Requirements, Speciﬁcation, Design, Programming, and Maintaining. Each stage should be
completed before the next one starts, and if problems are found one returns to the previous
stage where the problem lies, ﬁxes it, and then works through the stages. The name comes
from the diagram that is usually used to explain this.
WAV

See Audio ﬁle formats.

Wrapper A piece of software that provides elements of one language (e.g. functions, classes,
or constant deﬁnitions) in the form and syntax of another language. One common example
is a C-language API ‘‘wrapped’’ as a scripting language module (e.g. an extension to Python
or Tcl). Wrapping gives programmers access to the API directly from these languages instead
of having to write their software in C. The most commonly wrapped languages are C and
Cþþ. There are also systems that can automatically generate wrappers, such as SWIG.
White space The collective name for characters that do not cause a mark, such as a space, a
tab and a newline, or a line break. In C and Cþþ, most white space has no semantic meaning, and it is removed by the pre-processor before compilation starts. However, white space
has one important use: as a delimiter (or separator) for command-line arguments. Contemporary operating systems have popularized the use of ﬁle and directory names incorporating
white space (e.g., ‘‘Program Files’’). Not all programmers (or all users) regard this as a positive
step. When one is supplying such names to a command-line program, one must enclose

854

Appendix G

them in quotation marks. Alternatively, the offending space character has to be escaped, as
this example: cd my\ music\ folder.
Xcode A suite of free software-development tools, provided by Apple, that includes a modiﬁed version of the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) and uses GDB as the backend for its
debugger. Also the name of Apple’s Integrated Development Environment.
X11 A system for using bit-mapped screens. It is the basis of a number of screen systems,
including KDE and Gnome. The default system in UNIX and Linux, it is also used on OS X.

Appendix H: An Audio Programmer’s Guide to Mathematical Expressions
John fﬁtch

This appendix will provide a basic reference to the mathematical expressions used throughout this book. It is by no means is an exhaustive discussion of the subject.
H.1

Algebraic Expressions
H.1.1

Exponents

The following are the basic rules for exponents (with a and b positive):
a p a q ¼ a pþq ,
ap
¼ a pq ,
aq
(a p )q ¼ a pq ,
ap ¼

1
,
ap

a0 ¼ 1

(if a A 0),

(a m )1/n ¼ a m/n
 1/n
a
a1/n
¼ 1/n
b
b

(m and n positive integers),
(n a positive integer),

(ab)q ¼ a q b q .
H.1.2

Logarithms

The deﬁnition of a logarithm p to the base a of x is
log a x ¼ p so that

a p ¼ x (a not 0 or 1).

856

Appendix H

With that in mind, the following expressions are deﬁned:
log a xy ¼ log a x þ log a y,
log a

x
¼ log a x  log a y,
y

log a x y ¼ y log a x.
The bases commonly used in logarithms are normally limited to 2, 10, and e (¼ 2.7182818 . . . ,
the natural base of logarithms). To change the base we can use
log a x ¼

log b x
log b a

or
log a x ¼ C(a, b) log b x,

where

C(a, b) ¼

1
.
logb a

Now we can ﬁnd the different values of the constant C(a, b) for converting between the three
common bases:
C(2, 10) ¼ 3.321928 C(2, e) ¼ 1.442695,
C(e, 10) ¼ 2.302585 C(e, 2) ¼ 0.693147,
C(10, 2) ¼ 0.301029 C(10, e) ¼ 0.434294.
For example:
log10 x ¼ C(10, 2) log2 x ¼ 0.301029 log2 x.
H.1.3

Sum and Series Expressions

The notation of sums in series uses the Greek capital letter sigma (S) to indicate, in a compact
form, addition of terms (which may be inﬁnite):
n
X

k ¼ 1 þ 2 þ 3 þ    þ n.

k¼1

The left-hand side of this equation reads, in English, ‘‘the sum from k equals 1 to n of k.’’ In
mathematical terminology, k is the index of summation and the right-hand side is the expansion. Such expressions will usually be more complicated, but the principles are the same:
there will be a certain number of terms (which will be, for instance, equal to n, if we started
at 1, and this number might be inﬁnite), and the summation index is incremented by 1 in
each term of the expansion. For instance, the following expression has k as a subscript to A
(indicating several different values for A) and as a multiplier inside the cos() function:

857

Guide to Mathematical Expressions

n
X

Ak cos(ko) ¼ A1 cos(o) þ A2 cos(2o) þ    þ An cos(no).

k¼1

H.1.4

Product Expressions

Similar to sums, we have an expression that combines several factors in a product, using a
capital pi (P) and following the same principles outlined in subsubsection H.1.3:
n
Y

k ¼ 1  2  3    n

k¼1

H.1.5

Polynomials

Generalizing the principles presented above, we call an expression that involves only integer
powers of any unknown a polynomial in x. The following is a polynomial in one unknown, x:
f (x) ¼ an x n þ an1 x n1 þ    þ a2 x2 þ a1 x1 þ a0 .
In mathematical terms, n is the degree of the polynomial, an is a coefﬁcient of x n , and ao is the
constant term (because this coefﬁcient is not multiplying any variable).
H.1.6

Functions

A function is a mathematical expression that maps one or more arguments into a value or
a result. Essentially, given an input, a function produces a unique output. For instance, the
trivial function f (x) ¼ x maps the argument x on itself, f (x) ¼ 2x doubles x, and f (x) ¼ x2
squares the function’s argument. A polynomial function of one argument can be classiﬁed
depending on the maximum exponent of the variables found in its deﬁnition. In the above
examples, the ﬁrst two functions are called functions of the ﬁrst degree, or linear (their
plots produce straight lines), and the third is a quadratic or second-degree function. Other
higher-order polynomial functions are called cubic, quartic, and so on. There are also nonpolynomial functions in which f involves more complicated expressions, such as sines or
cosines.
H.1.7

Equations

When a function f (x) is equated with 0, as in f (x) ¼ 0, we have an equation, which may have
one or more roots. A root is a number that, when assigned to the argument of a function f (x),
produces zero as a result, i.e., makes the equation f (x) ¼ 0 valid. An equation can have more
than one root, depending on its type. Polynomial equations in one unknown have a particularly simple rule: the number of roots is the same as the degree. A linear equation will have

858

Appendix H

Table H.1
Right-angled triangle deﬁnitions.
Sine

Opposite side to y
Hypotenuse

or sin y ¼

O
H

Measured on y axis

Cosine

Adjacent side to y
Hypotenuse

or cos y ¼

A
H

Measured on x axis

Tangent

Opposite side to y
Adjacent side to y

or tan y ¼

O
A

Equivalent to the line BC

one root, a quadratic equation will have two; a cubic equation will have three, and so on. In
order for this to be true, we must distinguish equal roots (as in the equation x2  2x þ 1 ¼ 0,
whose roots are x ¼ 1 and x ¼ 1. We also need complex numbers to make this work (see
section 3.7). This rule is called the Fundamental Theory of Algebra. For non-polynomial
functions there is no equivalent simple rule. Indeed, the equation sin(1/x) ¼ 0 has on inﬁnite number of roots between 0 and 1.
H.2

Trigonometry
H.2.1

Angle Units

Angles are subdivisions of a circle and are typically measured in degrees or radians. When
degrees are used, the circle is divided into 360 ‘‘slices.’’ One of these ‘‘slices’’ can be subdivided into 60 minutes, and one minute into 60 seconds). When radians are used, angle
values are related to the diameter and the circumference of a circle. (Radians are preferred
in this book.) The ratio of the circumference to the diameter of a circle, the irrational number
p (¼ 3.14159 . . . ), is the basis for the radian:
c ¼ p  d,
d ¼ 2r,
c ¼ 2p radians,
where c is the circumference, d is the diameter, and r is the radius. The radian is a natural
measure for angles. There are 2p radians in a full circle (360 ), so half a circle is p radians
(180 ), one-fourth of a circle is p/2 (90 ), and so on.
H.2.2

Basic Trigonometric Functions

Using table H.1 and ﬁgure H.1, we can deﬁne the basic trigonometric functions: sin(y),
cos(y), and tan(y). If the radius of the circle in ﬁgure H.1, which is the same as the hypotenuse (H ), is set to 1, these functions are more easily identiﬁed as the line O, the line A, and
the ratio O/A, respectively. Notice that the values of sin(y) are obtained by reading the projec-

859

Guide to Mathematical Expressions

Figure H.1
Right-angled triangle and trigonometric circle.

tion of the point p on the y axis. This means that if we trace a line from p, parallel to
the x axis, the point at which it intersects the y axis will be equivalent to the sine of y.
That is the mathematical meaning of projection. In its turn, cos(y) is taken similarly from
the x axis. The tangent can then be deﬁned as the ratio of the sine and the cosine of an
angle. Cosine and sine functions provide the basis for the most fundamental types of audio
signals.
H.2.3

Trigonometric Identities

To facilitate the change of some formulas and derivation of expressions, a number of trigonometric identities are given, here is a collection of some of these:
sin2 A þ cos2 A ¼ 1,
sin(A) ¼ sin A,
cos(A) ¼ cos A,
tan(A) ¼ tan A,
cos(A) ¼ sin(A þ p/2),
sin(A) ¼ cos(A  p/2),
sin(A e B) ¼ sin(A) cos(B) e cos(A) sin(B),

860

Appendix H

cos(A e B) ¼ cos(A) cos(B) f sin(A) sin(B),
sin 2A ¼ 2 sin A cos A,
cos 2A ¼ cos2 A  sin2 A,
sin2 A ¼

1  cos 2A
,
2

cos2 A ¼

1 þ cos 2A
,
2

cos A cos B ¼

cos(A  B) þ cos(A þ B)
,
2

sin A sin B ¼

cos(A  B)  cos(A þ B)
,
2

sin A cos B ¼

sin(A þ B) þ sin(A  B)
,
2

sin(A þ B)  sin(A  B)
,
2




AeB
AfB
cos
,
sin A e sin B ¼ 2 sin
2
2




AþB
AB
cos
,
cos A þ cos B ¼ 2 cos
2
2




AþB
AB
sin
.
cos A  cos B ¼ 2 sin
2
2
cos A sin B ¼

In the expressions above, a e b ¼ c f d means a þ b ¼ c  d and a  b ¼ c þ d. Some of
these identities are very signiﬁcant in audio programming. For instance,
cos A cos B ¼

cos(A  B) þ cos(A þ B)
2

indicates that if you multiply two sinusoid signals of two different frequencies (A and B), you
will get a mix (sum) of two components as the sum (A þ B) and difference (A  B) of the two
frequencies. Furthermore, each of these two components will have half the original amplitude. This is known as ring modulation.
H.3

Differential Calculus
An important development of the algebraic operations described above is found in the differential calculus. The main interest is in describing the rate of change of expressions. Originally the calculus was developed to understand velocity and acceleration of celestial bodies.

861

Guide to Mathematical Expressions

Figure H.2
A plot of f (x) ¼ 2x 2 .

H.3.1

Differentiation

We seek to provide a mathematical description of the instantaneous change in an expression. For instance, if we have the expression f (x) ¼ ax2 then the curve is as shown in ﬁgure
H.2. The change in the expression can be characterized by the tangent to the curve at a point.
The differential calculus is a way to give an algebraic expression to this tangent as a function
of the point where it happens.
We consider a point x and a close point x þ qx, and draw a line between f (x) and f (x þ qx)
to produce a chord. The growth is then (f (x þ qx)  f (x))/qx. As qx gets smaller, the chord
gets closer to the tangent to the curve at x. The intention of the calculus was to consider
the limit of the expression (f (x þ qx)  f (x))/qx as qx tends to zero. In the case of our example this limit is
lim(qx ! 0)(a(x þ qx)2  ax2 )/qx ¼ lim(qx ! 0)(ax2 þ 2axqx þ qx2  ax2 )/qx
¼ lim(qx ! 0)(2ax þ qx)
¼ 2ax,
and so we have determined the expression for the tangent of a quadratic form, which is
called the derivative of the form. This is usually written as df (x)/dx or sometimes, when
unambiguous, f (x).

862

Appendix H

In general, the derivative of a polynomial term x n can be easily shown1 to be nx n1 , and
the rules for the derivatives of sums and differences are
d(A þ b) dA dB
¼
þ
dx
dx dx
and
d(A  b) dA dB
¼
þ
.
dx
dx dx
The equivalent rules for derivatives of products are
d(Ab) BdA AdB
¼
þ
dx
dx
dx
and
d(A/b) BdA/dx  AdB/dx
.
¼
dx
B2
These allow us to calculate derivatives of any polynomial form.
Other Derivative Functions
The derivatives of other functions can also be calculated. The proofs are mainly beyond this
text, but we will consider one of these, d sin(x)/dx. The deﬁnition is
limit(qx ! 0)(sin(x þ qx)  sin(x))/qx.
Using the formula above for sin(A þ B), we see that this is the same as
limit(qx ! 0)(sin(x) cos(qx) þ cos(x) sin(qx)  sin(x))/qx.
For small values of qx, cos(qx) is approximately 1 and sin(qx) is approximately qx, so we can
simplify this to
limit(qx ! 0)(sin(x) þ cos(x)qx  sin(x))/qx ¼ cos(x).
The other results are proved in similar ways. These are
d sin(x)/dx ¼ cos(x) (with x expressed in radians),
d cos(x)/dx ¼ sin(x),
d tan(x)/dx ¼ tan2 (x) þ 1,
da x /dx ¼ a x log(a) (using the natural logarithm, base e),
dlog(x)/dx ¼ 1/x,
df (g(x))/dx ¼ dg(x)/dx df (g(x))/dg(x).

863

Guide to Mathematical Expressions

H.3.2

Anti-Differentiation

The opposite of differentiation can be seen in two ways. The ﬁrst is as anti-differentiation;
that is to answer the question ‘‘What function has f (x) as its derivative?’’ In simple polynomial cases this can easily be achieved by the inverse of the rules in section 3.1:
antideriv(x n ) ¼ x nþ1 /(n þ 1) (with n not equal to 1),
antideriv(1/x) ¼ log(x),
antideriv(a x ) ¼ a x /log(a).
In general this operation is a great deal harder than calculating the derivative. It is an example of an inverse problem. There is also a small matter of ambiguity. As da/dx is zero for any
constant a, it follows that the anti-derivative of x n can have any constant added without
breaking the relationship. This is called the arbitrary constant, and the operation is ambiguous
regarding this constant.
H.3.3

Integration

The other aspect of the differential calculus is integration. That is the operation of calculating
the area under a curve. The area under the curve f (x) and above the x axis between the points
a and b is written
Z

b

f (x) dx.
a

It is easy to see that the integral is closely related to the anti-derivative. Suppose that
Z
F(x) ¼

x

f (y) dy
a

and we consider the derivative of F(x). The deﬁnition gives it as
lim(qx ! 0)(F(x þ qx)  F(x))/qx,
which is like adding a thin strip to F of width qx and height f (x). So we can see that dF(x)/dx
is f (x) and so integration and derivatives are inverses of each other. Strictly this remark is true
only for functions that do not have inﬁnite values at any point.
H.4

Numeric Systems
H.4.1

Natural numbers

The simplest numeric system is based on the set of positive integers: 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . . These are
called natural numbers, whose set is denoted by N. Some people include 0 in this set, but it is
known that early mathematics did not include the concept of null.

864

Appendix H

H.4.2

Integers

If this is not enough for our use, then we can include 0 and negative quantities (. . . 2, 1, 0,
1, 2, . . . ), which make up the integer numbers (the ‘‘whole’’ numbers, whose set is denoted
by Z). The use of positive and negative quantities is fundamental for certain areas of mathematics, including algebra. The concept of negative numbers is more abstract than the idea of
natural numbers, and it came later in the evolution of mathematics.
H.4.3

Rationals

Whole numbers do not include numbers that have fractional parts, such as 1.25 or 3/2.
Rational numbers, whose set is denoted by Q are numbers that can be expressed as a ratio
a/b, with b A 0. (This includes all integers, because they can be expressed as n/1.) Every
number has a decimal expansion, in which the number is represented by the sequence
P
{an . . . a1 , a0 , a1 , a2 , . . . , am }, where n ¼ ak 10 k . If the sequence is ﬁnite (that is, for integers less than some m all the a’s are zero), the number is rational. The proof of this is easy to
create. If the a’s start repeating a pattern indeﬁnitely after some point, then the number is
also rational. The proof of that involves formulas for summing series.
H.4.4

Algebraic Numbers

Numbers that are the roots of polynomial equations are called algebraic. All rational numbers
are algebraic, and a/b is the root of the equation bx ¼ a, but not all algebraic numbers are
p
rational. The simplest example is 2. It has been known since the time of Pythagoras that
p
p
there is no a/b that is equal to 2. The proof is fairly simple: Suppose that 2 ¼ a/b and
this fraction is in its simplest form. Then squaring both sides and multiplying by b 2 we
see that 2b 2 ¼ a2 , from which it follows that a2 is even and so a is even. Let 2c ¼ a. Now
we have 2b 2 ¼ 4c2 , and so b 2 is even and so is b. As a and b are both even, the fraction a/b
can be simpliﬁed, contrary to our assumption, and so there is no rational answer.
H.4.5

Transcendental Numbers

Somewhat surprisingly, there are numbers that are not even algebraic. The proofs of this are
deep, but examples include p and the base of the natural logarithms, e. In fact, mathematically there are more transcendental numbers that algebraic ones, but somehow one does not
come across many.
H.4.6

Reals

The set of Real Numbers includes all rational and algebraic and transcendental numbers.
Their geometric interpretation is as unidimensional quantities, points in an inﬁnite line, with

865

Guide to Mathematical Expressions

integers equally spaced along it, and a real number a to the left of a real number b if a 5 b.
The set of real numbers, denoted by R, is used in many places for a in this book, but it has
some limitations. For instance, it cannot solve equations whose solution includes taking the
square root of a negative number. The square root of negative quantities is simply not
deﬁned in the R set. You can think of these limitations as a consequence of the numbers
having to be on a single line—of their being unidimensional. Some numbers will not ﬁt
that property and will lie elsewhere.
H.4.7

Complex Numbers

The complex number set, denoted by C, is a set that includes a deﬁnition for square roots of
negative numbers. A complex number can be represented as made up of a real part and an
imaginary part, as in a þ ib, where a is the real part and ib is the imaginary part. (The þ
sign can be interpreted as usual, because its arithmetic properties are intact, but can also be
seen as binding the two parts.) The i in the imaginary part is equal to the square root of 1, so
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
i ¼ 1 and i 2 ¼ 1.
With this deﬁnition, we are able to represent any negative square root, for instance
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
4 ¼ 2 1 ¼ 2i,
and even square roots of complex numbers, for example
pﬃﬃﬃ
pﬃﬃﬃ
2(i þ 1)
i ¼
.
2
The imaginary unit i is also sometimes notated as j, depending on the other variables used
in a given expression (so that it is not confused with them). Just as any real number can be
thought of as a point on an inﬁnite line, a complex number can be thought of as a point on
an inﬁnite plane, i.e. a bi-dimensional quantity. The complex number plane (ﬁgure H.3) is
made by adding an axis at a right angle to the real axis (the line on which real numbers lie).
This axis is called the imaginary axis. Now we can interpret the complex number a þ ib as the
intersection point of a line from the real axis at a with a line from the imaginary axis at b.
In this case, the i quantity identiﬁes the part of the number that will be reﬂected on the
imaginary axis.
Complex numbers can have many representations, but two are particularly important. The
ﬁrst is its rectangular form, as we see in ﬁgure H.3. In this form, the complex number z can
be represented as z ¼ a þ ib, with Re[z] ¼ a the real part and Im[z] ¼ b the imaginary part.
The quantities a and b are just points on the two axes. The second representation of complex
numbers is the polar form, which in ﬁgure H.3 is the representation of the number r at an
angle y or, using a common notation, r J y. The magnitude (or modulus) r of the number is
the distance from the origin to the point and y, the argument, is the angle this line makes
with the real axis (ﬁgure H.2). The formulas for these are

866

Appendix H

Figure H.3
The complex plane.

Modulus jzj ¼ sqrt(x2 þ y2 )
and
argument(x) ¼ arctan(y/x).
Addition or subtraction of complex numbers: In rectangular form, the real and imaginary
parts are added or subtracted separately:
(a þ ib) þ (c þ id) ¼ (a þ c) þ i(b þ d).
Multiplication: The ordinary algebraic rules are still valid here (remember that i 2 is 1):
(a þ ib)(c þ id) ¼ ac þ iad þ ibc þ i 2 bd
¼ (ac  bd) þ i(ad þ bc).
For example,
(2 þ 3i) * (4 þ i) ¼ 8 þ (3i * i) þ 2i þ 12i
¼ 8  3 þ 14i
¼ 5 þ 14i.
(Division will be discussed a little later.)
In polar form the operations of multiplication and division are easier than in rectangular
form; we multiply/divide the magnitudes and add/subtract the angles, as in
(r1 J y1 )  (r2 J y2 ) ¼ (r1  r2 ) J (y1 þ y2 ).
A means of linking the two representations above is given by the extremely important
Euler’s formula. Consider a point on the complex plane with magnitude 1 and argument y.

867

Guide to Mathematical Expressions

From ﬁgure H.1 we can see that the real part is cos(y) and the imaginary part is sin(y). From
this remark we deﬁne a new expression E(y) ¼ cos(y) þ i sin(y) as the complex number on the
unit circle whose argument is y. Some algebra, and the formulae given in subsection H.2.3,
shows that E(y)E(f) is
(cos(y) þ i sin(y))(cos(f) þ i sin(f)) ¼ cos(y þ f) þ i sin(y þ f)
¼ E(y þ f).
This is the result we expect from the polar multiplication rule, but it should be noted that
this is the same formula that was give in subsection H.1.1 for multiplications of two exponentials. Borrowing from the differential calculus, we know that the derivative of E(y) is
sin(y) þ i cos(y),
or
i(cos(y) þ i sin(y)) ¼ iE(y).
As we know that the derivative of e ax is ae ax , we can identify the E function as just e iy , and so
we arrive at Euler’s formula:
e iy ¼ cos y þ i sin y.
There are other ways of deriving this formula, including from the Taylor series, but this
derivation is sufﬁcient for our purposes. The numerical value of e is not important (it is
between 2 and 3); it is just a ﬁxed transcendental number (the ‘‘natural base of logarithms’’).
However, the concept of the formula is important. Any complex number can be represented by this formula, and so it is effectively another form that connects the two previous
representations:
R J y ¼ Re jy ¼ R[cos y þ i sin y] ¼ R[a þ ib],
with
a ¼ cos(y)
and
b ¼ sin(y).
A special case of Euler’s formula is when y is p, when it becomes e ip ¼ 1, neatly connecting
e, p, and 1. Also interesting is that e 2ip ¼ 1.
Finally, complex numbers can have an operation called complex conjugation, normally
deﬁned as follows:
z* ¼ a  ib is the complex conjugate of z ¼ a þ ib and vice versa.
If z ¼ r J y then z* ¼ r J y.
z ¼ Re jy , z* ¼ Rejy .

868

Appendix H

The following are relations obtained by adding, subtracting, and multiplying a number
and its complex conjugate:
z þ z* ¼ 2x ¼ 2Re[z],
z  z* ¼ 2jy ¼ 2Im[z],
z  z* ¼ Re jy Reyj ¼ R2 e jy  jy ¼ R2 ¼ jzj2 .
Division of complex numbers in rectangular format can now be deﬁned as
(a þ ib)/(c þ id) ¼ ((c  id)(a þ ib))/((c  id)(c þ id))
¼ (c  id)(a þ ib)/(c2 þ d 2 ),
and the rule for multiplication completes the calculation.
H.4.8

Complex Multiplication as Rotation

An interesting consequence of the multiplication rule in polar form,
(r1 J y1 )  (r2 J y2 ) ¼ (r1  r2 ) J (y1 þ y2 ),
is that if r2 is 1 then multiplying by e iy just adds y to the argument of the other number, and
so rotates the number by the angle y about the origin. Special cases of this include i ¼ e ip/2 ,
so multiplying by i is rotation by 90 .
H.5

Final Words
Many of the concepts introduced here are explored in more detail in some of the chapters
where they feature more prominently. For an extensive compilation of mathematical expressions and formulas, we recommend Handbook of Mathematical Functions with Formulas,
Graphs, and Mathematical Tables, edited by M. Abramowitz and I. Stegun (Dover, 1965). For
the reader with further interest in mathematics, we suggest the following books: R. Penrose,
The Road to Reality (Vintage, 2005); S. Hawking, God Created the Integers (Running Press,
2005).

Note
1. The calculation is to perform the same calculation:
lim(qx ! 0)((x þ qx)n  x n )/qx ¼ lim(qx ! 0)(x n þ (n  1)x n1 qx þ (n  1)(n  2)x n2 qx2 /2 þ     x n )/qx
¼ lim(qx ! 0)((n1)x n1 þ (n  1)(n  2)x n2 qx þ   )
¼ (n1)x n1 .

Contents of the DVD

Continuations of Chapters
Delay Lines and Noise Generation
Richard Dobson
Digital Filters
Richard Dobson
From C to Cþþ
Richard Dobson
Audio Processing in Cþþ
Richard Dobson
Audio Plug-ins in Cþþ
Richard Dobson
APB and DVD Chapter Summaries: An Annotated Outline
Richard Dobson
Continuing Down the Audio Stream
Gabriel Maldonado
Working with Control Signals to Build a SoftSynth with a Cross-Platform GUI
Gabriel Maldonado
More VST Plug-ins
Victor Lazzarini
Algorithmic Patch Design for Synmod
Eric Lyon
Algorithmic Sound Design
Eric Lyon

870

Contents of the DVD

Foundations
Compiling Software in the OS X Terminal—UNIX-style
Joo Won Park
Building Linux Audio Applications from Source: A User’s Guide
David L. Phillips
A Guide to Linux Audio Applications
David L. Phillips
MIDI Programming
The MIDI Spec and Programming with PortMIDI
Tim Lukens
A MIDI-Based Algorithmic Composition Library
John fﬁtch
Synthesis and Signal Processing Techniques
Dynamic Range Processing
Andre´s Cabrera
Binaural Audio Processing: A Sample Application
Brian Carty
Sound Manipulation Using Spectral Modeling Synthesis
John Glover
Composing Noise
Jaeho Chang
Graphical User Interfaces for Audio Programs
Developing Music Software Interfaces
Steven Yi
Graphical User Interfaces for Audio Programs Using the Qt Toolkit
Andre´s Cabrera
The FilterResponse Graphical Filter Utility
John fﬁtch

871

Contents of the DVD

Xcode-Based Audio Application Tutorials
Converting Command Line Applications to Xcode Projects
Jaeho Chang
Carbon Audio Programming for Mac OS X
Allan Seago
Getting Started with Cocoa-Based Application Programming
Barry Threw
Objective-C and Cocoa Programming with Xcode
Chen Sokolovsky
Audio Programming Basics in Xcode
Taemin Cho
Xcode-Based Alternate Controller Programming
Alternate Controllers: Connecting to HID Devices in Cocoa
Andrew Beck
Programming the Sudden Motion Sensor to Control Audio on the Mac
Taemin Cho
A Video Controller of Audio in Xcode
Taemin Cho
Apple iPhone Audio Programming
A Real-time Spectral Processor for the iPhone
Johannes Bochmann
Apple Audio Unit Plug-ins from Csound Opcodes
Converting Csound Opcodes into Apple Audio Unit Plug-ins
Jonathan Bailey
Waveshaping: From Csound to Cocoa
Federico G. Saldarini
The Csound5 API
Developing Audio Software with the Csound Host API
Rory Walsh

872

Contents of the DVD

Microcontrollers
Embedded One-Bit Audio: Making a Microcontroller Sing
Andrew Beck
An Audio Programming Course for Electronic Musicians
Learning C with Csound
Richard Boulanger and Jonathan Bailey
From Csound to Sound in C
Richard Boulanger, Jonathan Bailey, and Tim Lukens
Real-Time MIDI Control and Audio Processing in C
Richard Boulanger, Max Mathews, and Tim Lukens
From the Command Line to the IDE: Audio Programming in Xcode
Richard Boulanger
The Audio Programming Glossary
Author Bios, Photos, Audio, Links and Favorites
Special Content
The Audio Programming Book and DVD Source Code
Selections from The OLPC Sound Sample Archive
Classic Computer Music Software and Source Code: Music V, cmusic, Csound
Current Computer Music Software and Source Code: Csound5, csound~, WinXound, Ounk,
pyo, and the SndObj Library

References

Abadi, M., and L. Cardelli. 1996. A Theory of Objects. Springer-Verlag.
Abe, T. 1997. The IF spectrogram: A new spectral representation. In Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Simulation, Visualization and Auralization for Acoustic Research and Education, Tokyo.
Abramowitz, M., and I. Stegun, eds. 1965. Handbook of Mathematical Functions with Formulas, Graphs, and
Mathematical Tables. Dover.
Aho, A., R. Sethi, and J. Ullman. 1977. Principles of Compiler Design. Addison-Wesley.
Aho, A., R. Sethi, and J. Ullman. 1986. Compilers: Principles, Techniques and Tools. Addison-Wesley.
Aho, A., J. Ullman, and J. Hopcroft. 1983. Data Structures and Algorithms. Addison-Wesley.
Babbage, C. 1864. Passages from the Life of a Philosopher. Longman.
Backus, J. 1977. The Acoustical Foundations of Music, second edition. Norton.
Backus, J. W., R. Beer, S. Best, R. Goldberg, L. Haibt, H. Herrick, R. Nelson, D. Sayre, P. Sheridan, H. Stern,
I. Ziller, R. Hughes, and R. Nutt. 1957. The FORTRAN automatic coding system. In Proceedings of the
Western Joint Computer Conference, Los Angeles.
Barton, D., and J. Fitch. 1972. The application of symbolic algebra systems to physics. Reports on Progress
in Physics 35: 235–314.
Bennett, J. 1996. Compiling Techniques: A First Course Using ANSI C, LEX and YACC, second edition.
Addison-Wesley.
Bidlack, R. 1992. Chaotic systems as simple (but complex) compositional algorithms. Computer Music
Journal 16 (3): 33–47.
Boulanger, R., ed. 2000. The Csound Book. MIT Press.
Boulanger, R., and J. fﬁtch. 2003. Teaching software synthesis: From hardware to software synthesis.’’ In
Global Village—Global Brain—Global Music: KlangArt-Kongress 1999, ed. B. Enders and J. Strange-Elbe.
Electronic Publishing.
Bracewell, R. 1968. The Fourier Transform and Its Applications. McGraw-Hill.
Bryant, R., and D. O’Hallaron. 2003. Computer Systems: A Programmer’s Perspective. Prentice-Hall.
Burtch, K. 2004. Linux Shell Scripting with Bash. Sams.

874

References

Cameron, D., J. Elliott, M. Loy, E. Raymond, and B. Rosenblatt. 2004. Learning GNU Emacs, third edition.
O’Reilly Media.
Chowning, J. 1973. The synthesis of complex audio spectra by means of frequency modulation. Journal
of the Audio Engineering Society (21): 526–534.
Chowning, J., and R. Bristow. 1986. FM Theory and Applications by Musicians for Musicians. Yamaha Music
Foundation.
CODASYL. 1959. Common Business Oriented Language. Technical report.
Cody, W., and W. Waite. 1980. Software Manual for the Elementary Functions. Prentice-Hall.
Cook, P. 2002. Real Sound Synthesis for Interactive Applications. A. K. Peters.
Davenport, J., Y. Siret, and E. Tournier. 1993. Computer Algebra, Systems and Algorithms for Algebraic Computation, second edition. Academic Press.
De Furia, S., and J. Sciacciaferro. 1989. MIDI Programmers Handbook. M & T Publishing.
Deitel, H. 1984. An Introduction to Operating Systems. Addison-Wesley.
Deitel, H. 2006. C: How to Program, ﬁfth edition. Prentice-Hall.
Deitel, H., and P. Deitel. 2007. Cþþ: How to Program, sixth edition. Prentice-Hall.
Deitel, H., P. Deitel, and D. Choffnes. 2003. Operating Systems, third edition. Prentice-Hall.
¨ lzer. 1999. Modulation and delay line based digital audio effects. In Proceedings of
Disch, S., and U. Zo
the Second COST-G6 Workshop on Digital Audio Effects, Trondheim.
Dodge, C., and T. Jerse. 1985. Computer Music. Schirmer Books.
Dolson, M. 1986. The phase vocoder tutorial. Computer Music Journal 10 (4): 14–27.
fﬁtch, J. 2005. On the design of Csound5. In Proceedings of the Third International Linux Audio Conference, Karlsruhe.
Flanagan, J., and R. Golden. 1966. Phase vocoder. Bell System Technical Journal 45: 1493–1509.
Ford, W., and W. Topp. 2001. Data Structures with Cþþ Using STL, second edition. Prentice-Hall.
Forman, S. 1990. Numerical Algorithms That (Usually) Work. Mathematical Association of America.
Friedman, D. 1985. Instantaneous-frequency distribution vs. time: An interpretation of the phase structure of speech. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Audio and Speech Signal Processing,
Tampa.
Ghezi, C., and M. Javayeri. 1987. Programming Language Concepts, second edition. Wiley.
Graham, R., D. Knuth, and O. Patashnik. 1994. Concrete Mathematics. Addison-Wesley.
Hawking, S. 2005. God Created the Integers. Running Press.
Hennessy, J., and D. Patterson. 2003. Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, third edition. Morgan Kaufman.
Howard, D., and J. Angus. 2006. Acoustics and Psychoacoustics, third edition. Focal Press.
Howe, H. 1975. Electronic Music Synthesis. Norton.

875

References

Jaffe, D. 1987. Spectrum analysis tutorial, part 1: The discrete Fourier transform. Computer Music Journal
11 (2): 9–24.
Jaffe, D. 1987. Spectrum analysis tutorial, part 2: Properties and applications of the discrete Fourier transform. Computer Music Journal 11 (3): 17–35.
Johnson, S. 1990. Yacc: Yet another compiler-compiler. In UNIX Research System Programmer’s Manual,
volume 2, tenth edition. Saunders College Publishing.
Kaiser, J. 1963. Design methods for sampled data ﬁlters. In Proceedings of the First Allerton Conference
on Circuit and System Theory, Urbana.
Kelly, J., C. Lochbaum, and V. Vyssotsky. 1961. A block diagram compiler. Bell System Technical Journal
40: 669–676.
Kelly-Bootle, S. 1995. The Computer Contradictionary, second edition. MIT Press.
Kerninghan, B., and D. Ritchie. 1988. The ANSI C Programming Language. Prentice-Hall.
Knuth, D. 1998. The Art of Computer Programming, volume 1: Fundamental Algorithms, second edition.
Addison-Wesley.
Knuth, D. 1998. The Art of Computer Programming, volume 2: Seminumerical Algorithms, second edition.
Addison-Wesley.
Knuth, D. 1998. The Art of Computer Programming, volume 3: Sorting and Searching, second edition.
Addison-Wesley.
Laakso, T., V. Valimaki, M. Karjalainen, and U. Laine. 1996. Splitting the unit delay. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 13 (1): 30–60.
Lazzarini, V. 1998. A proposed design for an audio processing system. Organised Sound 3 (1): 77–84.
Lazzarini, V. 2000. The sound object library. Organised Sound 5 (1): 35–49.
Lazzarini, V. 2002. Audio signal processing and object oriented systems. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Digital Audio Effects, Hamburg.
Lazzarini, V. 2005. Extensions to the Csound language: From user-deﬁned to plugin opcodes and beyond. In Proceedings of the Third Linux Audio Developer’s Conference, Karlsruhe.
Lazzarini, V., J. Timoney, and T. Lysaght. 2006. Spectral signal processing in Csound 5. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Computer Music, New Orleans.
Lesk, M., and E. Schmidt. 1990. Lex—A lexical analyzer generator. In UNIX Research System Programmer’s
Manual, volume 2, tenth edition. Saunders College Publishing.
Loukides, M., T. O’Reilly, and S. Powers. 2002. UNIX Power Tools, third edition. O’Reilly Media.
Loy, G. 2006. Musimathics: The Mathematical Foundations of Music, volume 1. MIT Press.
Loy, G. 2007. Musimathics: The Mathematical Foundations of Music, volume 2. MIT Press.
Mathews, M. 1961. An acoustic compiler for music and psychological stimuli. Bell System Technical Journal 40: 677–694.
Mathews, M. 1969. The Technology of Computer Music. MIT Press.

876

References

Mathews, M., and J. Pierce, eds. 1989. Current Directions in Computer Music Research. MIT Press.
Matloff, N., and P. Salzman. 2008. The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse. No Starch Press.
McCarthy, J. 1960. Recursive functions of symbolic expressions and their computation by machine, part
I. Communications of ACM 3 (4): 184–195.
Meyer, B. 1990. Introduction to the Theory of Programming Languages. Prentice-Hall.
Miranda, E., and M. Wanderley. 2006. New Digital Musical Instruments. A-R Editions.
Moore, F. 1977. Table lookup noise for sinusoidal digital oscillators. Computer Music Journal 1 (2): 26–29.
Moore, F. 1990. Elements of Computer Music. Prentice-Hall.
Moorer, J. 1978. The use of the phase vocoder in computer music applications. Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 24: 717–727.
Moorer, J. 1979. About this reverberation business. Computer Music Journal 3 (2): 13–18.
Newham, C. 2005. Learning the bash Shell (In a Nutshell). O’Reilly Media.
Openheim, A., and R. Schafer. 1975. Digital Signal Processing. Prentice-Hall.
Ousterhout, J. 1994. Tcl and the Tk Toolkit. Addison-Wesley.
Penrose, R. 2005. The Road to Reality. Vintage.
Pesch, R., S. Shebs, and R. Stallman. 2002. Debugging with GDB: The GNU Source-Level Debugger. Free Software Foundation.
Pierce, J. R. 1983. The Science of Musical Sound. Freeman.
Pope, S. 1991. Machine tongues XI: Object oriented design. In The Well Tempered Object, ed. S. Pope. MIT
Press.
Pope, S., and G. Van Rossum. 1995. Machine tongues XVIII: A child’s garden of soundﬁle formats. Computer Music Journal 19 (1): 25–63.
Press, W., S. Teukolsky, W. Vetterling, and B. Flannery. 2007. Numerical Recipes, third edition. Cambridge
University Press.
Puckette, M. 2007. The Theory and Techniques of Electronic Music. World Scientiﬁc Press.
Roads, C. 1996. Computer Music Tutorial. MIT Press.
Roads, C., S. Pope, A. Picialli, and G. Poli, eds. 1997. Musical Signal Processing. Swets & Zeitlinger.
Robbins, A. 2005. GDB Pocket Reference. O’Reilly Media.
Risset, J. C. 1969. An Introductory Catalogue of Computer Synthesized Sounds. Bell Laboratories.
Sammet, J. 1969. Programming Languages: History and Fundamentals. Prentice-Hall.
Sammet, J. 1976. Roster of programming languages for 1974–75. Communications of the ACM 19 (2): 655–
669.
Sammet, J. 1981. An overview of high-level languages. Advances in Computers 20: 199–259.
Sandige, R. 2001. Digital Design Essentials. Prentice-Hall.

877

References

Schafer, R., and L. Rabiner. 1973. A digital signal processing approach to interpolation. Proceedings of the
IEEE 61 (6): 692–702.
Schroeder, R. M. 1962. Natural sounding artiﬁcial reverberation. Journal of the Audio Engineering Society
10: 219–223.
Smith, J., and J. Angell. 1982. A constant-gain digital resonator tuned by a single coefﬁcient. Computer
Music Journal 6 (4): 36–40.
Stallings, W. 2008. Operating Systems: Internals and Design Principles, sixth edition. Prentice-Hall.
Steiglitz, K. 1963. The General Theory of Digital Filters with Applications to Spectral Analysis. Sc.D. dissertation, New York University.
Steiglitz, K. 1994. A note on constant-gain digital resonators. Computer Music Journal 18 (4): 8–10.
Steiglitz, K. 1996. A Digital Signal Processing Primer. Prentice-Hall.
Stones, R., and N. Matthew. 2000. Beginning Linux Programming. Wrox.
Stroustrop, B. 1991. The Cþþ Programming Language, second edition. Addison-Wesley.
Taube, H. 2004. Notes from the Metalevel. Taylor & Francis.
Tennenbaum, A. 1989. Data Structures Using C. Prentice-Hall.
Turing, A. 1936. On computable numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungsproblem. Proceedings
of the London Mathematical Society 42 (2): 230–265.
Verfaille, V., and D. Arﬁb. 2002. Implementation Strategies for Adaptive Digital Effects. In Proceedings of
the Fifth Conference on Digital Audio Effects, Hamburg.
Verfaille, V., U. Zolzer, and D. Arﬁb. 2006. Adaptive digital audio effects (a-DAFx): A new class of sound
transformations. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing 14 (5): 1817–1831.
Warren, H. 2002. Hacker’s Delight. Addison-Wesley.
Watson, G. 1944. A Treatise on the Theory of Bessel Functions, second edition. Cambridge University Press.
Wishart, T. 1995. Audible Design. Orpheus the Pantomime.
Xenakis, I. 1992. Formalized Music, revised edition. Pendragon.
¨ lzer, U., ed. 2002. DAFX—Digital Audio Effects. Wiley.
Zo

About the Authors

Jonathan Bailey is a software developer and a drummer.
Andrew Beck is an audio programmer who has studied at the Berklee College of Music and
the Georgia Institute of Technology.
Johannes Bochmann is a freelance electronic artist and a computer scientist.
Richard Boulanger is a professor of electronic production and design at the Berklee College of
Music.
Andre´s Cabrera is a lecturer in music technology at Pontiﬁcia Universidad Javeriana. He is
the author of the Csound front end QuteCsound.
Brian Carty is a PhD student and a lecturer in the music department at the National University of Ireland at Maynooth.
Jaeho Chang is an associate professor of music technology at the Korea National University
of Arts.
Taemin Cho is a guitarist, a composer, and a music technologist. He is pursuing a PhD in
music technology at New York University.
Richard Dobson is a freelance software developer, a core developer for the Composers Desktop Project, and a virtuoso ﬂautist. He teaches at Bath Spa University.
John fﬁtch is a professor of software engineering at the University of Bath and the director of
Codemist Ltd.
John Glover is a computer scientist, a musician, and a composer. He is a researcher and a PhD
student in the Music Department at the National University of Ireland at Maynooth.
Victor Lazzarini is a senior lecturer in music at the National University of Ireland at
Maynooth.
Tim Lukens is a software developer. He is a graduate of the Berklee College of Music, where
he majored in electronic production and design.

880

About the Authors

Eric Lyon is a composer, a computer music researcher, and an educator at the Sonic Arts
Research Centre at Queen’s University in Belfast.
Gabriel Maldonado is a composer, a guitarist, a researcher, a video artist, and a VJ. He is president of the Ecuadorian Estuardo Maldonado Art Foundation.
Joo Won Park is a composer, a researcher, and an assistant professor of music at the Community College of Philadelphia.
David L. Phillips is a music teacher, a performer, and an author.
Robert Gerard Pietrusko is a designer and an engineer. He prepared most of the ﬁgures for
this book.
Federico G. Saldarini is a digital artist, a sound designer, and a computer scientist. He attends
Portland State University in Oregon.
Allan Seago is a senior lecturer in the Department of Art Media and Design at London
Metropolitan University.
Chen Sokolovsky is a musician and a programmer.
Barry Threw is an electronic musician and a media technologist.
Rory Walsh is Director of Music Technology at the Dundalk Institute of Technology.
Steven Yi is a composer and programmer. He is an editor of The Csound Journal and the
author of the blue music composition environment.

Index

Absolute value, 214
Access violation, 325

Arrays, 27–29, 79–81, 90, 94, 115, 338–345,
349–353, 363, 370, 377–380

Accumulating sum (+=), 310

allocation, 132, 139

Additive synthesis, 450, 573, 574

as container, 90, 106

Address
aligning, 139

errors, 81, 82, 113, 124, 177
index, 80, 81, 115, 177, 298

of data in memory, 78, 79, 81, 110–114, 118,

initialization, 80–82, 268

143, 168, 169, 307, 341, 347, 351–352, 357,

name as pointer, 111, 112

359, 368–374

of arrays, 90, 117–119, 135

of function, 368, 369, 374, 375

of objects, 287

ADSR, 478–480

sequential access, 113, 249

AIFF-C, 192

size, 103, 106, 132

Algorithm, 95, 220, 237, 249, 385
Algorithmic composition, 655

subscript, 80
ASIO, 364, 365

Aliasing, 261, 270, 292, 299, 434, 439, 440

Audacity, 157, 173, 206, 253

Allpass ﬁlter, 494

Audio ﬁle formats

ALSA, 364, 365, 372

AIFF, 337, 351, 353

Ambisonics, 193

raw binary, 338, 344–348

Amplitude response, 453, 454

WAV, 337, 338, 345–353

Analog signals, 431

Audio frames, 350

ANSI, 137, 138, 160, 221, 263, 297, 324
API (application programming interface), 190,

Audio IO, 771
Audio channels, 744

194, 280
Arguments to programs, 40, 350, 351

Audio signal, 329, 332, 365
Automation, 130, 239

Arithmetic
inverse, 236

Bessel functions, 458

logarithm, 75, 76

Binary ﬁles, 741

raising to power, 68, 69

Black box, 332, 333, 357, 359

ratio, 230, 231, 259
reciprocal, 232

Block diagram, 333, 335
Blocking I/O, 363, 364, 378, 774

square, square root, 234

BLODI, 629

882

Index

Breakpoint, 721
Breakpoints ﬁle, 130, 132, 220, 223, 226–228,
292
array of, 135
overhead, 237

goto, 201, 339–342, 350, 352, 355, 356
if, 14, 15, 84
linking, 5, 711
long, 7, 339, 343, 349–357, 366, 369–372,
377–381

span, 230

order of operations, 9, 73–75

stream object, 277

return, 24, 25, 138, 339, 349, 354, 355

Buffering, 348, 359, 360, 377, 378

short, 7, 344, 347, 381

Buffers, 349–354, 359–361
circular, 491, 492

standard library, 28, 330, 365
static, 286, 313

FIFO, 360
input, 360

stdio, 10–13, 330, 338, 341, 346–349, 354,
359, 366, 377

memory, 95, 113, 114, 180

structures, 35–39, 133, 225

output, 360

switch/case/default, 16, 194, 196, 197,

underrun, 361
Bugs, 57, 81, 107, 142, 177
Butterworth ﬁlters, 484
Byte ordering, 749
Byte reversal, 169, 320, 749, 759–762

276, 339–342, 354, 358
typedef, 36, 134–136, 179, 189, 276
while loop, 20, 95, 96, 101, 108, 319
Cþþ language, 324, 327, 329, 331
access control, 48
classes, 48, 49

C language, 329–332, 337, 350, 352
argc, 40, 349–351, 354–357
argv, 40, 349–357

plug-ins, 513–516
structures, 44
virtual functions, 52

atof, atoi, atol, 41, 82, 83, 91, 105, 354,

CAF, 193

355, 358
bitwise operators, 22–24

Calculus, 860–863
Callback function, 363, 366

break, 16, 101–103, 118, 125, 141, 197, 339–

Callbacks, 34, 35, 363–371, 774, 775

342, 354, 355

Cancellation effects, 293

building programs, 5

Casting, 392

case, 16, 339–342

Code

cast operator, 8, 343, 345, 347, 370, 379

analysis, 248

char, 8

bloat, 312

character set, 6
compiling programs, 4, 709

block, 59, 85, 95–99, 115, 120, 122
data hiding, 188

const, 82–84, 124, 236

dependent block, 86, 96, 97, 100, 101

data types, 7, 8

design, 57, 89, 99, 103, 136, 157, 255

do . . . while loop, 20, 100, 101, 114, 115,

encapsulation, 188, 255, 264, 280, 311

177, 350, 352, 356, 359

error handling, 201, 221, 228

else, 15, 119–121, 125

generation, 56

enum, 161, 162, 189, 268, 273, 315

implementation ﬁle, 264

for loop, 20, 21, 99, 100, 106, 107, 113, 177,
331, 343–345, 366, 370, 380

incremental development, 86, 241
inline, 219

functions, 24, 25, 60, 61

label, 202

883

Index

low-level, 56, 157, 255
optimization, 55, 56, 83, 116

Creation, vs. initialization, 266
Creation function (object), 265, 306, 308

robustness, 237, 311

Cross-synthesis, 546

self-documenting, 63, 88, 162, 177, 263, 270,

Cubic interpolation, 472

316, 321, 327

Csound, 109, 114, 320, 327, 582, 682–684

structure, 60, 69, 124, 213
Code layout, 69, 121, 176
duplication, 201

DAC (digital-analog converter), 329, 337, 338,
346–348, 353, 360, 361, 377

else block, 120, 123
indentation, 85, 86, 121, 176

Data plotting, 147
Dataspace, 45

white space, 58, 70, 131, 168, 176

Debugger, 719

Comb ﬁlter, 493, 494, 552

Debugging, 57, 129, 146, 147, 151, 162, 720

Command line, 58, 89, 78, 89, 143, 151, 176,

Decibel, 154, 208, 210, 211, 234

179

Declaration function, 62, 137

argc, argv, 40, 90–93

Declaration variable, 65, 70–72, 83, 133, 135

argument, 96, 104, 110, 116, 121, 123, 129,

Declarative programming, 332

244, 317
and GUI programs, 93

Decrement, 97
Default values, 117, 124, 244

input, 89, 90

Defensive programming, 57, 82, 83, 146, 162,

Command-line interface, 633
Comments (source code), 58, 59, 62, 70, 72, 82,
104, 125, 194, 195, 251

236
Deﬁnition, vs. declaration, 264
Delay, 451, 452

Compiled languages, 3

Delay line, 490–493

Compilers, 813, 814

Denormal number, 180

Complex numbers, 865–868
Complex signals, 441–444

Dependency, 185, 226
Destruction function, 306

Compressed ﬁles, 703

Destructive, vs. non-destructive, 194, 200, 202

Computation overhead, 229, 237

Digital audio signal, 329, 431

Computation speed, 55–57, 115, 116

Discrete Fourier transform, 521–525

Computer languages, 812, 813

Discrete-time signal, 431

Concert pitch, 161

Distortion, 195, 286, 302, 319

Conditional compilation, 159, 160, 187

Division by zero, 217, 231, 322

Conditional debugging, 726
Continue, 142

Documentation, 57, 89, 136, 190, 236, 238, 266,
323, 325

Continuous-time signals, 431

Doppler shift, 323

Control rate, 468, 469

DOS, 60, 67, 89, 93, 131, 147

Control signal, 270, 293

Drop-out, 360, 361, 377

Convolution, 498, 529–531, 597

DSP (digital signal processing), 341

fast, 531–535

Dynamic range, 211

graphic, 541
spectral, 540
Cook, Perry, 326

Efﬁciency, 220, 237, 267, 297
Emacs, 714

Core dumps, 736

Encapsulation, 48, 333

884

Index

Endianness, 169, 170, 174, 185, 320
Entry point, 5
Envelope
ADSR, 253
amplitude, 110, 130–132, 155, 212, 239,
241
breakpoint ﬁle, 237
on dB scale, 212

Flanger, 495, 496
Floating point, 65, 66, 71, 72, 75–77, 98, 142,
168, 173, 178, 192, 195, 198, 203, 211, 214,
297, 301, 325, 762
Flow chart, 332–334
Flow control, 14–16
initializer statement, 99, 134, 226, 322
update statement, 322

exponential, 475, 476
extraction, 239, 244

Formatted output, 60, 72, 94, 117–119,123, 124,
168, 247

following, 242

Fourier series, 448–451

generators, 477–481

Fourier transform, 521

linear, 474, 475, 478

Frequency

stereo pan, 132

fundamental, 287

tables, 474–477

of MIDI note, 68, 69

Environment variable, 704

modulation, 317, 264

Escape character, 61
Euler, Leonhard, 180

negative, 264, 267
as phase increment, 263

Euler’s formula, 867

Frequency modulation (FM), 264, 459, 460

Execution cycle, 798–802

Frequency response, 456

Exponential attack, 151, 152

Function

Exponential decay, 149, 150, 154, 158, 160, 164,
166, 167

address, 275
arguments, 61
body, 60

Fall-through, 291
Fast Fourier transform, 529

creation, 265, 277, 278, 294, 296, 305, 306,
308, 312, 319

Feedback, oscillator, 642

declaration (prototype), 62, 71, 83, 137, 168,

Fencepost problem, 420, 421

264

File permissions, 700

in expression, 88

File extension, 190, 199, 320, 321

main, 5, 58–60, 90, 203

Filter, 55, 114, 160, 327

overloading, 46, 266

and aliasing, 270

signature, 387

direct forms I, II, 485
equation, 453

static, 313
user-deﬁned, 137, 138

FIR, feedforward, 452–456

wrapper, 180

high-pass, 486

Function generator, 254

IIR, feedback, 452, 456, 457, 483–488

Functions, mathematical, 857

linear-phase, 455

Function tables, 335–337, 432

low-pass, 242, 486, 581

Fundamental frequency of analysis, 523

module, 651
pole, 457
Flag, 352–359, 366, 369, 370, 374, 375, 379–
381

Gain, 209
Gardner, Bill, 187
Generality, 220, 255, 327

885

Index

Geometric series, 149
Gnuplot, 147, 154, 160, 163, 241
Guard point, 297, 304, 312

341, 345–350, 353–359, 363–365, 369, 371,
376–380
Libsndﬁle, 187, 763–769,
Linear interpolation, 230, 241, 242, 286, 302,

Hamming window, 542, 543

327

Hanning window, 542, 543

Linear pan, 221, 234

Hardware, 56, 57, 67, 113, 125, 180, 297

Linking, 185

Harmonic (component), 287, 288, 292, 318

Listening test, 226, 233, 270, 305

Header ﬁles, 4, 62, 69, 70, 135, 137, 160
Headphones, 234

Logarithms, 855, 856
Logical expressions, 14

Heap, 807

Lookup tables, 335–337, 465

Henon map, 657

Loop, 19–21, 91, 95–99, 102, 106, 112, 118, 124,

High-level language, 56, 110

125, 142, 201, 202, 233, 251, 290

Host-APIs, 364–374
Host-driven mechanism, 363

Macintosh, 56, 89, 93, 147, 148, 173, 175, 199,

Imaginary number, 441, 442, 865
Imperative programming, 333

Macro, 179, 219, 333, 335, 338, 341, 342, 346,
347, 350, 358, 359, 365, 379

Increment, 97

Maintenance, 422

Incremental development, 86, 223

Makeﬁle and make, 185, 188, 206, 208, 226, 320,

321

Indirection, 92, 110, 111, 119
Inharmonicity, 317, 320
Inheritance, 52, 503, 504
Instantaneous frequency distribution, 568
Instructions, 798
Interleaving (samples), 163
Interpolation, 398–402

418, 712
Mapping
of ideas to performance instructions, 680
of instructions to performers, 679, 680
Mathematics, 855–868
approximations, 261
C deﬁnitions, 261

cubic, 400

computation, 298

exponential, 475, 564

e (Euler’s number), 75, 180, 867

linear, 398, 472, 475, 596, 564

exponential, 154, 180, 212, 239, 855

quadratic, 400

irrational number, 261, 864

Interpreted languages, 4

logarithm, 75, 154, 180, 210, 212, 855, 856

Interpreter, 147
Inverse DFT, 525–527

orthogonal, 324
p (pi), 180, 236, 259, 324, 858

Iteration, 95

radian, 236, 259, 260, 858
right angle, 324, 858

Keyword, 6, 58, 60, 64, 67, 84, 101, 133, 134,
142, 161, 194, 201, 236, 286, 313

sine, cosine, 235, 256, 258, 286, 293, 299, 437,
858, 859
transcendental number, 261, 864

Latency, 361–364, 367–369, 372–374, 378
Lexer, 814–817
Library, 4, 5, 57, 61, 62, 82, 84, 124, 125, 137,
162, 176, 186, 206, 220, 227, 287, 330, 332,

trigonometry, 236, 256, 437, 858
Mathews, Max, 335, 629
Max/MSP, 332
Member variables, 45

886

Index

Memory
allocation, 39, 40, 139, 807

Objected-oriented programming, 3, 49, 332–
343

error testing, 201

Offset, 446, 447

freeing, 40, 141

Open-source, 357, 364

heap, 325,

Operator, 64, 323

leak, 279

+= (accumulator), 20, 290

for objects, 266

++, –, 20, 97

on/off chip, 297

% (modulus), 98, 319

organization, 805
and printf, 140

and ?: test, 15, 218, 219, 284
AND, OR (||, &&), 222–224, 307

and realloc, 140, 143

assignment, 65, 71, 74

stressing, 180

association, 9, 73, 74, 275

virtual, 180

comma, 284, 322, 323

Methods (functions), 264

comparison, 84, 97, 264

Methodspace, 45

conditional, 229, 251, 280, 323

MIDI, 56, 68, 69, 75, 76, 80, 86, 92, 103, 110,

contents-of, address-of (*, &), 110

117, 783
Mixing, 445

indirection, 92, 110, 111, 119
logical, 14, 99

MME, 364, 365, 372, 373

NOT (!), 229

Modular synthesizer, 629

overload, 134

Modulus operation, 465

precedence, 9, 73–75, 88, 113, 115, 143, 179

Morphing, 564

sizeof, 67, 139

MUSIC I–MUSIC V languages, 335

struct, 35, 265, 308
true, false, 84, 85, 97, 101, 176, 218,

Noise, 270
generation, 645, 646
quantization, 322
truncation, 302, 305

unary, binary, 64
Orchestral composition, 677–679
Oscillator, 95, 259, 464, 630
bank, 255, 287

Normalization, 212–217, 310

feedback, 642

Normalize (samples), 154, 208, 242

low-frequency, 270

Numeric systems, 863–868

sine wave, 263

Nyquist limit, 261, 299

OS X, 56, 89, 160, 178, 321

Object, 75, 78, 79, 94, 112, 130–134, 168, 255,

Overlap-add, 531, 532
Overloading, 46, 53

264, 265, 305, 316, 325, 327
behavior, 264
in C, 132
derivation and inheritance, 307, 308

Pan, 219, 221, 323
constant power, 235
pairwise, 323

initialization, 265

Parentheses, 74, 275

lifetime, 325

Parser, 817

state, 57, 264
stream, 264, 277

Pascal, 175, 323
Path, relative, 206

Objected-oriented design, 383

PD, 332

887

Index

PEAK chunk, 195, 200, 269
Performer groups, 678, 687

Processes, 706
Processing time, 296, 299

Performers, 678, 686

Products, 857

Periodic signal, periodicity, 259, 287, 299

Programming

P-ﬁelds, 682
Phase, 258, 259, 261, 286, 293, 296, 298, 301

modular, 165
testing, 206, 233

Phase derivative, 568

Progress message, 207

Phase difference, 261

Pseudo-code, 101, 119, 141

Phase modulation, 457–459
Phase pointer, 337–343, 366, 367, 370, 371, 376,

Public and private, 48, 286, 305, 313, 316
Pulse-code modulation, 434, 435

379, 380
Phase response, 454, 455

Quantization, 434

Phase unwrapping, 558

Quantization noise, 436

Phase vocoder, 557, 617

Queue, 360

Phase wrapping, 263, 304
Pipe, 176, 178, 705

Random-access memory (RAM), 329

Pitch shifting, 505, 506, 621
Pointer manipulation, 112, 113, 306

Read and update, 267
Reaktor, 332

cast, 140

Real numbers, 441, 864

increment, 115, 177, 178

Rectangular format, 443, 527, 865

temporary, 143

Redirection (stream), 178, 705

Pointers, 30–32, 77, 78, 337, 341, 347–351, 357–
360, 365, 369–380

Rescaling, 347, 352
Reserved word, 60

arithmetic, 110, 112, 113, 116, 117, 124

Resonators, 487, 488, 551

to functions, 34, 274, 275, 308
NULL, 80, 86, 90, 132, 140, 280

Resources (machine), 201, 225
Return values and variables, 345, 348, 351, 352,

tests in expressions, 224

358–360, 367–374, 378–381

Polar format, 443, 527, 865

Ring modulation, 447, 448

Polynomials, 857

RMS (root mean square), 488, 590

Portaudio, 346, 364–375, 378–381, 771

Robustness, 82, 101, 220

Portmidi, 783

Rounding, 76

Portsf, 344, 355, 358, 359, 377, 400
Precision, numeric, 65, 66, 106, 151, 157, 168,
177, 180
Preprocessor, 5, 62, 70, 136, 159, 321

Sample, 160, 432, 744
format, 173, 191, 195
frame, 200

#define, 136, 321

rate (frequency), 161, 191, 259, 263

#elif, 344–346

precision, 743

#else, 344–346

window, 244

#endif, 344–346

Sample-and-hold, 649

#ifdef, 344–346

Samples, 329–352, 359–381

#include, 187, 330, 338, 344–346, 349,
354, 366

Sampling increment, 333–343, 358, 359, 365–
371, 376, 464

macro, 179, 219, 326

Sampling period, 432

888

Index

Sampling, regular vs. irregular, 239, 241
Sampling theorem, 433

Standard I/O streams (stdin, stdout, stderr),
151, 154, 178

Sawtooth wave, 449, 467

Standard output, 329–333, 337, 338, 344–348,

Scaling, 445, 446

377

Scope, 121, 122

Standard torus map, 669

Scripts, 708

Statements, 60, 63–65, 70, 72, 74, 80, 85, 96, 99,

Series, 856

113, 120, 122, 133, 177

Shell, 697

Stepping, 724

Shell command, 60, 88, 89, 131
Short-time Fourier transform (STFT), 539–544

Stereo, 132, 163, 191, 192, 195, 219, 221, 224,
226, 233–235, 323

Signal processing, 201, 320, 341

Streams, 329–381, 705

Signal-to-noise ratio, 436

String, 61, 71, 72, 78–83, 89–94, 117–119, 142,

Sign bit, 66
Sine wave (sinusoid), 158, 185, 233, 236, 256,
437–439, 464

175
Structured programming, 332
Surround, 192, 193, 322

Skeleton code, 104, 202

Syntactic sugar, 100

SNDAN, 170
Software engineering, 383, 385

Synthesis, 155, 161, 241, 264
additive, 158, 255, 286, 287

Soundﬁeld, 193

subtractive, 270

Soundﬁle

waveforms, 254–256, 299

AIFF, 754–762
and byte-swapping, 320
digital peak, 211
ﬁnd maximum, 214
formats, 163, 185
header, 167, 173, 185, 198, 320
libraries, 186
multi-channel, 187, 191

Table
implemented as C array, 330, 338
index, 336, 465
Table lookup, 335–337
Table lookup oscillator, 286, 297, 299
interpolating, 302
truncated, 286, 301

raw binary, 157, 168, 185, 742

Taylor series, 297

RIFF-Wave, 746–754

Tcl/Tk, 408

self-describing, 185, 320, 746

Template program, 209, 221

skeleton program, 202, 221

Terminal (OS X), 89, 93, 148

Source ﬁles, 4
Space-time trade-off, 395

Testing, 129, 299, 317, 419, 420
bebugging, 420

Spatialization, 323

black-box, 420

Specialization, 52, 53

reversion, 423

Spectral coefﬁcient, 523

white-box, 420

Spectral interpolation, 564–568

Test signal, 226, 253, 254, 268, 270

Spectral signals, 617, 618

Text ﬁles, 740

Spectrum, 286, 287, 292, 521–538

Tick function, 270, 271, 276, 277, 308, 309, 326

Square wave, 449, 467
Stack, 805,

Time constant, 150, 154
TinyAudioLib, 344–349, 352–354, 359, 363, 377,

Standard I/O, 10–13, 341

378

889

Index

Trapped in Convert, 655
Triangle wave, 185, 449, 467
Trigonometry, 236, 256, 858–860

local/global scope, 9, 70, 121–125, 138, 250,
325
pointer, 77–85, 92, 110–112

Truncating oscillator, 466, 467

Vector, 90, 467

Tuning, 68, 94, 175

Von Hann window, 542, 543

Tuning fork, 158, 164, 164

VST, 180, 502, 503

Types, 7, 65
abstract, 136, 264

Watchpoint, 728

bool, 323,
casting, 8, 74–76, 139, 140, 301

WaveArts, 187
Waveform, 211

clock_t, 297

geometric, 270, 286

collection, 110, 133

(non)band-limited, 270, 286

conversion, 8, 71

pulse, 318

ﬂoat, 7, 8, 331, 338–358, 366–370,

sawtooth, 288, 315

integer, 7, 66, 67, 374, 377–381

square, 288

numeric, 7, 8, 65, 66
promotion/demotion, 8, 75, 76
signed/unsigned, 7, 66–68, 134, 139, 168,
173

triangle, 288, 296, 310
WAVEFORMATEXTENSIBLE, 192
Wavetable synthesis, 335–337, 464–469
Wavetable playback, 383, 384

size_t, 139, 168, 175, 180

White space, 58, 131, 168, 176

string, 29, 61, 71, 78–83, 89, 90, 117, 118, 124,

Windowing, 539–543

142, 175,
struct, 35, 44, 133–135, 138, 178, 179, 225
void, 139, 140, 168
UNIX, 56, 60, 89, 93, 116, 131, 147, 160, 168,
176, 178, 188, 197, 236, 321, 322
Usage message, 92, 104, 117, 162, 176, 206,
245
User interface,
command line, 403
graphical, 408
positional and tagged, 405
Variable delay line, 494, 495
Variables, 7, 63–65, 107, 175
Boolean, 315, 323
constant, 83, 265
counter, 115, 249, 269
declaration, 65, 70, 72, 104
ﬂag, 124, 251, 317
initialization, 72, 80, 81, 110, 247
left-hand/right-hand side, 65, 175

Windows, 67, 82, 89, 93, 134, 168, 169, 201
Wraparound, 177, 298, 301

