CHAPTER 1
RELIABLE
SCALABLE
MAINTAINABLE
Is yours a Data-Intensive use case?
An application is data intensive if the amount of
data that it generates/uses increases quickly or
if the complexity of data that it generates/uses
increases quickly or if the speed of change in
data increases quickly.
Components of data intensive app




Credit: Martin Kleppmann: Source https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Designing-Data-Intensive-Applications%3A-The-Big-and-Kleppmann/24f14e3b30012c2bc7e3abbdb16e2b3365d6f920
Main components in a data-intensive app:
1.   Databases for source of truth for any consumer. E.g. Oracle/MySQL
2.   Cache for temporarily storing an expensive operation to speed up reads. E.g.
     Memcache
3.   Full-text Index for quickly searching data by keyword or filter.e.g. Apache
     Lucene
4.   Message queues for messaging passing between process. E.g. Apache
     Kafka
5.   Stream processing. E.g. Apache Samza, Apache Spark
6.   Batch processing for crunching large amount of data. E.g. Apache
     Spark/Hadoop
7.   Application code which acts as the connective tissue between the above
     components.
Role of an application developer is to design the
data system for reliability, scalability and
maintainability.
Reliability
●   Fault tolerance
●   No unauthorized access
●   Chaos testing
●   Full machine failures
●   Bugs - Automating tests
●   Staging/testing environment
●   Quickly roll-back
Scalability
●   Handle higher traffic volume
●   Traffic load with peak #of reads,writes and simultaneous users
●   Capacity planning
●   Response time vs throughput.
●   End user response time
●   90th,95th Percentile SLO/A service level objectives/agreements.
●   scaling up (more powerful machine)
●   scaling out (distributed many smaller machines).
Maintainability
●   Add new people to work
●   productivity
●   Operable: Configurable and testable
●   Simple: easy to understand and ramp up
●   Evolveable: easy to change
There is no one magic solution that works for all
data-intensive application use cases. Your solution
will be custom to your needs, as long as you have a
good idea of the above three pillars of Reliability,
Scalability and Maintainability you will build the
right system.
CHAPTER 2
DATA MODELS
& QUERY
LANGUAGES
Data Abstraction
                             Data Structures
                         1
                             Application layer

             Json
                     2
         Api layer
                             Bytes
                         3   Memory/Disk

   Magnetic Fields
        Hardware     4
Model a social network
Users -> Friends -> Posts -> Likes
Relational model
Relational query
Document based model
Graph model
Data Storage and Data Retrieval are the two main
things to consider. Same query can be either written
in 4 lines or with 30 lines based on your data model!
                           3 Main categories of databases

                                ●   Optimized for Transaction and batch processing
                                    (read throughput), joins..

01   Relational Database        ●
                                ●
                                    Data organized as table/relations
                                    Object Relational Mapping needed.
                                ●   Oracle, MySQL, PostgreSQL..
                                ●   NoSQL - Not only SQL.
                                ●   Flexible schemas, better performance due to

02   Document Database
                                ●
                                    locality/High write throughput.
                                    Mainly free and open source.
                                    (Espresso,CouchDB, MongoDB..)

                                ●   Best suited for highly interconnected data -
                                    many to many relationships.
03   Graph Database
                                ●   Social graph, Web graph (Neo4j AnzoGraph,
                                    SPARQL, Cypher)
Document databases target use
cases where data comes in
self-constrained documents and
relationships between one
document and another are rare.
Graph databases go in the
opposite direction, targeting use
cases where anything is potentially
related to everything.
Query languages
Imperative - e.g. SQL - tell exactly how
to perform certain operation in a certain order.

SELECT * FROM animals WHERE family = ʻSharksʼ



Declarative - e.g. CSS - just specify the pattern

Li.selected > p { background-color: blue; }

?map reduce?
CHAPTER 3
STORAGE &
RETRIEVAL
Storage &
Retrieval
                                Which database to use ??


● Every storage engine is optimized for different use cases. Select the right
  storage engine for your use case.
● As an application developer we need to have a rough idea on what the
  storage engine is doing under the hood so that we can select the right one.
● Tuning and optimizing pointers.
                              Which database to use ??


● There are two broad categories of databases - OLTP and OLAP each with
  different read pattern, write patterns, user using it, data size etc.
   ○ OLTP - Online Transaction processing database are optimized for latency.
        ■ E.g. MySQL, Oracle.
   ○ OLAP - Online Analytical processing databases are optimized data
       crunching! Data Warehousing - Star/Snowflake schema, Column oriented!
       Column compression, Data Cubes, optimized for reads/queries.
       Materialized views. Lack of flexibility.
        ■ E.g. Hbase, Hive, Spark,
                                 Database Index


● An Index is an additional structure that is derived from the primary data. A well
  chosen index optimizes for reads but slows down the write. ← your use case?
● Simple database index is a Hash based Index. Some issues for an index
   ○ File format (encoding)
   ○ Deleting records
   ○ Crash recovery
   ○ Partially written records
   ○ Concurrency control
   ○ Range queries?
                            Types of storage engines


● There are two families of storage engines these databases use
   ○ Log-structured - LSM-Trees e.g. SSTables → HBase, Cassandra
   ○ Page-Oriented - B-trees. → RDBMS
● These are answers to limitations of disk access.
                             LSM-Trees - Log Sort Merge
                             SSTables - Sorted String Tables

● SSTables - in-memory mem table backed by Disk SSTable file, sorted by keys. E.g.
  Red-black tree or AVL Trees. Supports high wight throughput.
● Lucene - full-text search is much more complex than key-value index like SSTables.
  It does internally use SSTables for term dictionary.
● Bloom filters - memory-eﬀicient data structure used for approximating the contents
  of a set. It can tell you if a key does not appear in the database, thus saves many
  unnecessary disk reads for nonexistent keys.
● Compaction is a background process of the means of throwing away duplicate
  keys in the log and keeping only the most recent update for each key.
  LevelDB, RocksDB, Cassandra and HBase are examples that use LSM-Trees.
LSM-Trees - Log Sort Merge
SSTables - Sorted String Tables
                                 B-Trees Index


●   Most widely used indexing structure is B-Trees. One place per key!
●   They are the standard implementation in RDBMS and NoSQL stores today.
●   It also keeps key-value sorted by keys which allows quick lookups.
●   B-Trees are designed and optimized for the hardware as disks are arranged in
    fixed-size blocks, B-Trees also break down the data into fixed size 4KB blocks
●   There is a root node and a branching factor (references to child pages).
●   4 level tree with 4KB pages with branching factor of 500 can store up to
    256TB!! B-Tree is optimized for reads!
●   Write ahead log is used for Crash recovery, Latches for concurrency.
●   Sibling references in child node allows for easier scanning of sequential keys.
B-Trees Index
                                More about Index


● Clustered index - inline storing of row values.
● Secondary index - helps with joins.
● Covering index - few columns are included.
● Multi-column index - multiple keys concatenated.
● Full-text search and fuzzy indexes help with spelling mistakes(edit-distances),
  grammar, synonyms, words near each other, linguistics etc.
● In Memory stores - VoltDB, MemSQL,Memcached.
CHAPTER 4
Agile Code
Evolution &
Data Encoding
Rolling
upgrade
Code
Compatibility

 Backward Compatibility: Newer code can read data that was written by older
 code for old and new clients.

 Forward Compatibility: Older code can read data that was written by newer
 code for new and old clients.
                                  Encoding/Decoding
                                  { “username” : “kunalc”,
                                    “favoriteNumber”: 1111,
                                   “Interests”: [“kayaking”, “daydreaming”]
                                  }

● Encoding       == Serialization      == Marshalling.
● Decoding       == Deserialization    == Unmarshalling.

● Language specification formats - java.io.Serializable.
● Text based - JSON, CSV, XML
● Binary encoding - varying parse and size performance.


Text Json - 81 bytes, Binary JSON - 66 bytes, Thrift Binary - 59 bytes, Thrift
Compat - 34 bytes, Protocol Buffer - 33 bytes, Avro - 32 bytes.
                                  Data transfer use cases


Example data structure

{ “username” : “kunalc”,
  “favoriteNumber”: 1111,
 “Interests”: [“kayaking”, “daydreaming”]
}

●   To a File
●   To a Database
●   To an external service over the network - Rest.li(json/http), SOAP/WSDL, RPC
●   To an async server via message passing - one way
    communication/kakfa/rabbotmq/activeMQ
CHAPTER 5
REPLICATION
CHAPTER 6
PARTITIONING
CHAPTER 7
TRANSACTIONS
CHAPTER 8
Troubles with
Distributed
System
CHAPTER 9
CONSISTENCY
& CONSENSUS
CHAPTER 10
BATCH
PROCESSING
CHAPTER 11
STREAM
PROCESSING
CHAPTER 12
FUTURE of
DATA SYSTEMS
Introduction

to   CDN
