Designing Data-Intensive
Applications
The Big Ideas Behind Reliable, Scalable, and Maintainable
Systems

SECOND EDITION


With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take advantage
of these technologies long before the official release of these titles.


Martin Kleppmann
Designing Data-Intensive
Applications
by Martin Kleppmann

Copyright © 2026 Martin Kleppmann. All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of America.

Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway
North, Sebastopol, CA 95472.

O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or
sales promotional use. Online editions are also available for
most titles (http://oreilly.com). For more information, contact
our corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938 or
corporate@oreilly.com.
 Acquisitions Editor: Aaron
 Black

 Development Editor: Virginia     Interior Designer: David
 Wilson                           Futato

 Production Editor: Katherine     Cover Designer: Karen
 Tozer                            Montgomery




  March 2017: First Edition
  December 2025: Second Edition


Revision History for the Early Release
  2024-08-27: First Release

See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781449373320
for release details.

The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media,
Inc. Designing Data-Intensive Applications, the cover image, and
related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith
efforts to ensure that the information and instructions
contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and the
authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions,
including without limitation responsibility for damages
resulting from the use of or reliance on this work. Use of the
information and instructions contained in this work is at your
own risk. If any code samples or other technology this work
contains or describes is subject to open source licenses or the
intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsibility to
ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.
978-1-098-11900-3
Dedication
To everyone using technology and data to address the world’s
biggest problems.
Computing is pop culture. […] Pop culture holds a disdain
for history. Pop culture is all about identity and feeling like
you’re participating. It has nothing to do with cooperation,
the past or the future—it’s living in the present. I think the
same is true of most people who write code for money. They
have no idea where [their culture came from].

        —Alan Kay, in interview with Dr Dobb’s
                                    Journal (2012)
Brief Table of Contents (Not Yet Final)
Chapter 1: Tradeoffs in Data Systems Architecture (available)

Chapter 2: Defining NonFunctional Requirements (available)

Chapter 3: Data Models and Query Languages (available)

Chapter 4: Storage and Retrieval (unavailable)

Chapter 5: Encoding and Evolution (unavailable)

Chapter 6: Replication (unavailable)

Chapter 7: Partitioning (unavailable)

Chapter 8: Transactions (unavailable)

Chapter 9: The Trouble with Distributed Systems (unavailable)

Chapter 10: Consistency and Consensus (unavailable)

Chapter 11: Batch Processing (unavailable)

Chapter 12: Stream Processing (unavailable)

Chapter 13: Doing the Right Thing (unavailable)
...
Chapter 1. Trade-offs in Data Systems
Architecture
 There are no solutions, there are only trade-offs. […] But you
 try to get the best trade-off you can get, and that’s all you
 can hope for.

  —Thomas Sowell, Interview with Fred Barnes
                                              (2005)
A NOTE FOR EARLY RELEASE READERS

With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form
—the author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you
can take advantage of these technologies long before the official
release of these titles.

This will be the 1st chapter of the final book. The GitHub repo
for this book is https://github.com/ept/ddia2-feedback.

If you have comments about how we might improve the content
and/or examples in this book, or if you notice missing material
within this chapter, please reach out on GitHub.




Data is central to much application development today. With
web and mobile apps, software as a service (SaaS), and cloud
services, it has become normal to store data from many
different users in a shared server-based data infrastructure.
Data from user activity, business transactions, devices and
sensors needs to be stored and made available for analysis. As
users interact with an application, they both read the data that
is stored, and also generate more data.
Small amounts of data, which can be stored and processed on a
single machine, are often fairly easy to deal with. However, as
the data volume or the rate of queries grows, it needs to be
distributed across multiple machines, which introduces many
challenges. As the needs of the application become more
complex, it is no longer sufficient to store everything in one
system, but it might be necessary to combine multiple storage
or processing systems that provide different capabilities.

We call an application data-intensive if data management is one
of the primary challenges in developing the application [1].
While in compute-intensive systems the challenge is
parallelizing some very large computation, in data-intensive
applications we usually worry more about things like storing
and processing large data volumes, managing changes to data,
ensuring consistency in the face of failures and concurrency,
and making sure services are highly available.

Such applications are typically built from standard building
blocks that provide commonly needed functionality. For
example, many applications need to:

  Store data so that they, or another application, can find it
  again later (databases)
  Remember the result of an expensive operation, to speed up
  reads (caches)
  Allow users to search data by keyword or filter it in various
  ways (search indexes)
  Handle events and data changes as soon as they occur
  (stream processing)
  Periodically crunch a large amount of accumulated data
  (batch processing)

In building an application we typically take several software
systems or services, such as databases or APIs, and glue them
together with some application code. If you are doing exactly
what the data systems were designed for, then this process can
be quite easy.

However, as your application becomes more ambitious,
challenges arise. There are many database systems with
different characteristics, suitable for different purposes—how
do you choose which one to use? There are various approaches
to caching, several ways of building search indexes, and so on—
how do you reason about their trade-offs? You need to figure
out which tools and which approaches are the most appropriate
for the task at hand, and it can be difficult to combine tools
when you need to do something that a single tool cannot do
alone.
This book is a guide to help you make decisions about which
technologies to use and how to combine them. As you will see,
there is no one approach that is fundamentally better than
others; everything has pros and cons. With this book, you will
learn to ask the right questions to evaluate and compare data
systems, so that you can figure out which approach will best
serve the needs of your particular application.

We will start our journey by looking at some of the ways that
data is typically used in organizations today. Many of the ideas
here have their origin in enterprise software (i.e., the software
needs and engineering practices of large organizations, such as
big corporations and governments), since historically, only
large organizations had the large data volumes that required
sophisticated technical solutions. If your data volume is small
enough, you can simply keep it in a spreadsheet! However,
more recently it has also become common for smaller
companies and startups to manage large data volumes and
build data-intensive systems.

One of the key challenges with data systems is that different
people need to do very different things with data. If you are
working at a company, you and your team will have one set of
priorities, while another team may have entirely different
goals, although you might even be working with the same
dataset! Moreover, those goals might not be explicitly
articulated, which can lead to misunderstandings and
disagreement about the right approach.

To help you understand what choices you can make, this
chapter compares several contrasting concepts, and explores
their trade-offs:

  the difference between transaction processing and analytics
  (“Transaction Processing versus Analytics”);
  pros and cons of cloud services and self-hosted systems
  (“Cloud versus Self-Hosting”);
  when to move from single-node systems to distributed
  systems (“Distributed versus Single-Node Systems”); and
  balancing the needs of the business and the rights of the user
  (“Data Systems, Law, and Society”).

Moreover, this chapter will provide you with terminology that
we will need for the rest of the book.
TERMINOLOGY: FRONTENDS AND BACKENDS

Much of what we will discuss in this book relates to backend
development. To explain that term: for web applications, the
client-side code (which runs in a web browser) is called the
frontend, and the server-side code that handles user requests is
known as the backend. Mobile apps are similar to frontends in
that they provide user interfaces, which often communicate
over the Internet with a server-side backend. Frontends
sometimes manage data locally on the user’s device [2], but the
greatest data infrastructure challenges often lie in the backend:
a frontend only needs to handle one user’s data, whereas the
backend manages data on behalf of all of the users.

A backend service is often reachable via HTTP; it usually
consists of some application code that reads and writes data in
one or more databases, and sometimes interfaces with
additional data systems such as caches or message queues
(which we might collectively call data infrastructure). The
application code is often stateless (i.e., when it finishes handling
one HTTP request, it forgets everything about that request), and
any information that needs to persist from one request to
another needs to be stored either on the client, or in the server-
side data infrastructure.
Transaction Processing versus
Analytics
If you are working on data systems in an enterprise, you are
likely to encounter several different types of people who work
with data. The first type are backend engineers who build
services that handle requests for reading and updating data;
these services often serve external users, either directly or
indirectly via other services (see “Microservices and
Serverless”). Sometimes services are for internal use by other
parts of the organization.

In addition to the teams managing backend services, two other
groups of people typically require access to an organization’s
data: business analysts, who generate reports about the
activities of the organization in order to help the management
make better decisions (business intelligence or BI), and data
scientists, who look for novel insights in data or who create
user-facing product features that are enabled by data analysis
and machine learning/AI (for example, “people who bought X
also bought Y” recommendations on an e-commerce website,
predictive analytics such as risk scoring or spam filtering, and
ranking of search results).
Although business analysts and data scientists tend to use
different tools and operate in different ways, they have some
things in common: both perform analytics, which means they
look at the data that the users and backend services have
generated, but they generally do not modify this data (except
perhaps for fixing mistakes). They might create derived
datasets in which the original data has been processed in some
way. This has led to a split between two types of systems—a
distinction that we will use throughout this book:

  Operational systems consist of the backend services and data
  infrastructure where data is created, for example by serving
  external users. Here, the application code both reads and
  modifies the data in its databases, based on the actions
  performed by the users.
  Analytical systems serve the needs of business analysts and
  data scientists. They contain a read-only copy of the data
  from the operational systems, and they are optimized for the
  types of data processing that are needed for analytics.

As we shall see in the next section, operational and analytical
systems are often kept separate, for good reasons. As these
systems have matured, two new specialized roles have
emerged: data engineers and analytics engineers. Data engineers
are the people who know how to integrate the operational and
the analytical systems, and who take responsibility for the
organization’s data infrastructure more widely [3]. Analytics
engineers model and transform data to make it more useful for
end users querying data in an organization [4].

Many engineers specialize on either the operational or the
analytical side. However, this book covers both operational and
analytical data systems, since both play an important role in the
lifecycle of data within an organization. We will explore in-
depth the data infrastructure that is used to deliver services
both to internal and external users, so that you can work better
with your colleagues on the other side of this divide.


Characterizing Analytical and Operational
Systems

In the early days of business data processing, a write to the
database typically corresponded to a commercial transaction
taking place: making a sale, placing an order with a supplier,
paying an employee’s salary, etc. As databases expanded into
areas that didn’t involve money changing hands, the term
transaction nevertheless stuck, referring to a group of reads
and writes that form a logical unit.
NOTE

[Link to Come] explores in detail what we mean with a transaction. This chapter uses
the term loosely to refer to low-latency reads and writes.




Even though databases started being used for many different
kinds of data—posts on social media, moves in a game, contacts
in an address book, and many others—the basic access pattern
remained similar to processing business transactions. An
operational system typically looks up a small number of records
by some key (this is called a point query). Records are inserted,
updated, or deleted based on the user’s input. Because these
applications are interactive, this access pattern became known
as online transaction processing (OLTP).

However, databases also started being increasingly used for
analytics, which has very different access patterns compared to
OLTP. Usually an analytic query scans over a huge number of
records, and calculates aggregate statistics (such as count, sum,
or average) rather than returning the individual records to the
user. For example, a business analyst at a supermarket chain
may want to answer analytic queries such as:

   What was the total revenue of each of our stores in January?
  How many more bananas than usual did we sell during our
  latest promotion?
  Which brand of baby food is most often purchased together
  with brand X diapers?

The reports that result from these types of queries are
important for business intelligence, helping the management
decide what to do next. In order to differentiate this pattern of
using databases from transaction processing, it has been called
online analytic processing (OLAP) [5]. The difference between
OLTP and analytics is not always clear-cut, but some typical
characteristics are listed in Table 1-1.
Table 1-1. Comparing characteristics of operational and analytic systems

                        Operational systems             Analytical systems
 Property
                        (OLTP)                          (OLAP)

 Main read              Point queries (fetch            Aggregate over large
 pattern                individual records by           number of records
                        key)

 Main write             Create, update, and             Bulk import (ETL) or
 pattern                delete individual               event stream
                        records

 Human user             End user of                     Internal analyst, for
 example                web/mobile                      decision support
                        application

 Machine use            Checking if an action           Detecting
 example                is authorized                   fraud/abuse
                                                        patterns

 Type of                Fixed set of queries,           Analyst can make
 queries                predefined by                   arbitrary queries
                        application

 Data                   Latest state of data            History of events
 represents             (current point in               that happened over
                         Operational systems             Analytical systems
 Property
                         (OLTP)                          (OLAP)

                         time)                           time

 Dataset size            Gigabytes to                    Terabytes to
                         terabytes                       petabytes



NOTE

The meaning of online in OLAP is unclear; it probably refers to the fact that queries
are not just for predefined reports, but that analysts use the OLAP system
interactively for explorative queries.




With operational systems, users are generally not allowed to
construct custom SQL queries and run them on the database,
since that would potentially allow them to read or modify data
that they do not have permission to access. Moreover, they
might write queries that are expensive to execute, and hence
affect the database performance for other users. For these
reasons, OLTP systems mostly run a fixed set of queries that are
baked into the application code, and use one-off custom queries
only occasionally for maintenance or troubleshooting. On the
other hand, analytic databases usually give their users the
freedom to write arbitrary SQL queries by hand, or to generate
queries automatically using a data visualization or dashboard
tool such as Tableau, Looker, or Microsoft Power BI.


Data Warehousing

At first, the same databases were used for both transaction
processing and analytic queries. SQL turned out to be quite
flexible in this regard: it works well for both types of queries.
Nevertheless, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, there was a
trend for companies to stop using their OLTP systems for
analytics purposes, and to run the analytics on a separate
database system instead. This separate database was called a
data warehouse.

A large enterprise may have dozens, even hundreds, of
operational transaction processing systems: systems powering
the customer-facing website, controlling point of sale (checkout)
systems in physical stores, tracking inventory in warehouses,
planning routes for vehicles, managing suppliers, administering
employees, and performing many other tasks. Each of these
systems is complex and needs a team of people to maintain it,
so these systems end up operating mostly independently from
each other.
It is usually undesirable for business analysts and data
scientists to directly query these OLTP systems, for several
reasons:

  the data of interest may be spread across multiple
  operational systems, making it difficult to combine those
  datasets in a single query (a problem known as data silos);
  the kinds of schemas and data layouts that are good for OLTP
  are less well suited for analytics (see “Stars and Snowflakes:
  Schemas for Analytics”);
  analytic queries can be quite expensive, and running them
  on an OLTP database would impact the performance for
  other users; and
  the OLTP systems might reside in a separate network that
  users are not allowed direct access to for security or
  compliance reasons.

A data warehouse, by contrast, is a separate database that
analysts can query to their hearts’ content, without affecting
OLTP operations [6]. As we shall see in [Link to Come], data
warehouses often store data in a way that is very different from
OLTP databases, in order to optimize for the types of queries
that are common in analytics.
The data warehouse contains a read-only copy of the data in all
the various OLTP systems in the company. Data is extracted
from OLTP databases (using either a periodic data dump or a
continuous stream of updates), transformed into an analysis-
friendly schema, cleaned up, and then loaded into the data
warehouse. This process of getting data into the data
warehouse is known as Extract–Transform–Load (ETL) and is
illustrated in Figure 1-1. Sometimes the order of the transform
and load steps is swapped (i.e., the transformation is done in the
data warehouse, after loading), resulting in ELT.




          Figure 1-1. Simplified outline of ETL into a data warehouse.
In some cases the data sources of the ETL processes are
external SaaS products such as customer relationship
management (CRM), email marketing, or credit card processing
systems. In those cases, you do not have direct access to the
original database, since it is accessible only via the software
vendor’s API. Bringing the data from these external systems
into your own data warehouse can enable analyses that are not
possible via the SaaS API. ETL for SaaS APIs is often
implemented by specialist data connector services such as
Fivetran, Singer, or AirByte.

Some database systems offer hybrid transactional/analytic
processing (HTAP), which aims to enable OLTP and analytics in
a single system without requiring ETL from one system into
another [7, 8]. However, many HTAP systems internally consist
of an OLTP system coupled with a separate analytical system,
hidden behind a common interface—so the distinction beween
the two remains important for understanding how these
systems work.

Moreover, even though HTAP exists, it is common to have a
separation between transactional and analytic systems due to
their different goals and requirements. In particular, it is
considered good practice for each operational system to have its
own database (see “Microservices and Serverless”), leading to
hundreds of separate operational databases; on the other hand,
an enterprise usually has a single data warehouse, so that
business analysts can combine data from several operational
systems in a single query.

The separation between operational and analytical systems is
part of a wider trend: as workloads have become more
demanding, systems have become more specialized and
optimized for particular workloads. General-purpose systems
can handle small data volumes comfortably, but the greater the
scale, the more specialized systems tend to become [9].

From data warehouse to data lake

A data warehouse often uses a relational data model that is
queried through SQL (see Chapter 3), perhaps using specialized
business intelligence software. This model works well for the
types of queries that business analysts need to make, but it is
less well suited to the needs of data scientists, who might need
to perform tasks such as:

  Transform data into a form that is suitable for training a
  machine learning model; often this requires turning the rows
  and columns of a database table into a vector or matrix of
  numerical values called features. The process of performing
  this transformation in a way that maximizes the
  performance of the trained model is called feature
  engineering, and it often requires custom code that is difficult
  to express using SQL.
  Take textual data (e.g., reviews of a product) and use natural
  language processing techniques to try to extract structured
  information from it (e.g., the sentiment of the author, or
  which topics they mention). Similarly, they might need to
  extract structured information from photos using computer
  vision techniques.

Although there have been efforts to add machine learning
operators to a SQL data model [10] and to build efficient
machine learning systems on top of a relational foundation
[11], many data scientists prefer not to work in a relational
database such as a data warehouse. Instead, many prefer to use
Python data analysis libraries such as pandas and scikit-learn,
statistical analysis languages such as R, and distributed
analytics frameworks such as Spark [12]. We discuss these
further in “Dataframes, Matrices, and Arrays”.

Consequently, organizations face a need to make data available
in a form that is suitable for use by data scientists. The answer
is a data lake: a centralized data repository that holds a copy of
any data that might be useful for analysis, obtained from
operational systems via ETL processes. The difference from a
data warehouse is that a data lake simply contains files, without
imposing any particular file format or data model. Files in a
data lake might be collections of database records, encoded
using a file format such as Avro or Parquet (see [Link to Come]),
but they can equally well contain text, images, videos, sensor
readings, sparse matrices, feature vectors, genome sequences,
or any other kind of data [13].

ETL processes have been generalized to data pipelines, and in
some cases the data lake has become an intermediate stop on
the path from the operational systems to the data warehouse.
The data lake contains data in a “raw” form produced by the
operational systems, without the transformation into a
relational data warehouse schema. This approach has the
advantage that each consumer of the data can transform the
raw data into a form that best suits their needs. It has been
dubbed the sushi principle: “raw data is better” [14].

Besides loading data from a data lake into a separate data
warehouse, it is also possible to run typical data warehousing
workloads (SQL queries and business analytics) directly on the
files in the data lake, alongside data science/machine learning
workloads. This architecture is known as a data lakehouse, and
it requires a query execution engine and a metadata (e.g.,
schema management) layer that extend the data lake’s file
storage [15]. Apache Hive, Spark SQL, Presto, and Trino are
examples of this approach.


Beyond the data lake

As analytics practices have matured, organizations have been
increasingly paying attention to the management and
operations of analytics systems and data pipelines, as captured
for example in the DataOps manifesto [16]. Part of this are
issues of governance, privacy, and compliance with regulation
such as GDPR and CCPA, which we discuss in “Data Systems,
Law, and Society” and [Link to Come].

Moreover, analytical data is increasingly made available not
only as files and relational tables, but also as streams of events
(see [Link to Come]). With file-based data analysis you can re-
run the analysis periodically (e.g., daily) in order to respond to
changes in the data, but stream processing allows analytics
systems to respond to events much faster, on the order of
seconds. Depending on the application and how time-sensitive
it is, a stream processing approach can be valuable, for example
to identify and block potentially fraudulent or abusive activity.
In some cases the outputs of analytics systems are made
available to operational systems (a process sometimes known
as reverse ETL [17]). For example, a machine-learning model
that was trained on data in an analytics system may be
deployed to production, so that it can generate
recommendations for end-users, such as “people who bought X
also bought Y”. Such deployed outputs of analytics systems are
also known as data products [18]. Machine learning models can
be deployed to operational systems using specialized tools such
as TFX, Kubeflow, or MLflow.


Systems of Record and Derived Data

Related to the distinction between operational and analytical
systems, this book also distinguishes between systems of record
and derived data systems. These terms are useful because they
can help you clarify the flow of data through a system:

  Systems of record

     A system of record, also known as source of truth, holds
     the authoritative or canonical version of some data. When
     new data comes in, e.g., as user input, it is first written
     here. Each fact is represented exactly once (the
     representation is typically normalized; see
     “Normalization, Denormalization, and Joins”). If there is
     any discrepancy between another system and the system
     of record, then the value in the system of record is (by
     definition) the correct one.
  Derived data systems

     Data in a derived system is the result of taking some
     existing data from another system and transforming or
     processing it in some way. If you lose derived data, you
     can recreate it from the original source. A classic example
     is a cache: data can be served from the cache if present,
     but if the cache doesn’t contain what you need, you can
     fall back to the underlying database. Denormalized
     values, indexes, materialized views, transformed data
     representations, and models trained on a dataset also fall
     into this category.

Technically speaking, derived data is redundant, in the sense
that it duplicates existing information. However, it is often
essential for getting good performance on read queries. You can
derive several different datasets from a single source, enabling
you to look at the data from different “points of view.”

Analytical systems are usually derived data systems, because
they are consumers of data created elsewhere. Operational
services may contain a mixture of systems of record and
derived data systems. The systems of record are the primary
databases to which data is first written, whereas the derived
data systems are the indexes and caches that speed up common
read operations, especially for queries that the system of record
cannot answer efficiently.

Most databases, storage engines, and query languages are not
inherently a system of record or a derived system. A database is
just a tool: how you use it is up to you. The distinction between
system of record and derived data system depends not on the
tool, but on how you use it in your application. By being clear
about which data is derived from which other data, you can
bring clarity to an otherwise confusing system architecture.

When the data in one system is derived from the data in
another, you need a process for updating the derived data when
the original in the system of record changes. Unfortunately,
many databases are designed based on the assumption that
your application only ever needs to use that one database, and
they do not make it easy to integrate multiple systems in order
to propagate such updates. In [Link to Come] we will discuss
approaches to data integration, which allow us to compose
multiple data systems to achieve things that one system alone
cannot do.
That brings us to the end of our comparison of analytics and
transaction processing. In the next section, we will examine
another trade-off that you might have already seen debated
multiple times.



Cloud versus Self-Hosting
With anything that an organization needs to do, one of the first
questions is: should it be done in-house, or should it be
outsourced? Should you build or should you buy?

Ultimately, this is a question about business priorities. The
received management wisdom is that things that are a core
competency or a competitive advantage of your organization
should be done in-house, whereas things that are non-core,
routine, or commonplace should be left to a vendor [19]. To give
an extreme example, most companies do not generate their
own electricity (unless they are an energy company, and
leaving aside emergency backup power), since it is cheaper to
buy electricity from the grid.

With software, two important decisions to be made are who
builds the software and who deploys it. There is a spectrum of
possibilities that outsource each decision to various degrees, as
illustrated in Figure 1-2. At one extreme is bespoke software
that you write and run in-house; at the other extreme are
widely-used cloud services or Software as a Service (SaaS)
products that are implemented and operated by an external
vendor, and which you only access through a web interface or
API.




         Figure 1-2. A spectrum of types of software and its operations.



The middle ground is off-the-shelf software (open source or
commercial) that you self-host, i.e., deploy yourself—for
example, if you download MySQL and install it on a server you
control. This could be on your own hardware (often called on-
premises, even if the server is actually in a rented datacenter
rack and not literally on your own premises), or on a virtual
machine in the cloud (Infrastructure as a Service or IaaS). There
are still more points along this spectrum, e.g., taking open
source software and running a modified version of it.

Seperately from this spectrum there is also the question of how
you deploy services, either in the cloud or on-premises—for
example, whether you use an orchestration framework such as
Kubernetes. However, choice of deployment tooling is out of
scope of this book, since other factors have a greater influence
on the architecture of data systems.


Pros and Cons of Cloud Services

Using a cloud service, rather than running comparable software
yourself, essentially outsources the operation of that software
to the cloud provider. There are good arguments for and against
cloud services. Cloud providers claim that using their services
saves you time and money, and allows you to move faster
compared to setting up your own infrastructure.

Whether a cloud service is actually cheaper and easier than
self-hosting depends very much on your skills and the workload
on your systems. If you already have experience setting up and
operating the systems you need, and if your load is quite
predictable (i.e., the number of machines you need does not
fluctuate wildly), then it’s often cheaper to buy your own
machines and run the software on them yourself [20, 21].

On the other hand, if you need a system that you don’t already
know how to deploy and operate, then adopting a cloud service
is often easier and quicker than learning to manage the system
yourself. If you have to hire and train staff specifically to
maintain and operate the system, that can get very expensive.
You still need an operations team when you’re using the cloud
(see “Operations in the Cloud Era”), but outsourcing the basic
system administration can free up your team to focus on
higher-level concerns.

When you outsource the operation of a system to a company
that specializes in running that service, that can potentially
result in a better service, since the provider gains operational
expertise from providing the service to many customers. On the
other hand, if you run the service yourself, you can configure
and tune it to perform well on your particular workload; it is
unlikely that a cloud service would be willing to make such
customizations on your behalf.

Cloud services are particularly valuable if the load on your
systems varies a lot over time. If you provision your machines
to be able to handle peak load, but those computing resources
are idle most of the time, the system becomes less cost-effective.
In this situation, cloud services have the advantage that they
can make it easier to scale your computing resources up or
down in response to changes in demand.
For example, analytics systems often have extremely variable
load: running a large analytical query quickly requires a lot of
computing resources in parallel, but once the query completes,
those resources sit idle until the user makes the next query.
Predefined queries (e.g., for daily reports) can be enqueued and
scheduled to smooth out the load, but for interactive queries,
the faster you want them to complete, the more variable the
workload becomes. If your dataset is so large that querying it
quickly requires significant computing resources, using the
cloud can save money, since you can return unused resources
to the provider rather than leaving them idle. For smaller
datasets, this difference is less significant.

The biggest downside of a cloud service is that you have no
control over it:

  If it is lacking a feature you need, all you can do is to politely
  ask the vendor whether they will add it; you generally cannot
  implement it yourself.
  If the service goes down, all you can do is to wait for it to
  recover.
  If you are using the service in a way that triggers a bug or
  causes performance problems, it will be difficult for you to
  diagnose the issue. With software that you run yourself, you
  can get performance metrics and debugging information
  from the operating system to help you understand its
  behavior, and you can look at the server logs, but with a
  service hosted by a vendor you usually do not have access to
  these internals.
  Moreover, if the service shuts down or becomes unacceptably
  expensive, or if the vendor decides to change their product in
  a way you don’t like, you are at their mercy—continuing to
  run an old version of the software is usually not an option, so
  you will be forced to migrate to an alternative service [22].
  This risk is mitigated if there are alternative services that
  expose a compatible API, but for many cloud services there
  are no standard APIs, which raises the cost of switching,
  making vendor lock-in a problem.

Despite all these risks, it has become more and more popular
for organizations to build new applications on top of cloud
services. However, cloud services will not subsume all in-house
data systems: many older systems predate the cloud, and for
any services that have specialist requirements that existing
cloud services cannot meet, in-house systems remain necessary.
For example, very latency-sensitive applications such as high-
frequency trading require full control of the hardware.
Cloud-Native System Architecture

Besides having a different economic model (subscribing to a
service instead of buying hardware and licensing software to
run on it), the rise of the cloud has also had a profound effect
on how data systems are implemented on a technical level. The
term cloud-native is used to describe an architecture that is
designed to take advantage of cloud services.

In principle, almost any software that you can self-host could
also be provided as a cloud service, and indeed such managed
services are now available for many popular data systems.
However, systems that have been designed from the ground up
to be cloud-native have been shown to have several advantages:
better performance on the same hardware, faster recovery
from failures, being able to quickly scale computing resources
to match the load, and supporting larger datasets [23, 24, 25].
Table 1-2 lists some examples of both types of systems.
Table 1-2. Examples of self-hosted and cloud-native database systems


                           Self-hosted
 Category                                          Cloud-native systems
                           systems

 Operational/OLTP          MySQL,                  AWS Aurora [23], Azure
                           PostgreSQL,             SQL DB Hyperscale
                           MongoDB                 [24], Google Cloud
                                                   Spanner

 Analytical/OLAP           Teradata,               Snowflake [25], Google
                           ClickHouse,             BigQuery, Azure
                           Spark                   Synapse Analytics


Layering of cloud services

Many self-hosted data systems have very simple system
requirements: they run on a conventional operating system
such as Linux or Windows, they store their data as files on the
filesystem, and they communicate via standard network
protocols such as TCP/IP. A few systems depend on special
hardware such as GPUs (for machine learning) or RDMA
network interfaces, but on the whole, self-hosted software tends
to use very generic computing resources: CPU, RAM, a
filesystem, and an IP network.
In a cloud, this type of software can be run on an
Infrastructure-as-a-Service environment, using one or more
virtual machines (or instances) with a certain allocation of
CPUs, memory, disk, and network bandwidth. Compared to
physical machines, cloud instances can be provisioned faster
and they come in a greater variety of sizes, but otherwise they
are similar to a traditional computer: you can run any software
you like on it, but you are responsible for administering it
yourself.

In contrast, the key idea of cloud-native services is to use not
only the computing resources managed by your operating
system, but also to build upon lower-level cloud services to
create higher-level services. For example:

  Object storage services such as Amazon S3, Azure Blob
  Storage, and Cloudflare R2 store large files. They provide
  more limited APIs than a typical filesystem (basic file reads
  and writes), but they have the advantage that they hide the
  underlying physical machines: the service automatically
  distributes the data across many machines, so that you don’t
  have to worry about running out of disk space on any one
  machine. Even if some machines or their disks fail entirely,
  no data is lost.
  Many other services are in turn built upon object storage and
  other cloud services: for example, Snowflake is a cloud-based
  analytic database (data warehouse) that relies on S3 for data
  storage [25], and some other services in turn build upon
  Snowflake.

As always with abstractions in computing, there is no one right
answer to what you should use. As a general rule, higher-level
abstractions tend to be more oriented towards particular use
cases. If your needs match the situations for which a higher-
level system is designed, using the existing higher-level system
will probably provide what you need with much less hassle
than building it yourself from lower-level systems. On the other
hand, if there is no high-level system that meets your needs,
then building it yourself from lower-level components is the
only option.


Separation of storage and compute

In traditional computing, disk storage is regarded as durable
(we assume that once something is written to disk, it will not be
lost); to tolerate the failure of an individual hard disk, RAID is
often used to maintain copies of the data on several disks. In the
cloud, compute instances (virtual machines) may also have
local disks attached, but cloud-native systems typically treat
these disks more like an ephemeral cache, and less like long-
term storage. This is because the local disk becomes
inaccessible if the associated instance fails, or if the instance is
replaced with a bigger or a smaller one (on a different physical
machine) in order to adapt to changes in load.

As an alternative to local disks, cloud services also offer virtual
disk storage that can be detached from one instance and
attached to a different one (Amazon EBS, Azure managed disks,
and persistent disks in Google Cloud). Such a virtual disk is not
actually a physical disk, but rather a cloud service provided by
a separate set of machines, which emulates the behavior of a
disk (a block device, where each block is typically 4 KiB in size).
This technology makes it possible to run traditional disk-based
software in the cloud, but it often suffers from poor
performance and poor scalability [23].

To address this problem, cloud-native services generally avoid
using virtual disks, and instead build on dedicated storage
services that are optimized for particular workloads. Object
storage services such as S3 are designed for long-term storage
of fairly large files, ranging from hundreds of kilobytes to
several gigabytes in size. The individual rows or values stored
in a database are typically much smaller than this; cloud
databases therefore typically manage smaller values in a
separate service, and store larger data blocks (containing many
individual values) in an object store [24].

In a traditional systems architecture, the same computer is
responsible for both storage (disk) and computation (CPU and
RAM), but in cloud-native systems, these two responsibilities
have become somewhat separated or disaggregated [8, 25, 26,
27]: for example, S3 only stores files, and if you want to analyze
that data, you will have to run the analysis code somewhere
outside of S3. This implies transferring the data over the
network, which we will discuss further in “Distributed versus
Single-Node Systems”.

Moreover, cloud-native systems are often multitenant, which
means that rather than having a separate machine for each
customer, data and computation from several different
customers are handled on the same shared hardware by the
same service [28]. Multitenancy can enable better hardware
utilization, easier scalability, and easier management by the
cloud provider, but it also requires careful engineering to
ensure that one customer’s activity does not affect the
performance or security of the system for other customers [29].
Operations in the Cloud Era

Traditionally, the people managing an organization’s server-
side data infrastructure were known as database administrators
(DBAs) or system administrators (sysadmins). More recently,
many organizations have tried to integrate the roles of software
development and operations into teams with a shared
responsibility for both backend services and data
infrastructure; the DevOps philosophy has guided this trend.
Site Reliability Engineers (SREs) are Google’s implementation of
this idea [30].

The role of operations is to ensure services are reliably
delivered to users (including configuring infrastructure and
deploying applications), and to ensure a stable production
environment (including monitoring and diagnosing any
problems that may affect reliability). For self-hosted systems,
operations traditionally involves a significant amount of work
at the level of individual machines, such as capacity planning
(e.g., monitoring available disk space and adding more disks
before you run out of space), provisioning new machines,
moving services from one machine to another, and installing
operating system patches.
Many cloud services present an API that hides the individual
machines that actually implement the service. For example,
cloud storage replaces fixed-size disks with metered billing,
where you can store data without planning your capacity needs
in advance, and you are then charged based on the space
actually used. Moreover, many cloud services remain highly
available, even when individual machines have failed (see
“Reliability and Fault Tolerance”).

This shift in emphasis from individual machines to services has
been accompanied by a change in the role of operations. The
high-level goal of providing a reliable service remains the same,
but the processes and tools have evolved. The DevOps/SRE
philosophy places greater emphasis on:

  automation—preferring repeatable processes over manual
  one-off jobs,
  preferring ephemeral virtual machines and services over
  long running servers,
  enabling frequent application updates,
  learning from incidents, and
  preserving the organization’s knowledge about the system,
  even as individual people come and go [31].
With the rise of cloud services, there has been a bifurcation of
roles: operations teams at infrastructure companies specialize
in the details of providing a reliable service to a large number
of customers, while the customers of the service spend as little
time and effort as possible on infrastructure [32].

Customers of cloud services still require operations, but they
focus on different aspects, such as choosing the most
appropriate service for a given task, integrating different
services with each other, and migrating from one service to
another. Even though metered billing removes the need for
capacity planning in the traditional sense, it’s still important to
know what resources you are using for which purpose, so that
you don’t waste money on cloud resources that are not needed:
capacity planning becomes financial planning, and
performance optimization becomes cost optimization [33].
Moreover, cloud services do have resource limits or quotas
(such as the maximum number of processes you can run
concurrently), which you need to know about and plan for
before you run into them [34].

Adopting a cloud service can be easier and quicker than
running your own infrastructure, although even here there is a
cost in learning how to use it, and perhaps working around its
limitations. Integration between different services becomes a
particular challenge as a growing number of vendors offers an
ever broader range of cloud services targeting different use
cases [35, 36]. ETL (see “Data Warehousing”) is only part of the
story; operational cloud services also need to be integrated with
each other. At present, there is a lack of standards that would
facilitate this sort of integration, so it often involves significant
manual effort.

Other operational aspects that cannot fully be outsourced to
cloud services include maintaining the security of an
application and the libraries it uses, managing the interactions
between your own services, monitoring the load on your
services, and tracking down the cause of problems such as
performance degradations or outages. While the cloud is
changing the role of operations, the need for operations is as
great as ever.



Distributed versus Single-Node
Systems
A system that involves several machines communicating via a
network is called a distributed system. Each of the processes
participating in a distributed system is called a node. There are
various reasons why you might want a system to be distributed:
Inherently distributed systems

   If an application involves two or more interacting users,
   each using their own device, then the system is
   unavoidably distributed: the communication between the
   devices will have to go via a network.

Requests between cloud services

   If data is stored in one service but processed in another, it
   must be transferred over the network from one service to
   the other.

Fault tolerance/high availability

   If your application needs to continue working even if one
   machine (or several machines, or the network, or an
   entire datacenter) goes down, you can use multiple
   machines to give you redundancy. When one fails,
   another one can take over. See “Reliability and Fault
   Tolerance”.

Scalability

   If your data volume or computing requirements grow
   bigger than a single machine can handle, you can
   potentially spread the load across multiple machines. See
   “Scalability”.
Latency

   If you have users around the world, you might want to
   have servers at various locations worldwide so that each
   user can be served from a datacenter that is
   geographically close to them. That avoids the users having
   to wait for network packets to travel halfway around the
   world to answer their requests. See “Describing
   Performance”.

Elasticity

   If your application is busy at some times and idle at other
   times, a cloud deployment can scale up or down to meet
   the demand, so that you pay only for resources you are
   actively using. This more difficult on a single machine,
   which needs to be provisioned to handle the maximum
   load, even at times when it is barely used.

Using specialized hardware

   Different parts of the system can take advantage of
   different types of hardware to match their workload. For
   example, an object store may use machines with many
   disks but few CPUs, whereas a data analysis system may
   use machines with lots of CPU and memory but no disks,
   and a machine learning system may use machines with
     GPUs (which are much more efficient than CPUs for
     training deep neural networks and other machine
     learning tasks).
  Legal compliance

     Some countries have data residency laws that require
     data about people in their jurisdiction to be stored and
     processed geographically within that country [37]. The
     scope of these rules varies—for example, in some cases it
     applies only to medical or financial data, while other
     cases are broader. A service with users in several such
     jurisdictions will therefore have to distribute their data
     across servers in several locations.

These reasons apply both to services that you write yourself
(application code) and services consisting of off-the-shelf
software (such as databases).


Problems with Distributed Systems

Distributed systems also have downsides. Every request and
API call that goes via the network needs to deal with the
possibility of failure: the network may be interrupted, or the
service may be overloaded or crashed, and therefore any
request may time out without receiving a response. In this case,
we don’t know whether the service received the request, and
simply retrying it might not be safe. We will discuss these
problems in detail in [Link to Come].

Although datacenter networks are fast, making a call to another
service is still vastly slower than calling a function in the same
process [38]. When operating on large volumes of data, rather
than transferring the data from storage to a separate machine
that processes it, it can be faster to bring the computation to the
machine that already has the data [39]. More nodes are not
always faster: in some cases, a simple single-threaded program
on one computer can perform significantly better than a cluster
with over 100 CPU cores [40].

Troubleshooting a distributed system is often difficult: if the
system is slow to respond, how do you figure out where the
problem lies? Techniques for diagnosing problems in
distributed systems are developed under the heading of
observability [41, 42], which involves collecting data about the
execution of a system, and allowing it to be queried in ways
that allows both high-level metrics and individual events to be
analyzed. Tracing tools such as OpenTelemetry allow you to
track which client called which server for which operation, and
how long each call took [43].
Databases provide various mechanisms for ensuring data
consistency, as we shall see in [Link to Come] and [Link to
Come]. However, when each service has its own database,
maintaining consistency of data across those different services
becomes the application’s problem. Distributed transactions,
which we explore in [Link to Come], are a possible technique
for ensuring consistency, but they are rarely used in a
microservices context because they run counter to the goal of
making services independent from each other [44].

For all these reasons, if you can do something on a single
machine, this is often much simpler and easier compared to
setting up a distributed system [21]. CPUs, memory, and disks
have grown larger, faster, and more reliable. When combined
with single-node databases such as DuckDB, SQLite, and
KùzuDB, many workloads can now run on a single node. We
will explore more on this topic in [Link to Come].


Microservices and Serverless

The most common way of distributing a system across multiple
machines is to divide them into clients and servers, and let the
clients make requests to the servers. Most commonly HTTP is
used for this communication, as we will discuss in [Link to
Come]. The same process may be both a server (handling
incoming requests) and a client (making outbound requests to
other services).

This way of building applications has traditionally been called a
service-oriented architecture (SOA); more recently the idea has
been refined into a microservices architecture [45, 46]. In this
architecture, a service has one well-defined purpose (for
example, in the case of S3, this would be file storage); each
service exposes an API that can be called by clients via the
network, and each service has one team that is responsible for
its maintenance. A complex application can thus be
decomposed into multiple interacting services, each managed
by a separate team.

There are several advantages to breaking down a complex piece
of software into multiple services: each service can be updated
independently, reducing coordination effort among teams; each
service can be assigned the hardware resources it needs; and by
hiding the implementation details behind an API, the service
owners are free to change the implementation without affecting
clients. In terms of data storage, it is common for each service
to have its own databases, and not to share databases between
services: sharing a database would effectively make the entire
database structure a part of the service’s API, and then that
structure would be difficult to change. Shared databases could
also cause one service’s queries to negatively impact the
performance of other services.

On the other hand, having many services can itself breed
complexity: each service requires infrastructure for deploying
new releases, adjusting the allocated hardware resources to
match the load, collecting logs, monitoring service health, and
alerting an on-call engineer in the case of a problem.
Orchestration frameworks such as Kubernetes have become a
popular way of deploying services, since they provide a
foundation for this infrastructure. Testing a service during
development can be complicated, since you also need to run all
the other services that it depends on.

Microservice APIs can be challenging to evolve. Clients that call
an API expect the API to have certain fields. Developers might
wish to add or remove fields to an API as business needs
change, but doing so can cause clients to fail. Worse still, such
failures are often not discovered until late in the development
cycle when the updated service API is deployed to a staging or
production environment. API description standards such as
OpenAPI and gRPC help manage the relationship between client
and server APIs; we discuss these further in [Link to Come].
Microservices are primarily a technical solution to a people
problem: allowing different teams to make progress
independently without having to coordinate with each other.
This is valuable in a large company, but in a small company
where there are not many teams, using microservices is likely
to be unnecessary overhead, and it is preferable to implement
the application in the simplest way possible [45].

Serverless, or function-as-a-service (FaaS), is another approach
to deploying services, in which the management of the
infrastructure is outsourced to a cloud vendor [29]. When using
virtual machines, you have to explicitly choose when to start up
or shut down an instance; in contrast, with the serverless
model, the cloud provider automatically allocates and frees
hardware resources as needed, based on the incoming requests
to your service [47]. The term “serverless” can misleading: each
serverless function execution still runs on a server, but
subsequent executions might run on a different one.

Just like cloud storage replaced capacity planning (deciding in
advance how many disks to buy) with a metered billing model,
the serverless approach is bringing metered billing to code
execution: you only pay for the time that your application code
is actually running, rather than having to provision resources
in advance.
Cloud Computing versus Supercomputing

Cloud computing is not the only way of building large-scale
computing systems; an alternative is high-performance
computing (HPC), also known as supercomputing. Although
there are overlaps, HPC often has different priorities and uses
different techniques compared to cloud computing and
enterprise datacenter systems. Some of those differences are:

  Supercomputers are typically used for computationally
  intensive scientific computing tasks, such as weather
  forecasting, molecular dynamics (simulating the movement
  of atoms and molecules), complex optimization problems,
  and solving partial differential equations. On the other hand,
  cloud computing tends to be used for online services,
  business data systems, and similar systems that need to serve
  user requests with high availability.
  A supercomputer typically runs large batch jobs that
  checkpoint the state of their computation to disk from time to
  time. If a node fails, a common solution is to simply stop the
  entire cluster workload, repair the faulty node, and then
  restart the computation from the last checkpoint [48, 49].
  With cloud services, it is usually not desirable to stop the
  entire cluster, since the services need to continually serve
  users with minimal interruptions.
Supercomputers are typically built from specialized
hardware, where each node is quite reliable. Nodes in cloud
services are usually built from commodity machines, which
can provide equivalent performance at lower cost due to
economies of scale, but which also have higher failure rates
(see “Hardware and Software Faults”).
Supercomputer nodes typically communicate through shared
memory and remote direct memory access (RDMA), which
support high bandwidth and low latency, but assume a high
level of trust among the users of the system [50]. In cloud
computing, the network and the machines are often shared
by mutually untrusting organizations, requiring stronger
security mechanisms such as resource isolation (e.g., virtual
machines), encryption and authentication.
Cloud datacenter networks are often based on IP and
Ethernet, arranged in Clos topologies to provide high
bisection bandwidth—a commonly used measure of a
network’s overall performance [48, 51]. Supercomputers
often use specialized network topologies, such as multi-
dimensional meshes and toruses [52], which yield better
performance for HPC workloads with known communication
patterns.
Cloud computing allows nodes to be distributed across
multiple geographic locations, whereas supercomputers
  generally assume that all of their nodes are close together.

Large-scale analytics systems sometimes share some
characteristics with supercomputing, which is why it can be
worth knowing about these techniques if you are working in
this area. However, this book is mostly concerned with services
that need to be continually available, as discussed in “Reliability
and Fault Tolerance”.



Data Systems, Law, and Society
So far you’ve seen in this chapter that the architecture of data
systems is influenced not only by technical goals and
requirements, but also by the human needs of the organizations
that they support. Increasingly, data systems engineers are
realizing that serving the needs of their own business is not
enough: we also have a responsibility towards society at large.

One particular concern are systems that store data about people
and their behavior. Since 2018 the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) has given residents of many European
countries greater control and legal rights over their personal
data, and similar privacy regulation has been adopted in
various other countries and states around the world, including
for example the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA).
Regulations around AI, such as the EU AI Act, place further
restrictions on how personal data can be used.

Moreover, even in areas that are not directly subject to
regulation, there is increasing recognition of the effects that
computer systems have on people and society. Social media has
changed how individuals consume news, which influences their
political opinions and hence may affect the outcome of
elections. Automated systems increasingly make decisions that
have profound consequences for individuals, such as deciding
who should be given a loan or insurance coverage, who should
be invited to a job interview, or who should be suspected of a
crime [53].

Everyone who works on such systems shares a responsibility
for considering the ethical impact and ensuring that they
comply with relevant law. It is not necessary for everybody to
become an expert in law and ethics, but a basic awareness of
legal and ethical principles is just as important as, say, some
foundational knowledge in distributed systems.

Legal considerations are influencing the very foundations of
how data systems are being designed [54]. For example, the
GDPR grants individuals the right to have their data erased on
request (sometimes known as the right to be forgotten).
However, as we shall see in this book, many data systems rely
on immutable constructs such as append-only logs as part of
their design; how can we ensure deletion of some data in the
middle of a file that is supposed to be immutable? How do we
handle deletion of data that has been incorporated into derived
datasets (see “Systems of Record and Derived Data”), such as
training data for machine learning models? Answering these
questions creates new engineering challenges.

At present we don’t have clear guidelines on which particular
technologies or system architectures should be considered
“GDPR-compliant” or not. The regulation deliberately does not
mandate particular technologies, because these may quickly
change as technology progresses. Instead, the legal texts set out
high-level principles that are subject to interpretation. This
means that there are no simple answers to the question of how
to comply with privacy regulation, but we will look at some of
the technologies in this book through this lens.

In general, we store data because we think that its value is
greater than the costs of storing it. However, it is worth
remembering that the costs of storage are not just the bill you
pay for Amazon S3 or another service: the cost-benefit
calculation should also take into account the risks of liability
and reputational damage if the data were to be leaked or
compromised by adversaries, and the risk of legal costs and
fines if the storage and processing of the data is found not to be
compliant with the law.

Governments or police forces might also compel companies to
hand over data. When there is a risk that the data may reveal
criminalized behaviors (for example, homosexuality in several
Middle Eastern and African countries, or seeking an abortion in
several US states), storing that data creates real safety risks for
users. Travel to an abortion clinic, for example, could easily be
revealed by location data, perhaps even by a log of the user’s IP
addresses over time (which indicate approximate location).

Once all the risks are taken into account, it might be reasonable
to decide that some data is simply not worth storing, and that it
should therefore be deleted. This principle of data minimization
(sometimes known by the German term Datensparsamkeit) runs
counter to the “big data” philosophy of storing lots of data
speculatively in case it turns out to be useful in the future [55].
But it fits with the GDPR, which mandates that personal data
many only be collected for a specified, explicit purpose, that
this data may not later be used for any other purpose, and that
the data must not be kept for longer than necessary for the
purposes for which it was collected [56].
Businesses have also taken notice of privacy and safety
concerns. Credit card companies require payment processing
businesses to adhere to strict payment card industry (PCI)
standards. Processors undergo frequent evaluations from
independent auditors to verify continued compliance. Software
vendors have also seen increased scrutiny. Many buyers now
require their vendors to comply with Service Organization
Control (SOC) Type 2 standards. As with PCI compliance,
vendors undergo third party audits to verify adherence.

Generally, it is important to balance the needs of your business
against the needs of the people whose data you are collecting
and processing. There is much more to this topic; in [Link to
Come] we will go deeper into the topics of ethics and legal
compliance, including the problems of bias and discrimination.



Summary
The theme of this chapter has been to understand trade-offs:
that is, to recognize that for many questions there is not one
right answer, but several different approaches that each have
various pros and cons. We explored some of the most important
choices that affect the architecture of data systems, and
introduced terminology that will be needed throughout the rest
of this book.

We started by making a distinction between operational
(transaction-processing, OLTP) and analytical (OLAP) systems,
and saw their different characteristics: not only managing
different types of data with different access patterns, but also
serving different audiences. We encountered the concept of a
data warehouse and data lake, which receive data feeds from
operational systems via ETL. In [Link to Come] we will see that
operational and analytical systems often use very different
internal data layouts because of the different types of queries
they need to serve.

We then compared cloud services, a comparatively recent
development, to the traditional paradigm of self-hosted
software that has previously dominated data systems
architecture. Which of these approaches is more cost-effective
depends a lot on your particular situation, but it’s undeniable
that cloud-native approaches are bringing big changes to the
way data systems are architected, for example in the way they
separate storage and compute.

Cloud systems are intrinsically distributed, and we briefly
examined some of the trade-offs of distributed systems
 compared to using a single machine. There are situations in
 which you can’t avoid going distributed, but it’s advisable not to
 rush into making a system distributed if it’s possible to keep it
 on a single machine. In [Link to Come] and [Link to Come] we
 will cover the challenges with distributed systems in more
 detail.

 Finally, we saw that data systems architecture is determined
 not only by the needs of the business deploying the system, but
 also by privacy regulation that protects the rights of the people
 whose data is being processed—an aspect that many engineers
 are prone to ignoring. How we translate legal requirements into
 technical implementations is not yet well understood, but it’s
 important to keep this question in mind as we move through
 the rest of this book.



 FOOTNOTES



 REFERENCES

Richard T. Kouzes, Gordon A. Anderson, Stephen T. Elbert, Ian Gorton, and Deborah K.
 Gracio. The Changing Paradigm of Data-Intensive Computing. IEEE Computer, volume
 42, issue 1, January 2009. doi:10.1109/MC.2009.26


Martin Kleppmann, Adam Wiggins, Peter van Hardenberg, and Mark McGranaghan.
 Local-first software: you own your data, in spite of the cloud. At 2019 ACM SIGPLAN
 International Symposium on New Ideas, New Paradigms, and Reflections on
 Programming and Software (Onward!), October 2019. doi:10.1145/3359591.3359737


Joe Reis and Matt Housley. Fundamentals of Data Engineering. O’Reilly Media, 2022.
 ISBN: 9781098108304


Rui Pedro Machado and Helder Russa. Analytics Engineering with SQL and dbt. O’Reilly
 Media, 2023. ISBN: 9781098142384


Edgar F. Codd, S. B. Codd, and C. T. Salley. Providing OLAP to User-Analysts: An IT
 Mandate. E. F. Codd Associates, 1993. Archived at perma.cc/RKX8-2GEE


Surajit Chaudhuri and Umeshwar Dayal. An Overview of Data Warehousing and OLAP
 Technology. ACM SIGMOD Record, volume 26, issue 1, pages 65–74, March 1997.
 doi:10.1145/248603.248616


Fatma Özcan, Yuanyuan Tian, and Pinar Tözün. Hybrid Transactional/Analytical
 Processing: A Survey. At ACM International Conference on Management of Data
 (SIGMOD), May 2017. doi:10.1145/3035918.3054784


Adam Prout, Szu-Po Wang, Joseph Victor, Zhou Sun, Yongzhu Li, Jack Chen, Evan
 Bergeron, Eric Hanson, Robert Walzer, Rodrigo Gomes, and Nikita Shamgunov. Cloud-
 Native Transactions and Analytics in SingleStore. At International Conference on
 Management of Data (SIGMOD), June 2022. doi:10.1145/3514221.3526055


Michael Stonebraker and Uğur Çetintemel. ‘One Size Fits All’: An Idea Whose Time Has
 Come and Gone. At 21st International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), April
 2005. doi:10.1109/ICDE.2005.1


 Jeffrey Cohen, Brian Dolan, Mark Dunlap, Joseph M Hellerstein, and Caleb Welton.
 MAD Skills: New Analysis Practices for Big Data. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment,
 volume 2, issue 2, pages 1481–1492, August 2009. doi:10.14778/1687553.1687576
Dan Olteanu. The Relational Data Borg is Learning. Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment, volume 13, issue 12, August 2020. doi:10.14778/3415478.3415572


Matt Bornstein, Martin Casado, and Jennifer Li. Emerging Architectures for Modern
Data Infrastructure: 2020. future.a16z.com, October 2020. Archived at
perma.cc/LF8W-KDCC


Martin Fowler. DataLake. martinfowler.com, February 2015. Archived at
perma.cc/4WKN-CZUK


Bobby Johnson and Joseph Adler. The Sushi Principle: Raw Data Is Better. At
Strata+Hadoop World, February 2015.


Michael Armbrust, Ali Ghodsi, Reynold Xin, and Matei Zaharia. Lakehouse: A New
Generation of Open Platforms that Unify Data Warehousing and Advanced Analytics.
At 11th Annual Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2021.


DataKitchen, Inc. The DataOps Manifesto. dataopsmanifesto.org, 2017. Archived at
perma.cc/3F5N-FUQ4


Tejas Manohar. What is Reverse ETL: A Definition & Why It’s Taking Off. hightouch.io,
November 2021. Archived at perma.cc/A7TN-GLYJ


Simon O’Regan. Designing Data Products. towardsdatascience.com, August 2018.
Archived at perma.cc/HU67-3RV8


Camille Fournier. Why is it so hard to decide to buy? skamille.medium.com, July 2021.
Archived at perma.cc/6VSG-HQ5X


David Heinemeier Hansson. Why we’re leaving the cloud. world.hey.com, October
2022. Archived at perma.cc/82E6-UJ65
Nima Badizadegan. Use One Big Server. specbranch.com, August 2022. Archived at
perma.cc/M8NB-95UK


Steve Yegge. Dear Google Cloud: Your Deprecation Policy is Killing You. steve-
yegge.medium.com, August 2020. Archived at perma.cc/KQP9-SPGU


Alexandre Verbitski, Anurag Gupta, Debanjan Saha, Murali Brahmadesam, Kamal
Gupta, Raman Mittal, Sailesh Krishnamurthy, Sandor Maurice, Tengiz Kharatishvili,
and Xiaofeng Bao. Amazon Aurora: Design Considerations for High Throughput
Cloud-Native Relational Databases. At ACM International Conference on Management
of Data (SIGMOD), pages 1041–1052, May 2017. doi:10.1145/3035918.3056101


Panagiotis Antonopoulos, Alex Budovski, Cristian Diaconu, Alejandro Hernandez
Saenz, Jack Hu, Hanuma Kodavalla, Donald Kossmann, Sandeep Lingam, Umar
Farooq Minhas, Naveen Prakash, Vijendra Purohit, Hugh Qu, Chaitanya Sreenivas
Ravella, Krystyna Reisteter, Sheetal Shrotri, Dixin Tang, and Vikram Wakade.
Socrates: The New SQL Server in the Cloud. At ACM International Conference on
Management of Data (SIGMOD), pages 1743–1756, June 2019.
doi:10.1145/3299869.3314047


Midhul Vuppalapati, Justin Miron, Rachit Agarwal, Dan Truong, Ashish Motivala, and
Thierry Cruanes. Building An Elastic Query Engine on Disaggregated Storage. At 17th
USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI),
February 2020.


Gwen Shapira. Compute-Storage Separation Explained. thenile.dev, January 2023.
Archived at perma.cc/QCV3-XJNZ


Ravi Murthy and Gurmeet Goindi. AlloyDB for PostgreSQL under the hood:
Intelligent, database-aware storage. cloud.google.com, May 2022. Archived at
archive.org
Jack Vanlightly. The Architecture of Serverless Data Systems. jack-vanlightly.com,
November 2023. Archived at perma.cc/UDV4-TNJ5


Eric Jonas, Johann Schleier-Smith, Vikram Sreekanti, Chia-Che Tsai, Anurag
Khandelwal, Qifan Pu, Vaishaal Shankar, Joao Carreira, Karl Krauth, Neeraja
Yadwadkar, Joseph E Gonzalez, Raluca Ada Popa, Ion Stoica, David A Patterson. Cloud
Programming Simplified: A Berkeley View on Serverless Computing. arxiv.org,
February 2019.


Betsy Beyer, Jennifer Petoff, Chris Jones, and Niall Richard Murphy. Site Reliability
Engineering: How Google Runs Production Systems. O’Reilly Media, 2016. ISBN:
9781491929124


Thomas Limoncelli. The Time I Stole $10,000 from Bell Labs. ACM Queue, volume 18,
issue 5, November 2020. doi:10.1145/3434571.3434773


Charity Majors. The Future of Ops Jobs. acloudguru.com, August 2020. Archived at
perma.cc/GRU2-CZG3


Boris Cherkasky. (Over)Pay As You Go for Your Datastore. medium.com, September
2021. Archived at perma.cc/Q8TV-2AM2


Shlomi Kushchi. Serverless Doesn’t Mean DevOpsLess or NoOps. thenewstack.io,
February 2023. Archived at perma.cc/3NJR-AYYU


Erik Bernhardsson. Storm in the stratosphere: how the cloud will be reshuffled.
erikbern.com, November 2021. Archived at perma.cc/SYB2-99P3


Benn Stancil. The data OS. benn.substack.com, September 2021. Archived at
perma.cc/WQ43-FHS6


Maria Korolov. Data residency laws pushing companies toward residency as a
service. csoonline.com, January 2022. Archived at perma.cc/CHE4-XZZ2
Kousik Nath. These are the numbers every computer engineer should know.
freecodecamp.org, September 2019. Archived at perma.cc/RW73-36RL


Joseph M Hellerstein, Jose Faleiro, Joseph E Gonzalez, Johann Schleier-Smith, Vikram
Sreekanti, Alexey Tumanov, and Chenggang Wu. Serverless Computing: One Step
Forward, Two Steps Back. At Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR),
January 2019.


Frank McSherry, Michael Isard, and Derek G. Murray. Scalability! But at What COST?
At 15th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems (HotOS), May 2015.


Cindy Sridharan. Distributed Systems Observability: A Guide to Building Robust
Systems. Report, O’Reilly Media, May 2018. Archived at perma.cc/M6JL-XKCM


Charity Majors. Observability — A 3-Year Retrospective. thenewstack.io, August 2019.
Archived at perma.cc/CG62-TJWL


Benjamin H. Sigelman, Luiz André Barroso, Mike Burrows, Pat Stephenson, Manoj
Plakal, Donald Beaver, Saul Jaspan, and Chandan Shanbhag. Dapper, a Large-Scale
Distributed Systems Tracing Infrastructure. Google Technical Report dapper-2010-1,
April 2010. Archived at perma.cc/K7KU-2TMH


Rodrigo Laigner, Yongluan Zhou, Marcos Antonio Vaz Salles, Yijian Liu, and Marcos
Kalinowski. Data management in microservices: State of the practice, challenges, and
research directions. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 14, issue 13, pages
3348–3361, September 2021. doi:10.14778/3484224.3484232


Sam Newman. Building Microservices, second edition. O’Reilly Media, 2021. ISBN:
9781492034025


Chris Richardson. Microservices: Decomposing Applications for Deployability and
Scalability. infoq.com, May 2014. Archived at perma.cc/CKN4-YEQ2
Mohammad Shahrad, Rodrigo Fonseca, Íñigo Goiri, Gohar Chaudhry, Paul Batum,
Jason Cooke, Eduardo Laureano, Colby Tresness, Mark Russinovich, Ricardo
Bianchini. Serverless in the Wild: Characterizing and Optimizing the Serverless
Workload at a Large Cloud Provider. At USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC),
July 2020.


Luiz André Barroso, Urs Hölzle, and Parthasarathy Ranganathan. The Datacenter as a
Computer: Designing Warehouse-Scale Machines, third edition. Morgan & Claypool
Synthesis Lectures on Computer Architecture, October 2018.
doi:10.2200/S00874ED3V01Y201809CAC046


David Fiala, Frank Mueller, Christian Engelmann, Rolf Riesen, Kurt Ferreira, and Ron
Brightwell. Detection and Correction of Silent Data Corruption for Large-Scale High-
Performance Computing,” at International Conference for High Performance
Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC), November 2012.
doi:10.1109/SC.2012.49


Anna Kornfeld Simpson, Adriana Szekeres, Jacob Nelson, and Irene Zhang. Securing
RDMA for High-Performance Datacenter Storage Systems. At 12th USENIX Workshop
on Hot Topics in Cloud Computing (HotCloud), July 2020.


Arjun Singh, Joon Ong, Amit Agarwal, Glen Anderson, Ashby Armistead, Roy Bannon,
Seb Boving, Gaurav Desai, Bob Felderman, Paulie Germano, Anand Kanagala, Jeff
Provost, Jason Simmons, Eiichi Tanda, Jim Wanderer, Urs Hölzle, Stephen Stuart, and
Amin Vahdat. Jupiter Rising: A Decade of Clos Topologies and Centralized Control in
Google’s Datacenter Network. At Annual Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group
on Data Communication (SIGCOMM), August 2015. doi:10.1145/2785956.2787508


Glenn K. Lockwood. Hadoop’s Uncomfortable Fit in HPC.
glennklockwood.blogspot.co.uk, May 2014. Archived at perma.cc/S8XX-Y67B


Cathy O’Neil: Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and
Threatens Democracy. Crown Publishing, 2016. ISBN: 9780553418811
Supreeth Shastri, Vinay Banakar, Melissa Wasserman, Arun Kumar, and Vijay
Chidambaram. Understanding and Benchmarking the Impact of GDPR on Database
Systems. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 13, issue 7, pages 1064–1077,
March 2020. doi:10.14778/3384345.3384354


Martin Fowler. Datensparsamkeit. martinfowler.com, December 2013. Archived at
perma.cc/R9QX-CME6


Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April
2016 (General Data Protection Regulation). Official Journal of the European Union L
119/1, May 2016.
Chapter 2. Defining Nonfunctional
Requirements
  The Internet was done so well that most people think of it as
  a natural resource like the Pacific Ocean, rather than
  something that was man-made. When was the last time a
  technology with a scale like that was so error-free?

           —Alan Kay, in interview with Dr Dobb’s
                                     Journal (2012)


A NOTE FOR EARLY RELEASE READERS

With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form
—the author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you
can take advantage of these technologies long before the official
release of these titles.

This will be the 2nd chapter of the final book. The GitHub repo
for this book is https://github.com/ept/ddia2-feedback.

If you have comments about how we might improve the content
and/or examples in this book, or if you notice missing material
within this chapter, please reach out on GitHub.
If you are building an application, you will be driven by a list of
requirements. At the top of your list is most likely the
functionality that the application must offer: what screens and
what buttons you need, and what each operation is supposed to
do in order to fulfill the purpose of your software. These are
your functional requirements.

In addition, you probably also have some nonfunctional
requirements: for example, the app should be fast, reliable,
secure, legally compliant, and easy to maintain. These
requirements might not be explicitly written down, because
they may seem somewhat obvious, but they are just as
important as the app’s functionality: an app that is unbearably
slow or unreliable might as well not exist.

Not all nonfunctional requirements fall within the scope of this
book, but several do. In this chapter we will introduce several
technical concepts that will help you articulate the
nonfunctional requirements for your own systems:

  How to define and measure the performance of a system (see
  “Describing Performance”);
  What it means for a service to be reliable—namely,
  continuing to work correctly, even when things go wrong
  (see “Reliability and Fault Tolerance”);
  Allowing a system to be scalable by having efficient ways of
  adding computing capacity as the load on the system grows
  (see “Scalability”); and
  Making it easier to maintain a system in the long term (see
  “Maintainability”).

The terminology introduced in this chapter will also be useful
in the following chapters, when we go into the details of how
data-intensive systems are implemented. However, abstract
definitions can be quite dry; to make the ideas more concrete,
we will start this chapter with a case study of how a social
networking service might work, which will provide practical
examples of performance and scalability.


Case Study: Social Network Home
Timelines
Imagine you are given the task of implementing a social
network in the style of X (formerly Twitter), in which users can
post messages and follow other users. This will be a huge
simplification of how such a service actually works [1, 2, 3], but
it will help illustrate some of the issues that arise in large-scale
systems.
Let’s assume that users make 500 million posts per day, or 5,700
posts per second on average. Occasionally, the rate can spike as
high as 150,000 posts/second [4]. Let’s also assume that the
average user follows 200 people and has 200 followers
(although there is a very wide range: most people have only a
handful of followers, and a few celebrities such as Barack
Obama have over 100 million followers).


Representing Users, Posts, and Follows

Imagine we keep all of the data in a relational database as
shown in Figure 2-1. We have one table for users, one table for
posts, and one table for follow relationships.




Figure 2-1. Simple relational schema for a social network in which users can follow
                                    each other.



Let’s say the main read operation that our social network must
support is the home timeline, which displays recent posts by
people you are following (for simplicity we will ignore ads,
suggested posts from people you are not following, and other
extensions). We could write the following SQL query to get the
home timeline for a particular user:


   SELECT posts.*, users.* FROM posts
      JOIN follows ON posts.sender_id = follows.follo
      JOIN users   ON posts.sender_id = users.id
      WHERE follows.follower_id = current_user
      ORDER BY posts.timestamp DESC
      LIMIT 1000



To execute this query, the database will use the follows table
to find everybody who current_user is following, look up
recent posts by those users, and sort them by timestamp to get
the most recent 1,000 posts by any of the followed users.

Posts are supposed to be timely, so let’s assume that after
somebody makes a post, we want their followers to be able to
see it within 5 seconds. One way of doing that would be for the
user’s client to repeat the query above every 5 seconds while
the user is online (this is known as polling). If we assume that
10 million users are online and logged in at the same time, that
would mean running the query 2 million times per second.
Even if you increase the polling interval, this is a lot.
Moreover, the query above is quite expensive: if you are
following 200 people, it needs to fetch a list of recent posts by
each of those 200 people, and merge those lists. 2 million
timeline queries per second then means that the database
needs to look up the recent posts from some sender 400 million
times per second—a huge number. And that is the average case.
Some users follow tens of thousands of accounts; for them, this
query is very expensive to execute, and difficult to make fast.


Materializing and Updating Timelines

How can we do better? Firstly, instead of polling, it would be
better if the server actively pushed new posts to any followers
who are currently online. Secondly, we should precompute the
results of the query above so that a user’s request for their
home timeline can be served from a cache.

Imagine that for each user we store a data structure containing
their home timeline, i.e., the recent posts by people they are
following. Every time a user makes a post, we look up all of
their followers, and insert that post into the home timeline of
each follower—like delivering a message to a mailbox. Now
when a user logs in, we can simply give them this home
timeline that we precomputed. Moreover, to receive a
notification about any new posts on their timeline, the user’s
client simply needs to subscribe to the stream of posts being
added to their home timeline.

The downside of this approach is that we now need to do more
work every time a user makes a post, because the home
timelines are derived data that needs to be updated. The
process is illustrated in Figure 2-2. When one initial request
results in several downstream requests being carried out, we
use the term fan-out to describe the factor by which the number
of requests increases.




Figure 2-2. Fan-out: delivering new posts to every follower of the user who made the
                                        post.



At a rate of 5,700 posts posted per second, if the average post
reaches 200 followers (i.e., a fan-out factor of 200), we will need
to do just over 1 million home timeline writes per second. This
is a lot, but it’s still a significant saving compared to the 400
million per-sender post lookups per second that we would
otherwise have to do.

If the rate of posts spikes due to some special event, we don’t
have to do the timeline deliveries immediately—we can
enqueue them and accept that it will temporarily take a bit
longer for posts to show up in followers’ timelines. Even during
such load spikes, timelines remain fast to load, since we simply
serve them from a cache.

This process of precomputing and updating the results of a
query is called materialization, and the timeline cache is an
example of a materialized view (a concept we will discuss
further in [Link to Come]). The downside of materialization is
that every time a celebrity makes a post, we now have to do a
large amount of work to insert that post into the home
timelines of each of their millions of followers.

One way of solving this problem is to handle celebrity posts
separately from everyone else’s posts: we can save ourselves
the effort of adding them to millions of timelines by storing the
celebrity posts separately and merging them with the
materialized timeline when it is read. Despite such
optimizations, handling celebrities on a social network can
require a lot of infrastructure [5].
Describing Performance
Most discussions of software performance consider two main
types of metric:

  Response time

     The elapsed time from the moment when a user makes a
     request until they receive the requested answer. The unit
     of measurement is seconds.

  Throughput

     The number of requests per second, or the data volume
     per second, that the system is processing. For a given a
     particular allocation of hardware resources, there is a
     maximum throughput that can be handled. The unit of
     measurement is “somethings per second”.

In the social network case study, “posts per second” and
“timeline writes per second” are throughput metrics, whereas
the “time it takes to load the home timeline” or the “time until a
post is delivered to followers” are response time metrics.

There is often a connection between throughput and response
time; an example of such a relationship for an online service is
sketched in Figure 2-3. The service has a low response time
when request throughput is low, but response time increases as
load increases. This is because of queueing: when a request
arrives on a highly loaded system, it’s likely that the CPU is
already in the process of handling an earlier request, and
therefore the incoming request needs to wait until the earlier
request has been completed. As throughput approaches the
maximum that the hardware can handle, queueing delays
increase sharply.




Figure 2-3. As the throughput of a service approaches its capacity, the response time
                       increases dramatically due to queueing.
WHEN AN OVERLOADED SYSTEM WON’T RECOVER

If a system is close to overload, with throughput pushed close to
the limit, it can sometimes enter a vicious cycle where it
becomes less efficient and hence even more overloaded. For
example, if there is a long queue of requests waiting to be
handled, response times may increase so much that clients time
out and resend their request. This causes the rate of requests to
increase even further, making the problem worse—a retry
storm. Even when the load is reduced again, such a system may
remain in an overloaded state until it is rebooted or otherwise
reset. This phenomenon is called a metastable failure, and it can
cause serious outages in production systems [6, 7].

To avoid retries overloading a service, you can increase and
randomize the time between successive retries on the client
side (exponential backoff [8, 9]), and temporarily stop sending
requests to a service that has returned errors or timed out
recently (using a circuit breaker [10] or token bucket algorithm
[11]). The server can also detect when it is approaching
overload and start proactively rejecting requests (load shedding
[12]), and send back responses asking clients to slow down
(backpressure [1, 13]). The choice of queueing and load-
balancing algorithms can also make a difference [14].
In terms of performance metrics, the response time is usually
what users care about the most, whereas the throughput
determines the required computing resources (e.g., how many
servers you need), and hence the cost of serving a particular
workload. If throughput is likely to increase beyond what the
current hardware can handle, the capacity needs to be
expanded; a system is said to be scalable if its maximum
throughput can be significantly increased by adding computing
resources.

In this section we will focus primarily on response times, and
we will return to throughput and scalability in “Scalability”.


Latency and Response Time

“Latency” and “response time” are sometimes used
interchangeably, but in this book we will use the terms in a
specific way (illustrated in Figure 2-4):

  The response time is what the client sees; it includes all delays
  incurred anywhere in the system.
  The service time is the duration for which the service is
  actively processing the user request.
  Queueing delays can occur at several points in the flow: for
  example, after a request is received, it might need to wait
  until a CPU is available before it can be processed; a response
  packet might need to be buffered before it is sent over the
  network if other tasks on the same machine are sending a lot
  of data via the outbound network interface.
  Latency is a catch-all term for time during which a request is
  not being actively processed, i.e., during which it is latent. In
  particular, network latency or network delay refers to the
  time that request and response spend traveling through the
  network.




   Figure 2-4. Response time, service time, network latency, and queueing delay.



The response time can vary significantly from one request to
the next, even if you keep making the same request over and
over again. Many factors can add random delays: for example, a
context switch to a background process, the loss of a network
packet and TCP retransmission, a garbage collection pause, a
page fault forcing a read from disk, mechanical vibrations in
the server rack [15], or many other causes. We will discuss this
topic in more detail in [Link to Come].

Queueing delays often account for a large part of the variability
in response times. As a server can only process a small number
of things in parallel (limited, for example, by its number of CPU
cores), it only takes a small number of slow requests to hold up
the processing of subsequent requests—an effect known as
head-of-line blocking. Even if those subsequent requests have
fast service times, the client will see a slow overall response
time due to the time waiting for the prior request to complete.
The queueing delay is not part of the service time, and for this
reason it is important to measure response times on the client
side.


Average, Median, and Percentiles

Because the response time varies from one request to the next,
we need to think of it not as a single number, but as a
distribution of values that you can measure. In Figure 2-5, each
gray bar represents a request to a service, and its height shows
how long that request took. Most requests are reasonably fast,
but there are occasional outliers that take much longer.
Variation in network delay is also known as jitter.
  Figure 2-5. Illustrating mean and percentiles: response times for a sample of 100
                                 requests to a service.


It’s common to report the average response time of a service
(technically, the arithmetic mean: that is, sum all the response
times, and divide by the number of requests). However, the
mean is not a very good metric if you want to know your
“typical” response time, because it doesn’t tell you how many
users actually experienced that delay.

Usually it is better to use percentiles. If you take your list of
response times and sort it from fastest to slowest, then the
median is the halfway point: for example, if your median
response time is 200 ms, that means half your requests return
in less than 200 ms, and half your requests take longer than
that. This makes the median a good metric if you want to know
how long users typically have to wait. The median is also
known as the 50th percentile, and sometimes abbreviated as
p50.
In order to figure out how bad your outliers are, you can look at
higher percentiles: the 95th, 99th, and 99.9th percentiles are
common (abbreviated p95, p99, and p999). They are the
response time thresholds at which 95%, 99%, or 99.9% of
requests are faster than that particular threshold. For example,
if the 95th percentile response time is 1.5 seconds, that means
95 out of 100 requests take less than 1.5 seconds, and 5 out of
100 requests take 1.5 seconds or more. This is illustrated in
Figure 2-5.

High percentiles of response times, also known as tail latencies,
are important because they directly affect users’ experience of
the service. For example, Amazon describes response time
requirements for internal services in terms of the 99.9th
percentile, even though it only affects 1 in 1,000 requests. This
is because the customers with the slowest requests are often
those who have the most data on their accounts because they
have made many purchases—that is, they’re the most valuable
customers [16]. It’s important to keep those customers happy by
ensuring the website is fast for them.

On the other hand, optimizing the 99.99th percentile (the
slowest 1 in 10,000 requests) was deemed too expensive and to
not yield enough benefit for Amazon’s purposes. Reducing
response times at very high percentiles is difficult because they
are easily affected by random events outside of your control,
and the benefits are diminishing.
THE USER IMPACT OF RESPONSE TIMES

It seems intuitively obvious that a fast service is better for users
than a slow service [17]. However, it is surprisingly difficult to
get hold of reliable data to quantify the effect that latency has
on user behavior.

Some often-cited statistics are unreliable. In 2006 Google
reported that a slowdown in search results from 400 ms to
900 ms was associated with a 20% drop in traffic and revenue
[18]. However, another Google study from 2009 reported that a
400 ms increase in latency resulted in only 0.6% fewer searches
per day [19], and in the same year Bing found that a two-second
increase in load time reduced ad revenue by 4.3% [20]. Newer
data from these companies appears not to be publicly available.

A more recent Akamai study [21] claims that a 100 ms increase
in response time reduced the conversion rate of e-commerce
sites by up to 7%; however, on closer inspection, the same study
reveals that very fast page load times are also correlated with
lower conversion rates! This seemingly paradoxical result is
explained by the fact that the pages that load fastest are often
those that have no useful content (e.g., 404 error pages).
However, since the study makes no effort to separate the effects
of page content from the effects of load time, its results are
probably not meaningful.
A study by Yahoo [22] compares click-through rates on fast-
loading versus slow-loading search results, controlling for
quality of search results. It finds 20–30% more clicks on fast
searches when the difference between fast and slow responses
is 1.25 seconds or more.


Use of Response Time Metrics

High percentiles are especially important in backend services
that are called multiple times as part of serving a single end-
user request. Even if you make the calls in parallel, the end-user
request still needs to wait for the slowest of the parallel calls to
complete. It takes just one slow call to make the entire end-user
request slow, as illustrated in Figure 2-6. Even if only a small
percentage of backend calls are slow, the chance of getting a
slow call increases if an end-user request requires multiple
backend calls, and so a higher proportion of end-user requests
end up being slow (an effect known as tail latency amplification
[23]).
 Figure 2-6. When several backend calls are needed to serve a request, it takes just a
       single slow backend request to slow down the entire end-user request.



Percentiles are often used in service level objectives (SLOs) and
service level agreements (SLAs) as ways of defining the expected
performance and availability of a service [24]. For example, an
SLO may set a target for a service to have a median response
time of less than 200 ms and a 99th percentile under 1 s, and a
target that at least 99.9% of valid requests result in non-error
responses. An SLA is a contract that specifies what happens if
the SLO is not met (for example, customers may be entitled to a
refund). That is the basic idea, at least; in practice, defining
good availability metrics for SLOs and SLAs is not
straightforward [25, 26].
COMPUTING PERCENTILES

If you want to add response time percentiles to the monitoring
dashboards for your services, you need to efficiently calculate
them on an ongoing basis. For example, you may want to keep a
rolling window of response times of requests in the last 10
minutes. Every minute, you calculate the median and various
percentiles over the values in that window and plot those
metrics on a graph.

The simplest implementation is to keep a list of response times
for all requests within the time window and to sort that list
every minute. If that is too inefficient for you, there are
algorithms that can calculate a good approximation of
percentiles at minimal CPU and memory cost. Open source
percentile estimation libraries include HdrHistogram, t-digest
[27, 28], OpenHistogram [29], and DDSketch [30].

Beware that averaging percentiles, e.g., to reduce the time
resolution or to combine data from several machines, is
mathematically meaningless—the right way of aggregating
response time data is to add the histograms [31].
Reliability and Fault Tolerance
Everybody has an intuitive idea of what it means for something
to be reliable or unreliable. For software, typical expectations
include:

  The application performs the function that the user expected.
  It can tolerate the user making mistakes or using the
  software in unexpected ways.
  Its performance is good enough for the required use case,
  under the expected load and data volume.
  The system prevents any unauthorized access and abuse.

If all those things together mean “working correctly,” then we
can understand reliability as meaning, roughly, “continuing to
work correctly, even when things go wrong.” To be more
precise about things going wrong, we will distinguish between
faults and failures [32, 33]:

  Fault

      A fault is when a particular part of a system stops
      working correctly: for example, if a single hard drive
      malfunctions, or a single machine crashes, or an external
      service (that the system depends on) has an outage.
  Failure

      A failure is when the system as a whole stops providing
      the required service to the user; in other words, when it
      does not meet the service level objective (SLO).

The distinction between fault and failure can be confusing
because they are the same thing, just at different levels. For
example, if a hard drive stops working, we say that the hard
drive has failed: if the system consists only of that one hard
drive, it has stopped providing the required service. However, if
the system you’re talking about contains many hard drives,
then the failure of a single hard drive is only a fault from the
point of view of the bigger system, and the bigger system might
be able to tolerate that fault by having a copy of the data on
another hard drive.


Fault Tolerance

We call a system fault-tolerant if it continues providing the
required service to the user in spite of certain faults occurring.
If a system cannot tolerate a certain part becoming faulty, we
call that part a single point of failure (SPOF), because a fault in
that part escalates to cause the failure of the whole system.
For example, in the social network case study, a fault that might
happen is that during the fan-out process, a machine involved
in updating the materialized timelines crashes or become
unavailable. To make this process fault-tolerant, we would need
to ensure that another machine can take over this task without
missing any posts that should have been delivered, and without
duplicating any posts. (This idea is known as exactly-once
semantics, and we will examine it in detail in [Link to Come].)

Fault tolerance is always limited to a certain number of certain
types of faults. For example, a system might be able to tolerate a
maximum of two hard drives failing at the same time, or a
maximum of one out of three nodes crashing. It would not
make sense to tolerate any number of faults: if all nodes crash,
there is nothing that can be done. If the entire planet Earth (and
all servers on it) were swallowed by a black hole, tolerance of
that fault would require web hosting in space—good luck
getting that budget item approved.

Counter-intuitively, in such fault-tolerant systems, it can make
sense to increase the rate of faults by triggering them
deliberately—for example, by randomly killing individual
processes without warning. Many critical bugs are actually due
to poor error handling [34]; by deliberately inducing faults, you
ensure that the fault-tolerance machinery is continually
exercised and tested, which can increase your confidence that
faults will be handled correctly when they occur naturally.
Chaos engineering is a discipline that aims to improve
confidence in fault-tolerance mechanisms through experiments
such as deliberately injecting faults [35].

Although we generally prefer tolerating faults over preventing
faults, there are cases where prevention is better than cure
(e.g., because no cure exists). This is the case with security
matters, for example: if an attacker has compromised a system
and gained access to sensitive data, that event cannot be
undone. However, this book mostly deals with the kinds of
faults that can be cured, as described in the following sections.


Hardware and Software Faults

When we think of causes of system failure, hardware faults
quickly come to mind:

  Approximately 2–5% of magnetic hard drives fail per year
  [36, 37]; in a storage cluster with 10,000 disks, we should
  therefore expect on average one disk failure per day. Recent
  data suggests that disks are getting more reliable, but failure
  rates remain significant [38].
Approximately 0.5–1% of solid state drives (SSDs) fail per
year [39]. Small numbers of bit errors are corrected
automatically [40], but uncorrectable errors occur
approximately once per year per drive, even in drives that
are fairly new (i.e., that have experienced little wear); this
error rate is higher than that of magnetic hard drives [41, 42].
Other hardware components such as power supplies, RAID
controllers, and memory modules also fail, although less
frequently than hard drives [43, 44].
Approximately one in 1,000 machines has a CPU core that
occasionally computes the wrong result, likely due to
manufacturing defects [45, 46, 47]. In some cases, an
erroneous computation leads to a crash, but in other cases it
leads to a program simply returning the wrong result.
Data in RAM can also be corrupted, either due to random
events such as cosmic rays, or due to permanent physical
defects. Even when memory with error-correcting codes
(ECC) is used, more than 1% of machines encounter an
uncorrectable error in a given year, which typically leads to a
crash of the machine and the affected memory module
needing to be replaced [48]. Moreover, certain pathological
memory access patterns can flip bits with high probability
[49].
  An entire datacenter might become unavailable (for
  example, due to power outage or network misconfiguration)
  or even be permanently destroyed (for example by fire or
  flood). Although such large-scale failures are rare, their
  impact can be catastrophic if a service cannot tolerate the
  loss of a datacenter [50].

These events are rare enough that you often don’t need to
worry about them when working on a small system, as long as
you can easily replace hardware that becomes faulty. However,
in a large-scale system, hardware faults happen often enough
that they become part of the normal system operation.

Tolerating hardware faults through redundancy

Our first response to unreliable hardware is usually to add
redundancy to the individual hardware components in order to
reduce the failure rate of the system. Disks may be set up in a
RAID configuration (spreading data across multiple disks in the
same machine so that a failed disk does not cause data loss),
servers may have dual power supplies and hot-swappable CPUs,
and datacenters may have batteries and diesel generators for
backup power. Such redundancy can often keep a machine
running uninterrupted for years.
Redundancy is most effective when component faults are
independent, that is, the occurrence of one fault does not
change how likely it is that another fault will occur. However,
experience has shown that there are often significant
correlations between component failures [37, 51, 52];
unavailability of an entire server rack or an entire datacenter
still happens more often than we would like.

Hardware redundancy increases the uptime of a single
machine; however, as discussed in “Distributed versus Single-
Node Systems”, there are advantages to using a distributed
system, such as being able to tolerate a complete outage of one
datacenter. For this reason, cloud systems tend to focus less on
the reliability of individual machines, and instead aim to make
services highly available by tolerating faulty nodes at the
software level. Cloud providers use availability zones to identify
which resources are physically co-located; resources in the
same place are more likely to fail at the same time than
geographically separated resources.

The fault-tolerance techniques we discuss in this book are
designed to tolerate the loss of entire machines, racks, or
availability zones. They generally work by allowing a machine
in one datacenter to take over when a machine in another
datacenter fails or becomes unreachable. We will discuss such
techniques for fault tolerance in [Link to Come], [Link to Come],
and at various other points in this book.

Systems that can tolerate the loss of entire machines also have
operational advantages: a single-server system requires
planned downtime if you need to reboot the machine (to apply
operating system security patches, for example), whereas a
multi-node fault-tolerant system can be patched by restarting
one node at a time, without affecting the service for users. This
is called a rolling upgrade, and we will discuss it further in [Link
to Come].


Software faults

Although hardware failures can be weakly correlated, they are
still mostly independent: for example, if one disk fails, it’s likely
that other disks in the same machine will be fine for another
while. On the other hand, software faults are often very highly
correlated, because it is common for many nodes to run the
same software and thus have the same bugs [53, 54]. Such faults
are harder to anticipate, and they tend to cause many more
system failures than uncorrelated hardware faults [43]. For
example:
  A software bug that causes every node to fail at the same
  time in particular circumstances. For example, on June 30,
  2012, a leap second caused many Java applications to hang
  simultaneously due to a bug in the Linux kernel, bringing
  down many Internet services [55]. Due to a firmware bug, all
  SSDs of certain models suddenly fail after precisely 32,768
  hours of operation (less than 4 years), rendering the data on
  them unrecoverable [56].
  A runaway process that uses up some shared, limited
  resource, such as CPU time, memory, disk space, network
  bandwidth, or threads [57]. For example, a process that
  consumes too much memory while processing a large
  request may be killed by the operating system.
  A service that the system depends on slows down, becomes
  unresponsive, or starts returning corrupted responses.
  An interaction between different systems results in emergent
  behavior that does not occur when each system was tested in
  isolation [58].
  Cascading failures, where a problem in one component
  causes another component to become overloaded and slow
  down, which in turn brings down another component [59,
  60].

The bugs that cause these kinds of software faults often lie
dormant for a long time until they are triggered by an unusual
set of circumstances. In those circumstances, it is revealed that
the software is making some kind of assumption about its
environment—and while that assumption is usually true, it
eventually stops being true for some reason [61, 62].

There is no quick solution to the problem of systematic faults in
software. Lots of small things can help: carefully thinking about
assumptions and interactions in the system; thorough testing;
process isolation; allowing processes to crash and restart;
avoiding feedback loops such as retry storms (see “When an
overloaded system won’t recover”); measuring, monitoring, and
analyzing system behavior in production.


Humans and Reliability

Humans design and build software systems, and the operators
who keep the systems running are also human. Unlike
machines, humans don’t just follow rules; their strength is
being creative and adaptive in getting their job done. However,
this characteristic also leads to unpredictability, and sometimes
mistakes that can lead to failures, despite best intentions. For
example, one study of large internet services found that
configuration changes by operators were the leading cause of
outages, whereas hardware faults (servers or network) played a
role in only 10–25% of outages [63].
It is tempting to label such problems as “human error” and to
wish that they could be solved by better controlling human
behavior through tighter procedures and compliance with
rules. However, blaming people for mistakes is
counterproductive. What we call “human error” is not really
the cause of an incident, but rather a symptom of a problem
with the sociotechnical system in which people are trying their
best to do their jobs [64].

Various technical measures can help minimize the impact of
human mistakes, including thorough testing [34], rollback
mechanisms for quickly reverting configuration changes,
gradual roll-outs of new code, detailed and clear monitoring,
observability tools for diagnosing production issues (see
“Problems with Distributed Systems”), and well-designed
interfaces that encourage “the right thing” and discourage “the
wrong thing”.

However, these things require an investment of time and
money, and in the pragmatic reality of everyday business,
organizations often prioritize revenue-generating activities
over measures that increase their resilience against mistakes. If
there is a choice between more features and more testing, many
organizations understandably choose features. Given this
choice, when a preventable mistake inevitably occurs, it does
not make sense to blame the person who made the mistake—
the problem is the organization’s priorities.

Increasingly, organizations are adopting a culture of blameless
postmortems: after an incident, the people involved are
encouraged to share full details about what happened, without
fear of punishment, since this allows others in the organization
to learn how to prevent similar problems in the future [65].
This process may uncover a need to change business priorities,
a need to invest in areas that have been neglected, a need to
change the incentives for the people involved, or some other
systemic issue that needs to be brought to the management’s
attention.

As a general principle, when investigating an incident, you
should be suspicious of simplistic answers. “Bob should have
been more careful when deploying that change” is not
productive, but neither is “We must rewrite the backend in
Haskell.” Instead, management should take the opportunity to
learn the details of how the sociotechnical system works from
the point of view of the people who work with it every day, and
take steps to improve it based on this feedback [64].
HOW IMPORTANT IS RELIABILITY?

Reliability is not just for nuclear power stations and air traffic
control—more mundane applications are also expected to work
reliably. Bugs in business applications cause lost productivity
(and legal risks if figures are reported incorrectly), and outages
of e-commerce sites can have huge costs in terms of lost
revenue and damage to reputation.

In many applications, a temporary outage of a few minutes or
even a few hours is tolerable [66], but permanent data loss or
corruption would be catastrophic. Consider a parent who stores
all their pictures and videos of their children in your photo
application [67]. How would they feel if that database was
suddenly corrupted? Would they know how to restore it from a
backup?

As another example of how unreliable software can harm
people, consider the Post Office Horizon scandal. Between 1999
and 2019, hundreds of people managing Post Office branches in
Britain were convicted of theft or fraud because the accounting
software showed a shortfall in their accounts. Eventually it
became clear that many of these shortfalls were due to bugs in
the software, and many convictions have since been overturned
[68]. What led to this, probably the largest miscarriage of justice
in British history, is the fact that English law assumes that
computers operate correctly (and hence, evidence produced by
computers is reliable) unless there is evidence to the contrary
[69]. Software engineers may laugh at the idea that software
could ever be bug-free, but this is little solace to the people who
were wrongfully imprisoned, declared bankrupt, or even
committed suicide as a result of a wrongful conviction due to an
unreliable computer system.

There are situations in which we may choose to sacrifice
reliability in order to reduce development cost (e.g., when
developing a prototype product for an unproven market)—but
we should be very conscious of when we are cutting corners
and keep in mind the potential consequences.



Scalability
Even if a system is working reliably today, that doesn’t mean it
will necessarily work reliably in the future. One common
reason for degradation is increased load: perhaps the system
has grown from 10,000 concurrent users to 100,000 concurrent
users, or from 1 million to 10 million. Perhaps it is processing
much larger volumes of data than it did before.
Scalability is the term we use to describe a system’s ability to
cope with increased load. Sometimes, when discussing
scalability, people make comments along the lines of, “You’re
not Google or Amazon. Stop worrying about scale and just use a
relational database.” Whether this maxim applies to you
depends on the type of application you are building.

If you are building a new product that currently only has a
small number of users, perhaps at a startup, the overriding
engineering goal is usually to keep the system as simple and
flexible as possible, so that you can easily modify and adapt the
features of your product as you learn more about customers’
needs [70]. In such an environment, it is counterproductive to
worry about hypothetical scale that might be needed in the
future: in the best case, investments in scalability are wasted
effort and premature optimization; in the worst case, they lock
you into an inflexible design and make it harder to evolve your
application.

The reason is that scalability is not a one-dimensional label: it is
meaningless to say “X is scalable” or “Y doesn’t scale.” Rather,
discussing scalability means considering questions like:

  “If the system grows in a particular way, what are our
  options for coping with the growth?”
  “How can we add computing resources to handle the
  additional load?”
  “Based on current growth projections, when will we hit the
  limits of our current architecture?”

If you succeed in making your application popular, and
therefore handling a growing amount of load, you will learn
where your performance bottlenecks lie, and therefore you will
know along which dimensions you need to scale. At that point
it’s time to start worrying about techniques for scalability.


Describing Load

First, we need to succinctly describe the current load on the
system; only then can we discuss growth questions (what
happens if our load doubles?). Often this will be a measure of
throughput: for example, the number of requests per second to
a service, how many gigabytes of new data arrive per day, or
the number of shopping cart checkouts per hour. Sometimes
you care about the peak of some variable quantity, such as the
number of simultaneously online users in “Case Study: Social
Network Home Timelines”.

Often there are other statistical characteristics of the load that
also affect the access patterns and hence the scalability
requirements. For example, you may need to know the ratio of
reads to writes in a database, the hit rate on a cache, or the
number of data items per user (for example, the number of
followers in the social network case study). Perhaps the average
case is what matters for you, or perhaps your bottleneck is
dominated by a small number of extreme cases. It all depends
on the details of your particular application.

Once you have described the load on your system, you can
investigate what happens when the load increases. You can look
at it in two ways:

  When you increase the load in a certain way and keep the
  system resources (CPUs, memory, network bandwidth, etc.)
  unchanged, how is the performance of your system affected?
  When you increase the load in a certain way, how much do
  you need to increase the resources if you want to keep
  performance unchanged?

Usually our goal is to keep the performance of the system
within the requirements of the SLA (see “Use of Response Time
Metrics”) while also minimizing the cost of running the system.
The greater the required computing resources, the higher the
cost. It might be that some types of hardware are more cost-
effective than others, and these factors may change over time as
new types of hardware become available.

If you can double the resources in order to handle twice the
load, while keeping performance the same, we say that you
have linear scalability, and this is considered a good thing.
Occasionally it is possible to handle twice the load with less
than double the resources, due to economies of scale or a better
distribution of peak load [71, 72]. Much more likely is that the
cost grows faster than linearly, and there may be many reasons
for the inefficiency. For example, if you have a lot of data, then
processing a single write request may involve more work than
if you have a small amount of data, even if the size of the
request is the same.


Shared-Memory, Shared-Disk, and Shared-
Nothing Architecture

The simplest way of increasing the hardware resources of a
service is to move it to a more powerful machine. Individual
CPU cores are no longer getting significantly faster, but you can
buy a machine (or rent a cloud instance) with more CPU cores,
more RAM, and more disk space. This approach is called
vertical scaling or scaling up.
You can get parallelism on a single machine by using multiple
processes or threads. All the threads belonging to the same
process can access the same RAM, and hence this approach is
also called a shared-memory architecture. The problem with a
shared-memory approach is that the cost grows faster than
linearly: a high-end machine with twice the hardware
resources typically costs significantly more than twice as much.
And due to bottlenecks, a machine twice the size can often
handle less than twice the load.

Another approach is the shared-disk architecture, which uses
several machines with independent CPUs and RAM, but which
stores data on an array of disks that is shared between the
machines, which are connected via a fast network: Network-
Attached Storage (NAS) or Storage Area Network (SAN). This
architecture has traditionally been used for on-premises data
warehousing workloads, but contention and the overhead of
locking limit the scalability of the shared-disk approach [73].

By contrast, the shared-nothing architecture [74] (also called
horizontal scaling or scaling out) has gained a lot of popularity.
In this approach, we use a distributed system with multiple
nodes, each of which has its own CPUs, RAM, and disks. Any
coordination between nodes is done at the software level, via a
conventional network.
The advantages of shared-nothing are that it has the potential to
scale linearly, it can use whatever hardware offers the best
price/performance ratio (especially in the cloud), it can more
easily adjust its hardware resources as load increases or
decreases, and it can achieve greater fault tolerance by
distributing the system across multiple data centers and
regions. The downsides are that it requires explicit data
partitioning (see [Link to Come]), and it incurs all the
complexity of distributed systems ([Link to Come]).

Some cloud-native database systems use separate services for
storage and transaction execution (see “Separation of storage
and compute”), with multiple compute nodes sharing access to
the same storage service. This model has some similarity to a
shared-disk architecture, but it avoids the scalability problems
of older systems: instead of providing a filesystem (NAS) or
block device (SAN) abstraction, the storage service offers a
specialized API that is designed for the specific needs of the
database [75].


Principles for Scalability

The architecture of systems that operate at large scale is usually
highly specific to the application—there is no such thing as a
generic, one-size-fits-all scalable architecture (informally
known as magic scaling sauce). For example, a system that is
designed to handle 100,000 requests per second, each 1 kB in
size, looks very different from a system that is designed for 3
requests per minute, each 2 GB in size—even though the two
systems have the same data throughput (100 MB/sec).

Moreover, an architecture that is appropriate for one level of
load is unlikely to cope with 10 times that load. If you are
working on a fast-growing service, it is therefore likely that you
will need to rethink your architecture on every order of
magnitude load increase. As the needs of the application are
likely to evolve, it is usually not worth planning future scaling
needs more than one order of magnitude in advance.

A good general principle for scalability is to break a system
down into smaller components that can operate largely
independently from each other. This is the underlying principle
behind microservices (see “Microservices and Serverless”),
partitioning ([Link to Come]), stream processing ([Link to
Come]), and shared-nothing architectures. However, the
challenge is in knowing where to draw the line between things
that should be together, and things that should be apart. Design
guidelines for microservices can be found in other books [76],
and we discuss partitioning of shared-nothing systems in [Link
to Come].
Another good principle is not to make things more complicated
than necessary. If a single-machine database will do the job, it’s
probably preferable to a complicated distributed setup. Auto-
scaling systems (which automatically add or remove resources
in response to demand) are cool, but if your load is fairly
predictable, a manually scaled system may have fewer
operational surprises (see [Link to Come]). A system with five
services is simpler than one with fifty. Good architectures
usually involve a pragmatic mixture of approaches.



Maintainability
Software does not wear out or suffer material fatigue, so it does
not break in the same ways as mechanical objects do. But the
requirements for an application frequently change, the
environment that the software runs in changes (such as its
dependencies and the underlying platform), and it has bugs
that need fixing.

It is widely recognized that the majority of the cost of software
is not in its initial development, but in its ongoing maintenance
—fixing bugs, keeping its systems operational, investigating
failures, adapting it to new platforms, modifying it for new use
cases, repaying technical debt, and adding new features [77,
78].

However, maintenance is also difficult. If a system has been
successfully running for a long time, it may well use outdated
technologies that not many engineers understand today (such
as mainframes and COBOL code); institutional knowledge of
how and why a system was designed in a certain way may have
been lost as people have left the organization; it might be
necessary to fix other people’s mistakes. Moreover, the
computer system is often intertwined with the human
organization that it supports, which means that maintenance of
such legacy systems is as much a people problem as a technical
one [79].

Every system we create today will one day become a legacy
system if it is valuable enough to survive for a long time. In
order to minimize the pain for future generations who need to
maintain our software, we should design it with maintenance
concerns in mind. Although we cannot always predict which
decisions might create maintenance headaches in the future, in
this book we will pay attention to several principles that are
widely applicable:

  Operability
      Make it easy for the organization to keep the system
      running smoothly.

  Simplicity

      Make it easy for new engineers to understand the system,
      by implementing it using well-understood, consistent
      patterns and structures, and avoiding unnecessary
      complexity.

  Evolvability

      Make it easy for engineers to make changes to the system
      in the future, adapting it and extending it for
      unanticipated use cases as requirements change.


Operability: Making Life Easy for
Operations

We previously discussed the role of operations in “Operations
in the Cloud Era”, and we saw that human processes are at least
as important for reliable operations as software tools. In fact, it
has been suggested that “good operations can often work
around the limitations of bad (or incomplete) software, but
good software cannot run reliably with bad operations” [54].
In large-scale systems consisting of many thousands of
machines, manual maintenance would be unreasonably
expensive, and automation is essential. However, automation
can be a two-edged sword: there will always be edge cases (such
as rare failure scenarios) that require manual intervention
from the operations team. Since the cases that cannot be
handled automatically are the most complex issues, greater
automation requires a more skilled operations team that can
resolve those issues [80].

Moreover, if an automated system goes wrong, it is often harder
to troubleshoot than a system that relies on an operator to
perform some actions manually. For that reason, it is not the
case that more automation is always better for operability.
However, some amount of automation is important, and the
sweet spot will depend on the specifics of your particular
application and organization.

Good operability means making routine tasks easy, allowing the
operations team to focus their efforts on high-value activities.
Data systems can do various things to make routine tasks easy,
including [81]:

  Allowing monitoring tools to check the system’s key metrics,
  and supporting observability tools (see “Problems with
  Distributed Systems”) to give insights into the system’s
  runtime behavior. A variety of commercial and open source
  tools can help here [82].
  Avoiding dependency on individual machines (allowing
  machines to be taken down for maintenance while the
  system as a whole continues running uninterrupted)
  Providing good documentation and an easy-to-understand
  operational model (“If I do X, Y will happen”)
  Providing good default behavior, but also giving
  administrators the freedom to override defaults when
  needed
  Self-healing where appropriate, but also giving
  administrators manual control over the system state when
  needed
  Exhibiting predictable behavior, minimizing surprises


Simplicity: Managing Complexity

Small software projects can have delightfully simple and
expressive code, but as projects get larger, they often become
very complex and difficult to understand. This complexity slows
down everyone who needs to work on the system, further
increasing the cost of maintenance. A software project mired in
complexity is sometimes described as a big ball of mud [83].
When complexity makes maintenance hard, budgets and
schedules are often overrun. In complex software, there is also
a greater risk of introducing bugs when making a change: when
the system is harder for developers to understand and reason
about, hidden assumptions, unintended consequences, and
unexpected interactions are more easily overlooked [62].
Conversely, reducing complexity greatly improves the
maintainability of software, and thus simplicity should be a key
goal for the systems we build.

Simple systems are easier to understand, and therefore we
should try to solve a given problem in the simplest way
possible. Unfortunately, this is easier said than done. Whether
something is simple or not is often a subjective matter of taste,
as there is no objective standard of simplicity [84]. For example,
one system may hide a complex implementation behind a
simple interface, whereas another may have a simple
implementation that exposes more internal detail to its users—
which one is simpler?

One attempt at reasoning about complexity has been to break it
down into two categories, essential and accidental complexity
[85]. The idea is that essential complexity is inherent in the
problem domain of the application, while accidental complexity
arises only because of limitations of our tooling. Unfortunately,
this distinction is also flawed, because boundaries between the
essential and the accidental shift as our tooling evolves [86].

One of the best tools we have for managing complexity is
abstraction. A good abstraction can hide a great deal of
implementation detail behind a clean, simple-to-understand
façade. A good abstraction can also be used for a wide range of
different applications. Not only is this reuse more efficient than
reimplementing a similar thing multiple times, but it also leads
to higher-quality software, as quality improvements in the
abstracted component benefit all applications that use it.

For example, high-level programming languages are
abstractions that hide machine code, CPU registers, and syscalls.
SQL is an abstraction that hides complex on-disk and in-
memory data structures, concurrent requests from other
clients, and inconsistencies after crashes. Of course, when
programming in a high-level language, we are still using
machine code; we are just not using it directly, because the
programming language abstraction saves us from having to
think about it.

Abstractions for application code, which aim to reduce its
complexity, can be created using methodologies such as design
patterns [87] and domain-driven design (DDD) [88]. This book is
not about such application-specific abstractions, but rather
about general-purpose abstractions on top of which you can
build your applications, such as database transactions, indexes,
and event logs. If you want to use techniques such as DDD, you
can implement them on top of the foundations described in this
book.


Evolvability: Making Change Easy

It’s extremely unlikely that your system’s requirements will
remain unchanged forever. They are much more likely to be in
constant flux: you learn new facts, previously unanticipated use
cases emerge, business priorities change, users request new
features, new platforms replace old platforms, legal or
regulatory requirements change, growth of the system forces
architectural changes, etc.

In terms of organizational processes, Agile working patterns
provide a framework for adapting to change. The Agile
community has also developed technical tools and processes
that are helpful when developing software in a frequently
changing environment, such as test-driven development (TDD)
and refactoring. In this book, we search for ways of increasing
agility at the level of a system consisting of several different
applications or services with different characteristics.
The ease with which you can modify a data system, and adapt it
to changing requirements, is closely linked to its simplicity and
its abstractions: simple and easy-to-understand systems are
usually easier to modify than complex ones. Since this is such
an important idea, we will use a different word to refer to
agility on a data system level: evolvability [89].

One major factor that makes change difficult in large systems is
when some action is irreversible, and therefore that action
needs to be taken very carefully [90]. For example, say you are
migrating from one database to another: if you cannot switch
back to the old system in case of problems wth the new one, the
stakes are much higher than if you can easily go back.
Minimizing irreversibility improves flexibility.



Summary
In this chapter we examined several examples of nonfunctional
requirements: performance, reliability, scalability, and
maintainability. Through these topics we have also encountered
principles and terminology that we will need throughout the
rest of the book. We started with a case study of how one might
implement home timelines in a social network, which
illustrated some of the challenges that arise at scale.
We discussed how to measure performance (e.g., using
response time percentiles), the load on a system (e.g., using
throughput metrics), and how they are used in SLAs. Scalability
is a closely related concept: that is, ensuring performance stays
the same when the load grows. We saw some general principles
for scalability, such as breaking a task down into smaller parts
that can operate independently, and we will dive into deep
technical detail on scalability techniques in the following
chapters.

To achieve reliability, you can use fault tolerance techniques,
which allow a system to continue providing its service even if
some component (e.g., a disk, a machine, or another service) is
faulty. We saw examples of hardware faults that can occur, and
distinguished them from software faults, which can be harder
to deal with because they are often strongly correlated. Another
aspect of achieving reliability is to build resilience against
humans making mistakes, and we saw blameless postmortems
as a technique for learning from incidents.

Finally, we examined several facets of maintainability,
including supporting the work of operations teams, managing
complexity, and making it easy to evolve an application’s
functionality over time. There are no easy answers on how to
achieve these things, but one thing that can help is to build
 applications using well-understood building blocks that provide
 useful abstractions. The rest of this book will cover a selection
 of the most important such building blocks.



 FOOTNOTES



 REFERENCES

Mike Cvet. How We Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Fan-In at Twitter. At QCon San
 Francisco, December 2016.


Raffi Krikorian. Timelines at Scale. At QCon San Francisco, November 2012. Archived at
 perma.cc/V9G5-KLYK


Twitter. Twitter’s Recommendation Algorithm. blog.twitter.com, March 2023. Archived
 at perma.cc/L5GT-229T


Raffi Krikorian. New Tweets per second record, and how! blog.twitter.com, August
 2013. Archived at perma.cc/6JZN-XJYN


Samuel Axon. 3% of Twitter’s Servers Dedicated to Justin Bieber. mashable.com,
 September 2010. Archived at perma.cc/F35N-CGVX


Nathan Bronson, Abutalib Aghayev, Aleksey Charapko, and Timothy Zhu. Metastable
 Failures in Distributed Systems. At Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems
 (HotOS), May 2021. doi:10.1145/3458336.3465286


Marc Brooker. Metastability and Distributed Systems. brooker.co.za, May 2021.
 Archived at archive.org
Marc Brooker. Exponential Backoff And Jitter. aws.amazon.com, March 2015. Archived
 at perma.cc/R6MS-AZKH


Marc Brooker. What is Backoff For? brooker.co.za, August 2022. Archived at archive.org


 Michael T. Nygard. Release It!, 2nd Edition. Pragmatic Bookshelf, January 2018. ISBN:
 9781680502398


 Marc Brooker. Fixing retries with token buckets and circuit breakers. brooker.co.za,
 February 2022. Archived at archive.org


 David Yanacek. Using load shedding to avoid overload. Amazon Builders’ Library,
 aws.amazon.com. Archived at perma.cc/9SAW-68MP


 Matthew Sackman. Pushing Back. wellquite.org, May 2016. Archived at
 perma.cc/3KCZ-RUFY


 Dmitry Kopytkov and Patrick Lee. Meet Bandaid, the Dropbox service proxy.
 dropbox.tech, March 2018. Archived at perma.cc/KUU6-YG4S


 Haryadi S. Gunawi, Riza O. Suminto, Russell Sears, Casey Golliher, Swaminathan
 Sundararaman, Xing Lin, Tim Emami, Weiguang Sheng, Nematollah Bidokhti, Caitie
 McCaffrey, Gary Grider, Parks M. Fields, Kevin Harms, Robert B. Ross, Andree
 Jacobson, Robert Ricci, Kirk Webb, Peter Alvaro, H. Birali Runesha, Mingzhe Hao, and
 Huaicheng Li. Fail-Slow at Scale: Evidence of Hardware Performance Faults in Large
 Production Systems. At 16th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies,
 February 2018.


 Giuseppe DeCandia, Deniz Hastorun, Madan Jampani, Gunavardhan Kakulapati,
 Avinash Lakshman, Alex Pilchin, Swaminathan Sivasubramanian, Peter Vosshall, and
 Werner Vogels. Dynamo: Amazon’s Highly Available Key-Value Store. At 21st ACM
 Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP), October 2007.
 doi:10.1145/1294261.1294281
Kathryn Whitenton. The Need for Speed, 23 Years Later. nngroup.com, May 2020.
Archived at perma.cc/C4ER-LZYA


Greg Linden. Marissa Mayer at Web 2.0. glinden.blogspot.com, November 2005.
Archived at perma.cc/V7EA-3VXB


Jake Brutlag. Speed Matters for Google Web Search. services.google.com, June 2009.
Archived at perma.cc/BK7R-X7M2


Eric Schurman and Jake Brutlag. Performance Related Changes and their User
Impact. Talk at Velocity 2009.


Akamai Technologies, Inc. The State of Online Retail Performance. akamai.com, April
2017. Archived at perma.cc/UEK2-HYCS


Xiao Bai, Ioannis Arapakis, B. Barla Cambazoglu, and Ana Freire. Understanding and
Leveraging the Impact of Response Latency on User Behaviour in Web Search. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems, volume 36, issue 2, article 21, April 2018.
doi:10.1145/3106372


Jeffrey Dean and Luiz André Barroso. The Tail at Scale. Communications of the ACM,
volume 56, issue 2, pages 74–80, February 2013. doi:10.1145/2408776.2408794


Alex Hidalgo. Implementing Service Level Objectives: A Practical Guide to SLIs, SLOs,
and Error Budgets. O’Reilly Media, September 2020. ISBN: 1492076813


Jeffrey C. Mogul and John Wilkes. Nines are Not Enough: Meaningful Metrics for
Clouds. At 17th Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems (HotOS), May 2019.
doi:10.1145/3317550.3321432


Tamás Hauer, Philipp Hoffmann, John Lunney, Dan Ardelean, and Amer Diwan.
Meaningful Availability. At 17th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation (NSDI), February 2020.
Ted Dunning. The t-digest: Efficient estimates of distributions. Software Impacts,
volume 7, article 100049, February 2021. doi:10.1016/j.simpa.2020.100049


David Kohn. How percentile approximation works (and why it’s more useful than
averages). timescale.com, September 2021. Archived at perma.cc/3PDP-NR8B


Heinrich Hartmann and Theo Schlossnagle. Circllhist — A Log-Linear Histogram Data
Structure for IT Infrastructure Monitoring. arxiv.org, January 2020.


Charles Masson, Jee E. Rim, and Homin K. Lee. DDSketch: A Fast and Fully-Mergeable
Quantile Sketch with Relative-Error Guarantees. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment,
volume 12, issue 12, pages 2195–2205, August 2019. doi:10.14778/3352063.3352135


Baron Schwartz. Why Percentiles Don’t Work the Way You Think. solarwinds.com,
November 2016. Archived at perma.cc/469T-6UGB


Walter L. Heimerdinger and Charles B. Weinstock. A Conceptual Framework for
System Fault Tolerance. Technical Report CMU/SEI-92-TR-033, Software Engineering
Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, October 1992. Archived at perma.cc/GD2V-
DMJW


Felix C. Gärtner. Fundamentals of fault-tolerant distributed computing in
asynchronous environments. ACM Computing Surveys, volume 31, issue 1, pages 1–
26, March 1999. doi:10.1145/311531.311532


Ding Yuan, Yu Luo, Xin Zhuang, Guilherme Renna Rodrigues, Xu Zhao, Yongle Zhang,
Pranay U. Jain, and Michael Stumm. Simple Testing Can Prevent Most Critical
Failures: An Analysis of Production Failures in Distributed Data-Intensive Systems. At
11th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI),
October 2014.


Casey Rosenthal and Nora Jones. Chaos Engineering. O’Reilly Media, April 2020. ISBN:
9781492043867
Eduardo Pinheiro, Wolf-Dietrich Weber, and Luiz Andre Barroso. Failure Trends in a
Large Disk Drive Population. At 5th USENIX Conference on File and Storage
Technologies (FAST), February 2007.


Bianca Schroeder and Garth A. Gibson. Disk failures in the real world: What does an
MTTF of 1,000,000 hours mean to you? At 5th USENIX Conference on File and Storage
Technologies (FAST), February 2007.


Andy Klein. Backblaze Drive Stats for Q2 2021. backblaze.com, August 2021. Archived
at perma.cc/2943-UD5E


Iyswarya Narayanan, Di Wang, Myeongjae Jeon, Bikash Sharma, Laura Caulfield,
Anand Sivasubramaniam, Ben Cutler, Jie Liu, Badriddine Khessib, and Kushagra Vaid.
SSD Failures in Datacenters: What? When? and Why? At 9th ACM International on
Systems and Storage Conference (SYSTOR), June 2016. doi:10.1145/2928275.2928278


Alibaba Cloud Storage Team. Storage System Design Analysis: Factors Affecting NVMe
SSD Performance (1). alibabacloud.com, January 2019. Archived at archive.org


Bianca Schroeder, Raghav Lagisetty, and Arif Merchant. Flash Reliability in
Production: The Expected and the Unexpected. At 14th USENIX Conference on File and
Storage Technologies (FAST), February 2016.


Jacob Alter, Ji Xue, Alma Dimnaku, and Evgenia Smirni. SSD failures in the field:
symptoms, causes, and prediction models. At International Conference for High
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC), November 2019.
doi:10.1145/3295500.3356172


Daniel Ford, François Labelle, Florentina I. Popovici, Murray Stokely, Van-Anh
Truong, Luiz Barroso, Carrie Grimes, and Sean Quinlan. Availability in Globally
Distributed Storage Systems. At 9th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI), October 2010.
Kashi Venkatesh Vishwanath and Nachiappan Nagappan. Characterizing Cloud
Computing Hardware Reliability. At 1st ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC),
June 2010. doi:10.1145/1807128.1807161


Peter H. Hochschild, Paul Turner, Jeffrey C. Mogul, Rama Govindaraju, Parthasarathy
Ranganathan, David E. Culler, and Amin Vahdat. Cores that don’t count. At Workshop
on Hot Topics in Operating Systems (HotOS), June 2021. doi:10.1145/3458336.3465297


Harish Dattatraya Dixit, Sneha Pendharkar, Matt Beadon, Chris Mason, Tejasvi
Chakravarthy, Bharath Muthiah, and Sriram Sankar. Silent Data Corruptions at Scale.
arXiv:2102.11245, February 2021.


Diogo Behrens, Marco Serafini, Sergei Arnautov, Flavio P. Junqueira, and Christof
Fetzer. Scalable Error Isolation for Distributed Systems. At 12th USENIX Symposium
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI), May 2015.


Bianca Schroeder, Eduardo Pinheiro, and Wolf-Dietrich Weber. DRAM Errors in the
Wild: A Large-Scale Field Study. At 11th International Joint Conference on
Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems (SIGMETRICS), June 2009.
doi:10.1145/1555349.1555372


Yoongu Kim, Ross Daly, Jeremie Kim, Chris Fallin, Ji Hye Lee, Donghyuk Lee, Chris
Wilkerson, Konrad Lai, and Onur Mutlu. Flipping Bits in Memory Without Accessing
Them: An Experimental Study of DRAM Disturbance Errors. At 41st Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), June 2014.
doi:10.5555/2665671.2665726


Adrian Cockcroft. Failure Modes and Continuous Resilience. adrianco.medium.com,
November 2019. Archived at perma.cc/7SYS-BVJP


Shujie Han, Patrick P. C. Lee, Fan Xu, Yi Liu, Cheng He, and Jiongzhou Liu. An In-Depth
Study of Correlated Failures in Production SSD-Based Data Centers. At 19th USENIX
Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST), February 2021.
Edmund B. Nightingale, John R. Douceur, and Vince Orgovan. Cycles, Cells and
Platters: An Empirical Analysis of Hardware Failures on a Million Consumer PCs. At
6th European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys), April 2011.
doi:10.1145/1966445.1966477


Haryadi S. Gunawi, Mingzhe Hao, Tanakorn Leesatapornwongsa, Tiratat Patana-
anake, Thanh Do, Jeffry Adityatama, Kurnia J. Eliazar, Agung Laksono, Jeffrey F.
Lukman, Vincentius Martin, and Anang D. Satria. What Bugs Live in the Cloud? At 5th
ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC), November 2014.
doi:10.1145/2670979.2670986


Jay Kreps. Getting Real About Distributed System Reliability. blog.empathybox.com,
March 2012. Archived at perma.cc/9B5Q-AEBW


Nelson Minar. Leap Second Crashes Half the Internet. somebits.com, July 2012.
Archived at perma.cc/2WB8-D6EU


Hewlett Packard Enterprise. Support Alerts – Customer Bulletin a00092491en_us.
support.hpe.com, November 2019. Archived at perma.cc/S5F6-7ZAC


Lorin Hochstein. awesome limits. github.com, November 2020. Archived at
perma.cc/3R5M-E5Q4


Lilia Tang, Chaitanya Bhandari, Yongle Zhang, Anna Karanika, Shuyang Ji, Indranil
Gupta, and Tianyin Xu. Fail through the Cracks: Cross-System Interaction Failures in
Modern Cloud Systems. At 18th European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys),
May 2023. doi:10.1145/3552326.3587448


Mike Ulrich. Addressing Cascading Failures. In Betsy Beyer, Jennifer Petoff, Chris
Jones, and Niall Richard Murphy (ed). Site Reliability Engineering: How Google Runs
Production Systems. O’Reilly Media, 2016. ISBN: 9781491929124
Harri Faßbender. Cascading failures in large-scale distributed systems. blog.mi.hdm-
stuttgart.de, March 2022. Archived at perma.cc/K7VY-YJRX


Richard I. Cook. How Complex Systems Fail. Cognitive Technologies Laboratory, April
2000. Archived at perma.cc/RDS6-2YVA


David D Woods. STELLA: Report from the SNAFUcatchers Workshop on Coping With
Complexity. snafucatchers.github.io, March 2017. Archived at archive.org


David Oppenheimer, Archana Ganapathi, and David A. Patterson. Why Do Internet
Services Fail, and What Can Be Done About It? At 4th USENIX Symposium on Internet
Technologies and Systems (USITS), March 2003.


Sidney Dekker. The Field Guide to Understanding ‘Human Error’, 3rd Edition. CRC
Press, November 2017. ISBN: 9781472439055


John Allspaw. Blameless PostMortems and a Just Culture. etsy.com, May 2012.
Archived at perma.cc/YMJ7-NTAP


Itzy Sabo. Uptime Guarantees — A Pragmatic Perspective. world.hey.com, March 2023.
Archived at perma.cc/F7TU-78JB


Michael Jurewitz. The Human Impact of Bugs. jury.me, March 2013. Archived at
perma.cc/5KQ4-VDYL


Haroon Siddique and Ben Quinn. Court clears 39 post office operators convicted due
to ‘corrupt data’. theguardian.com, April 2021. Archived at archive.org


Nicholas Bohm, James Christie, Peter Bernard Ladkin, Bev Littlewood, Paul Marshall,
Stephen Mason, Martin Newby, Steven J. Murdoch, Harold Thimbleby, and Martyn
Thomas. The legal rule that computers are presumed to be operating correctly –
unforeseen and unjust consequences. Briefing note, benthamsgaze.org, June 2022.
Archived at perma.cc/WQ6X-TMW4
Dan McKinley. Choose Boring Technology. mcfunley.com, March 2015. Archived at
perma.cc/7QW7-J4YP


Andy Warfield. Building and operating a pretty big storage system called S3.
allthingsdistributed.com, July 2023. Archived at perma.cc/7LPK-TP7V


Marc Brooker. Surprising Scalability of Multitenancy. brooker.co.za, March 2023.
Archived at archive.org


Ben Stopford. Shared Nothing vs. Shared Disk Architectures: An Independent View.
benstopford.com, November 2009. Archived at perma.cc/7BXH-EDUR


Michael Stonebraker. The Case for Shared Nothing. IEEE Database Engineering
Bulletin, volume 9, issue 1, pages 4–9, March 1986.


Panagiotis Antonopoulos, Alex Budovski, Cristian Diaconu, Alejandro Hernandez
Saenz, Jack Hu, Hanuma Kodavalla, Donald Kossmann, Sandeep Lingam, Umar
Farooq Minhas, Naveen Prakash, Vijendra Purohit, Hugh Qu, Chaitanya Sreenivas
Ravella, Krystyna Reisteter, Sheetal Shrotri, Dixin Tang, and Vikram Wakade.
Socrates: The New SQL Server in the Cloud. At ACM International Conference on
Management of Data (SIGMOD), pages 1743–1756, June 2019.
doi:10.1145/3299869.3314047


Sam Newman. Building Microservices, second edition. O’Reilly Media, 2021. ISBN:
9781492034025


Nathan Ensmenger. When Good Software Goes Bad: The Surprising Durability of an
Ephemeral Technology. At The Maintainers Conference, April 2016. Archived at
perma.cc/ZXT4-HGZB


Robert L. Glass. Facts and Fallacies of Software Engineering. Addison-Wesley
Professional, October 2002. ISBN: 9780321117427
Marianne Bellotti. Kill It with Fire. No Starch Press, April 2021. ISBN: 9781718501188


Lisanne Bainbridge. Ironies of automation. Automatica, volume 19, issue 6, pages
775–779, November 1983. doi:10.1016/0005-1098(83)90046-8


James Hamilton. On Designing and Deploying Internet-Scale Services. At 21st Large
Installation System Administration Conference (LISA), November 2007.


Dotan Horovits. Open Source for Better Observability. horovits.medium.com, October
2021. Archived at perma.cc/R2HD-U2ZT


Brian Foote and Joseph Yoder. Big Ball of Mud. At 4th Conference on Pattern Languages
of Programs (PLoP), September 1997. Archived at perma.cc/4GUP-2PBV


Marc Brooker. What is a simple system? brooker.co.za, May 2022. Archived at
archive.org


Frederick P Brooks. No Silver Bullet – Essence and Accident in Software Engineering.
In The Mythical Man-Month, Anniversary edition, Addison-Wesley, 1995. ISBN:
9780201835953


Dan Luu. Against essential and accidental complexity. danluu.com, December 2020.
Archived at perma.cc/H5ES-69KC


Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, and John Vlissides. Design Patterns:
Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software. Addison-Wesley Professional, October
1994. ISBN: 9780201633610


Eric Evans. Domain-Driven Design: Tackling Complexity in the Heart of Software.
Addison-Wesley Professional, August 2003. ISBN: 9780321125217


Hongyu Pei Breivold, Ivica Crnkovic, and Peter J. Eriksson. Analyzing Software
Evolvability. at 32nd Annual IEEE International Computer Software and Applications
Conference (COMPSAC), July 2008. doi:10.1109/COMPSAC.2008.50


Enrico Zaninotto. From X programming to the X organisation. At XP Conference, May
2002. Archived at perma.cc/R9AR-QCKZ
Chapter 3. Data Models and Query
Languages
 The limits of my language mean the limits of my world.

       —Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-
                            Philosophicus (1922)
A NOTE FOR EARLY RELEASE READERS

With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form
—the author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you
can take advantage of these technologies long before the official
release of these titles.

This will be the 3rd chapter of the final book. The GitHub repo
for this book is https://github.com/ept/ddia2-feedback.

If you have comments about how we might improve the content
and/or examples in this book, or if you notice missing material
within this chapter, please reach out on GitHub.




Data models are perhaps the most important part of developing
software, because they have such a profound effect: not only on
how the software is written, but also on how we think about the
problem that we are solving.

Most applications are built by layering one data model on top of
another. For each layer, the key question is: how is it represented
in terms of the next-lower layer? For example:
1. As an application developer, you look at the real world (in
  which there are people, organizations, goods, actions, money
  flows, sensors, etc.) and model it in terms of objects or data
  structures, and APIs that manipulate those data structures.
  Those structures are often specific to your application.
2. When you want to store those data structures, you express
  them in terms of a general-purpose data model, such as JSON
  or XML documents, tables in a relational database, or
  vertices and edges in a graph. Those data models are the
  topic of this chapter.
3. The engineers who built your database software decided on a
  way of representing that JSON/relational/graph data in terms
  of bytes in memory, on disk, or on a network. The
  representation may allow the data to be queried, searched,
  manipulated, and processed in various ways. We will discuss
  these storage engine designs in [Link to Come].
4. On yet lower levels, hardware engineers have figured out
  how to represent bytes in terms of electrical currents, pulses
  of light, magnetic fields, and more.

In a complex application there may be more intermediary
levels, such as APIs built upon APIs, but the basic idea is still the
same: each layer hides the complexity of the layers below it by
providing a clean data model. These abstractions allow
different groups of people—for example, the engineers at the
database vendor and the application developers using their
database—to work together effectively.

Several different data models are widely used in practice, often
for different purposes. Some types of data and some queries are
easy to express in one model, and awkward in another. In this
chapter we will explore those trade-offs by comparing the
relational model, the document model, graph-based data
models, event sourcing, and dataframes. We will also briefly
look at query languages that allow you to work with these
models. This comparison will help you decide when to use
which model.
TERMINOLOGY: DECLARATIVE QUERY LANGUAGES

Many of the query languages in this chapter (such as SQL,
Cypher, SPARQL, or Datalog) are declarative, which means that
you specify the pattern of the data you want—what conditions
the results must meet, and how you want the data to be
transformed (e.g., sorted, grouped, and aggregated)—but not
how to achieve that goal. The database system’s query optimizer
can decide which indexes and which join algorithms to use, and
in which order to execute various parts of the query.

In contrast, with most programming languages you would have
to write an algorithm—i.e., telling the computer which
operations to perform in which order. A declarative query
language is attractive because it is typically more concise and
easier to write than an explicit algorithm. But more
importantly, it also hides implementation details of the query
engine, which makes it possible for the database system to
introduce performance improvements without requiring any
changes to queries. [1].

For example, a database might be able to execute a declarative
query in parallel across multiple CPU cores and machines,
without you having to worry about how to implement that
parallelism [2]. In a hand-coded algorithm it would be a lot of
work to implement such parallel execution yourself.



Relational Model versus Document
Model
The best-known data model today is probably that of SQL,
based on the relational model proposed by Edgar Codd in 1970
[3]: data is organized into relations (called tables in SQL), where
each relation is an unordered collection of tuples (rows in SQL).

The relational model was originally a theoretical proposal, and
many people at the time doubted whether it could be
implemented efficiently. However, by the mid-1980s, relational
database management systems (RDBMS) and SQL had become
the tools of choice for most people who needed to store and
query data with some kind of regular structure. Many data
management use cases are still dominated by relational data
decades later—for example, business analytics (see “Stars and
Snowflakes: Schemas for Analytics”).

Over the years, there have been many competing approaches to
data storage and querying. In the 1970s and early 1980s, the
network model and the hierarchical model were the main
alternatives, but the relational model came to dominate them.
Object databases came and went again in the late 1980s and
early 1990s. XML databases appeared in the early 2000s, but
have only seen niche adoption. Each competitor to the
relational model generated a lot of hype in its time, but it never
lasted [4]. Instead, SQL has grown to incorporate other data
types besides its relational core—for example, adding support
for XML, JSON, and graph data [5].

In the 2010s, NoSQL was the latest buzzword that tried to
overthrow the dominance of relational databases. NoSQL refers
not to a single technology, but a loose set of ideas around new
data models, schema flexibility, scalability, and a move towards
open source licensing models. Some databases branded
themselves as NewSQL, as they aim to provide the scalability of
NoSQL systems along with the data model and transactional
guarantees of traditional relational databases. The NoSQL and
NewSQL ideas have been very influential in the design of data
systems, but as the principles have become widely adopted, use
of those terms has faded.

One lasting effect of the NoSQL movement is the popularity of
the document model, which usually represents data as JSON.
This model was originally popularized by specialized document
databases such as MongoDB and Couchbase, although most
relational databases have now also added JSON support.
Compared to relational tables, which are often seen as having a
rigid and inflexible schema, JSON documents are thought to be
more flexible.

The pros and cons of document and relational data have been
debated extensively; let’s examine some of the key points of that
debate.


The Object-Relational Mismatch

Much application development today is done in object-oriented
programming languages, which leads to a common criticism of
the SQL data model: if data is stored in relational tables, an
awkward translation layer is required between the objects in
the application code and the database model of tables, rows,
and columns. The disconnect between the models is sometimes
called an impedance mismatch.


NOTE

The term impedance mismatch is borrowed from electronics. Every electric circuit
has a certain impedance (resistance to alternating current) on its inputs and outputs.
When you connect one circuit’s output to another one’s input, the power transfer
across the connection is maximized if the output and input impedances of the two
circuits match. An impedance mismatch can lead to signal reflections and other
troubles.
Object-relational mapping (ORM)

Object-relational mapping (ORM) frameworks like ActiveRecord
and Hibernate reduce the amount of boilerplate code required
for this translation layer, but they are often criticized [6]. Some
commonly cited problems are:

  ORMs are complex and can’t completely hide the differences
  between the two models, so developers still end up having to
  think about both the relational and the object
  representations of the data.
  ORMs are generally only used for OLTP app development (see
  “Characterizing Analytical and Operational Systems”); data
  engineers making the data available for analytics purposes
  still need to work with the underlying relational
  representation, so the design of the relational schema still
  matters when using an ORM.
  Many ORMs work only with relational OLTP databases.
  Organizations with diverse data systems such as search
  engines, graph databases, and NoSQL systems might find
  ORM support lacking.
  Some ORMs generate relational schemas automatically, but
  these might be awkward for the users who are accessing the
  relational data directly, and they might be inefficient on the
  underlying database. Customizing the ORM’s schema and
query generation can be complex and negate the benefit of
using the ORM in the first place.
ORMs often come with schema migration tools that update
database schemas as model definitions change. Such tools are
handy, but should be used with caution. Migrations on large
or high-traffic tables can lock the entire table for an extended
amount of time, resulting in downtime. Many operations
teams prefer to run schema migrations manually,
incrementally, during off peak hours, or with specialized
tools. Safe schema migrations are discussed further in
“Schema flexibility in the document model”.
ORMs make it easy to accidentally write inefficient queries,
such as the N+1 query problem [7]. For example, say you want
to display a list of user comments on a page, so you perform
one query that returns N comments, each containing the ID
of its author. To show the name of the comment author you
need to look up the ID in the users table. In hand-written SQL
you would probably perform this join in the query and
return the author name along with each comment, but with
an ORM you might end up making a separate query on the
users table for each of the N comments to look up its author,
resulting in N+1 database queries in total, which is slower
than performing the join in the database. To avoid this
  problem, you may need to tell the ORM to fetch the author
  information at the same time as fetching the comments.

Nevertheless, ORMs also have advantages:

  For data that is well suited to a relational model, some kind
  of translation between the persistent relational and the in-
  memory object representation is inevitable, and ORMs
  reduce the amount of boilerplate code required for this
  translation. Complicated queries may still need to be handled
  outside of the ORM, but the ORM can help with the simple
  and repetitive cases.
  Some ORMs help with caching the results of database
  queries, which can help reduce the load on the database.
  ORMs can also help with managing schema migrations and
  other administrative activities.


The document data model for one-to-many
relationships

Not all data lends itself well to a relational representation; let’s
look at an example to explore a limitation of the relational
model. Figure 3-1 illustrates how a résumé (a LinkedIn profile)
could be expressed in a relational schema. The profile as a
whole can be identified by a unique identifier, user_id . Fields
like first_name and last_name appear exactly once per
user, so they can be modeled as columns on the users table.

Most people have had more than one job in their career
(positions), and people may have varying numbers of periods of
education and any number of pieces of contact information.
One way of representing such one-to-many relationships is to
put positions, education, and contact information in separate
tables, with a foreign key reference to the users table, as in
Figure 3-1.
     Figure 3-1. Representing a LinkedIn profile using a relational schema.



Another way of representing the same information, which is
perhaps more natural and maps more closely to an object
structure in application code, is as a JSON document as shown
in Example 3-1.
Example 3-1. Representing a LinkedIn profile as a JSON
document


   {
       "user_id":        251,
       "first_name":     "Barack",
       "last_name":   "Obama",
       "headline":    "Former President of the United
       "region_id":   "us:91",
       "photo_url":   "/p/7/000/253/05b/308dd6e.jpg",
       "positions": [
         {"job_title": "President", "organization": "U
         {"job_title": "US Senator (D-IL)", "organizat
       ],
       "education": [
         {"school_name": "Harvard University", "start
         {"school_name": "Columbia University", "start
       ],
       "contact_info": {
         "website": "https://barackobama.com",
         "twitter": "https://twitter.com/barackobama"
       }
   }



Some developers feel that the JSON model reduces the
impedance mismatch between the application code and the
storage layer. However, as we shall see in [Link to Come], there
are also problems with JSON as a data encoding format. The
lack of a schema is often cited as an advantage; we will discuss
this in “Schema flexibility in the document model”.

The JSON representation has better locality than the multi-table
schema in Figure 3-1 (see “Data locality for reads and writes”).
If you want to fetch a profile in the relational example, you
need to either perform multiple queries (query each table by
user_id ) or perform a messy multi-way join between the
users table and its subordinate tables [8]. In the JSON
representation, all the relevant information is in one place,
making the query both faster and simpler.

The one-to-many relationships from the user profile to the
user’s positions, educational history, and contact information
imply a tree structure in the data, and the JSON representation
makes this tree structure explicit (see Figure 3-2).
           Figure 3-2. One-to-many relationships forming a tree structure.



NOTE

This type of relationship is sometimes called one-to-few rather than one-to-many,
since a résumé typically has a small number of positions [9, 10]. In sitations where
there may be a genuinely large number of related items—say, comments on a
celebrity’s social media post, of which there could be many thousands—embedding
them all in the same document may be too unwieldy, so the relational approach in
Figure 3-1 is preferable.




Normalization, Denormalization, and
Joins

In Example 3-1 in the preceding section, region_id is given as
an ID, not as the plain-text string "Washington, DC, United
States" . Why?
If the user interface has a free-text field for entering the region,
it makes sense to store it as a plain-text string. But there are
advantages to having standardized lists of geographic regions,
and letting users choose from a drop-down list or
autocompleter:

  Consistent style and spelling across profiles
  Avoiding ambiguity if there are several places with the same
  name (if the string were just “Washington”, would it refer to
  DC or to the state?)
  Ease of updating—the name is stored in only one place, so it
  is easy to update across the board if it ever needs to be
  changed (e.g., change of a city name due to political events)
  Localization support—when the site is translated into other
  languages, the standardized lists can be localized, so the
  region can be displayed in the viewer’s language
  Better search—e.g., a search for people on the US East Coast
  can match this profile, because the list of regions can encode
  the fact that Washington is located on the East Coast (which is
  not apparent from the string "Washington, DC" )

Whether you store an ID or a text string is a question of
normalization. When you use an ID, your data is more
normalized: the information that is meaningful to humans
(such as the text Washington, DC) is stored in only one place,
and everything that refers to it uses an ID (which only has
meaning within the database). When you store the text directly,
you are duplicating the human-meaningful information in
every record that uses it; this representation is denormalized.

The advantage of using an ID is that because it has no meaning
to humans, it never needs to change: the ID can remain the
same, even if the information it identifies changes. Anything
that is meaningful to humans may need to change sometime in
the future—and if that information is duplicated, all the
redundant copies need to be updated. That requires more code,
more write operations, and risks inconsistencies (where some
copies of the information are updated but others aren’t).

The downside of a normalized representation is that every time
you want to display a record containing an ID, you have to do
an additional lookup to resolve the ID into something human-
readable. In a relational data model, this is done using a join,
for example:


   SELECT users.*, regions.region_name
   FROM users
   JOIN regions ON users.region_id = regions.id
   WHERE users.id = 251;
In a document database, it is more common to either use a
denormalized representation that needs no join when reading,
or to perform the join in application code—that is, you first
fetch a document containing an ID, and then perform a second
query to resolve that ID into another document. In MongoDB, it
is also possible to perform a join using the $lookup operator
in an aggregation pipeline:


   db.users.aggregate([
        { $match: { _id: 251 } },
        { $lookup: {
              from: "regions",
              localField: "region_id",
              foreignField: "_id",
              as: "region"
        } }
   ])


Trade-offs of normalization

In the résumé example, while the region_id field is a
reference into a standardized set of regions, the name of the
organization (the company or government where the person
worked) and school_name (where they studied) are just
strings. This representation is denormalized: many people may
have worked at the same company, but there is no ID linking
them.

Perhaps the organization and school should be entities instead,
and the profile should reference their IDs instead of their
names? The same arguments for referencing the ID of a region
also apply here. For example, say we wanted to include the logo
of the school or company in addition to their name:

  In a denormalized representation, we would include the
  image URL of the logo on every individual person’s profile;
  this makes the JSON document self-contained, but it creates a
  headache if we ever need to change the logo, because we
  now need to find all of the occurrences of the old URL and
  update them [9].
  In a normalized representation, we would create an entity
  representing an organization or school, and store its name,
  logo URL, and perhaps other attributes (description, news
  feed, etc.) once on that entity. Every résumé that mentions
  the organization would then simply reference its ID, and
  updating the logo is easy.

As a general principle, normalized data is usually faster to write
(since there is only one copy), but slower to query (since it
requires joins); denormalized data is usually faster to read
(fewer joins), but more expensive to write (more copies to
update). You might find it helpful to view denormalization as a
form of derived data (“Systems of Record and Derived Data”),
since you need to set up a process for updating the redundant
copies of the data.

Besides the cost of performing all these updates, you also need
to consider the consistency of the database if a process crashes
halfway through making its updates. Databases that offer
atomic transactions (see [Link to Come]) make it easier to
remain consistent, but not all databases offer atomicity across
multiple documents. It is also possible to ensure consistency
through stream processing, which we discuss in [Link to Come].

Normalization tends to be better for OLTP systems, where both
reads and updates need to be fast; analytics systems often fare
better with denormalized data, since they perform updates in
bulk, and the performance of read-only queries is the dominant
concern. Moreover, in systems of small to moderate scale, a
normalized data model is often best, because you don’t have to
worry about keeping multiple copies of the data consistent with
each other, and the cost of performing joins is acceptable.
However, in very large-scale systems, the cost of joins can
become problematic.
Denormalization in the social networking case study

In “Case Study: Social Network Home Timelines” we compared
a normalized representation (Figure 2-1) and a denormalized
one (precomputed, materialized timelines): here, the join
between posts and follows was too expensive, and the
materialized timeline is a cache of the result of that join. The
fan-out process that inserts a new post into followers’ timelines
was our way of keeping the denormalized representation
consistent.

However, the implementation of materialized timelines at X
(formerly Twitter) does not store the actual text of each post:
each entry actually only stores the post ID, the ID of the user
who posted it, and a little bit of extra information to identify
reposts and replies [11]. In other words, it is a precomputed
result of (approximately) the following query:


   SELECT posts.id, posts.sender_id FROM posts
     JOIN follows ON posts.sender_id = follows.follo
     WHERE follows.follower_id = current_user
     ORDER BY posts.timestamp DESC
     LIMIT 1000
This means that whenever the timeline is read, the service still
needs to perform two joins: look up the post ID to fetch the
actual post content (as well as statistics such as the number of
likes and replies), and look up the sender’s profile by ID (to get
their username, profile picture, and other details). This process
of looking up the human-readable information by ID is called
hydrating the IDs, and it is essentially a join performed in
application code [11].

The reason for storing only IDs in the precomputed timeline is
that the data they refer to is fast-changing: the number of likes
and replies may change multiple times per second on a popular
post, and some users regularly change their username or
profile photo. Since the timeline should show the latest like
count and profile picture when it is viewed, it would not make
sense to denormalize this information into the materialized
timeline. Moreover, the storage cost would be increased
significantly by such denormalization.

This example shows that having to perform joins when reading
data is not, as sometimes claimed, an impediment to creating
high-performance, scalable services. Hydrating post ID and user
ID is actually a fairly easy operation to scale, since it
parallelizes well, and the cost doesn’t depend on the number of
accounts you are following or the number of followers you
have.

If you need to decide whether to denormalize something in
your application, the social network case study shows that the
choice is not immediately obvious: the most scalable approach
may involve denormalizing some things and leaving other
things normalized. You will have to carefully consider how
often the information changes, and the cost of reads and writes
(which might be dominated by outliers, such as users with
many follows/followers in the case of a typical social network).
Normalization and denormalization are not inherently good or
bad—they are just a trade-off in terms of performance of reads
and writes, as well as the amount of effort to implement.


Many-to-One and Many-to-Many
Relationships

While positions and education in Figure 3-1 are examples
of one-to-many or one-to-few relationships (one résumé has
several positions, but each position belongs only to one
résumé), the region_id field is an example of a many-to-one
relationship (many people live in the same region, but we
assume that each person lives in only one region at any one
time).

If we introduce entities for organizations and schools, and
reference them by ID from the résumé, then we also have
many-to-many relationships (one person has worked for several
organizations, and an organization has several past or present
employees). In a relational model, such a relationship is usually
represented as an associative table or join table, as shown in
Figure 3-3: each position associates one user ID with one
organization ID.




         Figure 3-3. Many-to-many relationships in the relational model.



Many-to-one and many-to-many relationships do not easily fit
within one self-contained JSON document; they lend themselves
more to a normalized representation. In a document model, one
possible representation is given in Example 3-2 and illustrated
in Figure 3-4: the data within each dotted rectangle can be
grouped into one document, but the links to organizations and
schools are best represented as references to other documents.

Example 3-2. A résumé that references organizations by ID.


   {
       "user_id":    251,
       "first_name": "Barack",
       "last_name": "Obama",
       "positions": [
         {"start": 2009, "end": 2017, "job_title": "Pr
         {"start": 2005, "end": 2008, "job_title": "US
       ],
       ...
   }
Figure 3-4. Many-to-many relationships in the document model: the data within each
                   dotted box can be grouped into one document.


Many-to-many relationships often need to be queried in “both
directions”: for example, finding all of the organizations that a
particular person has worked for, and finding all of the people
who have worked at a particular organization. One way of
enabling such queries is to store ID references on both sides,
i.e., a résumé includes the ID of each organization where the
person has worked, and the organization document includes
the IDs of the résumés that mention that organization. This
representation is denormalized, since the relationship is stored
in two places, which could become inconsistent with each other.
A normalized representation stores the relationship in only one
place, and relies on secondary indexes (which we discuss in
[Link to Come]) to allow the relationship to be efficiently
queried in both directions. In the relational schema of Figure 3-
3, we would tell the database to create indexes on both the
user_id and the org_id columns of the positions table.

In the document model of Example 3-2, the database needs to
index the org_id field of objects inside the positions array.
Many document databases and relational databases with JSON
support are able to create such indexes on values inside a
document.


Stars and Snowflakes: Schemas for
Analytics

Data warehouses (see “Data Warehousing”) are usually
relational, and there are a few widely-used conventions for the
structure of tables in a data warehouse: a star schema,
snowflake schema, dimensional modeling [12], and one big table
(OBT). These structures are optimized for the needs of business
analysts. ETL processes translate data from operational systems
into this schema.
The example schema in Figure 3-5 shows a data warehouse that
might be found at a grocery retailer. At the center of the schema
is a so-called fact table (in this example, it is called
fact_sales ). Each row of the fact table represents an event
that occurred at a particular time (here, each row represents a
customer’s purchase of a product). If we were analyzing
website traffic rather than retail sales, each row might
represent a page view or a click by a user.




        Figure 3-5. Example of a star schema for use in a data warehouse.
Usually, facts are captured as individual events, because this
allows maximum flexibility of analysis later. However, this
means that the fact table can become extremely large. A big
enterprise may have many petabytes of transaction history in
its data warehouse, mostly represented as fact tables.

Some of the columns in the fact table are attributes, such as the
price at which the product was sold and the cost of buying it
from the supplier (allowing the profit margin to be calculated).
Other columns in the fact table are foreign key references to
other tables, called dimension tables. As each row in the fact
table represents an event, the dimensions represent the who,
what, where, when, how, and why of the event.

For example, in Figure 3-5, one of the dimensions is the product
that was sold. Each row in the dim_product table represents
one type of product that is for sale, including its stock-keeping
unit (SKU), description, brand name, category, fat content,
package size, etc. Each row in the fact_sales table uses a
foreign key to indicate which product was sold in that
particular transaction. Queries often involve multiple joins to
multiple dimension tables.

Even date and time are often represented using dimension
tables, because this allows additional information about dates
(such as public holidays) to be encoded, allowing queries to
differentiate between sales on holidays and non-holidays.

Figure 3-5 is an example of a star schema. The name comes
from the fact that when the table relationships are visualized,
the fact table is in the middle, surrounded by its dimension
tables; the connections to these tables are like the rays of a star.

A variation of this template is known as the snowflake schema,
where dimensions are further broken down into
subdimensions. For example, there could be separate tables for
brands and product categories, and each row in the
dim_product table could reference the brand and category as
foreign keys, rather than storing them as strings in the
dim_product table. Snowflake schemas are more normalized
than star schemas, but star schemas are often preferred
because they are simpler for analysts to work with [12].

In a typical data warehouse, tables are often quite wide: fact
tables often have over 100 columns, sometimes several
hundred. Dimension tables can also be wide, as they include all
the metadata that may be relevant for analysis—for example,
the dim_store table may include details of which services are
offered at each store, whether it has an in-store bakery, the
square footage, the date when the store was first opened, when
it was last remodeled, how far it is from the nearest highway,
etc.

A star or snowflake schema consists mostly of many-to-one
relationships (e.g., many sales occur for one particular product,
in one particular store), represented as the fact table having
foreign keys into dimension tables, or dimensions into sub-
dimensions. In principle, other types of relationship could exist,
but they are often denormalized in order to simplify queries.
For example, if a customer buys several different products at
once, that multi-item transaction is not represented explicitly;
instead, there is a separate row in the fact table for each
product purchased, and those facts all just happen to have the
same customer ID, store ID, and timestamp.

Some data warehouse schemas take denormalization even
further and leave out the dimension tables entirely, folding the
information in the dimensions into denormalized columns on
the fact table instead (essentially, precomputing the join
between the fact table and the dimension tables). This approach
is known as one big table (OBT), and while it requires more
storage space, it sometimes enables faster queries [13].

In the context of analytics, such denormalization is
unproblematic, since the data typically represents a log of
historical data that is not going to change (except maybe for
occasionally correcting an error). The issues of data consistency
and write overheads that occur with denormalization in OLTP
systems are not as pressing in analytics.


When to Use Which Model

The main arguments in favor of the document data model are
schema flexibility, better performance due to locality, and that
for some applications it is closer to the object model used by the
application. The relational model counters by providing better
support for joins, many-to-one, and many-to-many
relationships. Let’s examine these arguments in more detail.

If the data in your application has a document-like structure
(i.e., a tree of one-to-many relationships, where typically the
entire tree is loaded at once), then it’s probably a good idea to
use a document model. The relational technique of shredding—
splitting a document-like structure into multiple tables (like
positions , education , and contact_info in Figure 3-1)—
can lead to cumbersome schemas and unnecessarily
complicated application code.

The document model has limitations: for example, you cannot
refer directly to a nested item within a document, but instead
you need to say something like “the second item in the list of
positions for user 251”. If you do need to reference nested
items, a relational approach works better, since you can refer to
any item directly by its ID.

Some applications allow the user to choose the order of items:
for example, imagine a to-do list or issue tracker where the user
can drag and drop tasks to reorder them. The document model
supports such applications well, because the items (or their IDs)
can simply be stored in a JSON array to determine their order.
In relational databases there isn’t a standard way of
representing such reorderable lists, and various tricks are used:
sorting by an integer column (requiring renumbering when you
insert into the middle), a linked list of IDs, or fractional
indexing [14, 15, 16].

Schema flexibility in the document model

Most document databases, and the JSON support in relational
databases, do not enforce any schema on the data in
documents. XML support in relational databases usually comes
with optional schema validation. No schema means that
arbitrary keys and values can be added to a document, and
when reading, clients have no guarantees as to what fields the
documents may contain.
Document databases are sometimes called schemaless, but
that’s misleading, as the code that reads the data usually
assumes some kind of structure—i.e., there is an implicit
schema, but it is not enforced by the database [17]. A more
accurate term is schema-on-read (the structure of the data is
implicit, and only interpreted when the data is read), in
contrast with schema-on-write (the traditional approach of
relational databases, where the schema is explicit and the
database ensures all data conforms to it when the data is
written) [18].

Schema-on-read is similar to dynamic (runtime) type checking
in programming languages, whereas schema-on-write is similar
to static (compile-time) type checking. Just as the advocates of
static and dynamic type checking have big debates about their
relative merits [19], enforcement of schemas in database is a
contentious topic, and in general there’s no right or wrong
answer.

The difference between the approaches is particularly
noticeable in situations where an application wants to change
the format of its data. For example, say you are currently
storing each user’s full name in one field, and you instead want
to store the first name and last name separately [20]. In a
document database, you would just start writing new
documents with the new fields and have code in the application
that handles the case when old documents are read. For
example:


   if (user && user.name && !user.first_name) {
            // Documents written before Dec 8, 2023 don't
            user.first_name = user.name.split(" ")[0];
   }



The downside of this approach is that every part of your
application that reads from the database now needs to deal
with documents in old formats that may have been written a
long time in the past. On the other hand, in a schema-on-write
database, you would typically perform a migration along the
lines of:


   ALTER TABLE users ADD COLUMN first_name text DEFA
   UPDATE users SET first_name = split_part(name, '
   UPDATE users SET first_name = substring_index(nam



In most relational databases, adding a column with a default
value is fast and unproblematic, even on large tables. However,
running the UPDATE statement is likely to be slow on a large
table, since every row needs to be rewritten, and other schema
operations (such as changing the data type of a column) also
typically require the entire table to be copied.

Various tools exist to allow this type of schema changes to be
performed in the background without downtime [21, 22, 23, 24],
but performing such migrations on large databases remains
operationally challenging. Complicated migrations can be
avoided by only adding the first_name column with a default
value of NULL (which is fast), and filling it in at read time, like
you would with a document database.

The schema-on-read approach is advantageous if the items in
the collection don’t all have the same structure for some reason
(i.e., the data is heterogeneous)—for example, because:

  There are many different types of objects, and it is not
  practicable to put each type of object in its own table.
  The structure of the data is determined by external systems
  over which you have no control and which may change at
  any time.

In situations like these, a schema may hurt more than it helps,
and schemaless documents can be a much more natural data
model. But in cases where all records are expected to have the
same structure, schemas are a useful mechanism for
documenting and enforcing that structure. We will discuss
schemas and schema evolution in more detail in [Link to
Come].


Data locality for reads and writes

A document is usually stored as a single continuous string,
encoded as JSON, XML, or a binary variant thereof (such as
MongoDB’s BSON). If your application often needs to access the
entire document (for example, to render it on a web page),
there is a performance advantage to this storage locality. If data
is split across multiple tables, like in Figure 3-1, multiple index
lookups are required to retrieve it all, which may require more
disk seeks and take more time.

The locality advantage only applies if you need large parts of
the document at the same time. The database typically needs to
load the entire document, which can be wasteful if you only
need to access a small part of a large document. On updates to a
document, the entire document usually needs to be rewritten.
For these reasons, it is generally recommended that you keep
documents fairly small and avoid frequent small updates to a
document.
However, the idea of storing related data together for locality is
not limited to the document model. For example, Google’s
Spanner database offers the same locality properties in a
relational data model, by allowing the schema to declare that a
table’s rows should be interleaved (nested) within a parent
table [25]. Oracle allows the same, using a feature called multi-
table index cluster tables [26]. The column-family concept in the
Bigtable data model (used in Cassandra, HBase, and ScyllaDB),
also known as a wide-column model, has a similar purpose of
managing locality [27].


Query languages for documents

Another difference between a relational and a document
database is the language or API that you use to query it. Most
relational databases are queried using SQL, but document
databases are more varied. Some allow only key-value access by
primary key, while others also offer secondary indexes to query
for values inside documents, and some provide rich query
languages.

XML databases are often queried using XQuery and XPath,
which are designed to allow complex queries, including joins
across multiple documents, and also format their results as
XML [28]. JSON Pointer [29] and JSONPath [30] provide an
equivalent to XPath for JSON. MongoDB’s aggregation pipeline,
whose $lookup operator for joins we saw in “Normalization,
Denormalization, and Joins”, is an example of a query language
for collections of JSON documents.

Let’s look at another example to get a feel for this language—
this time an aggregation, which is especially needed for
analytics. Imagine you are a marine biologist, and you add an
observation record to your database every time you see
animals in the ocean. Now you want to generate a report saying
how many sharks you have sighted per month. In PostgreSQL
you might express that query like this:


   SELECT date_trunc('month', observation_timestamp)
          sum(num_animals) AS total_animals
   FROM observations
   WHERE family = 'Sharks'
   GROUP BY observation_month;



     The date_trunc('month', timestamp) function
     determines the calendar month containing timestamp ,
     and returns another timestamp representing the
     beginning of that month. In other words, it rounds a
     timestamp down to the nearest month.
This query first filters the observations to only show species in
the Sharks family, then groups the observations by the
calendar month in which they occurred, and finally adds up the
number of animals seen in all observations in that month. The
same query can be expressed using MongoDB’s aggregation
pipeline as follows:


   db.observations.aggregate([
       { $match: { family: "Sharks" } },
       { $group: {
           _id: {
               year: { $year: "$observationTimesta
               month: { $month: "$observationTimesta
           },
           totalAnimals: { $sum: "$numAnimals" }
       } }
   ]);



The aggregation pipeline language is similar in expressiveness
to a subset of SQL, but it uses a JSON-based syntax rather than
SQL’s English-sentence-style syntax; the difference is perhaps a
matter of taste.
Convergence of document and relational databases

Document databases and relational databases started out as
very different approaches to data management, but they have
grown more similar over time. Relational databases added
support for JSON types and query operators, and the ability to
index properties inside documents. Some document databases
(such as MongoDB, Couchbase, and RethinkDB) added support
for joins, secondary indexes, and declarative query languages.

This convergence of the models is good news for application
developers, because the relational model and the document
model work best when you can combine both in the same
database. Many document databases need relational-style
references to other documents, and many relational databases
have sections where schema flexibility is beneficial. Relational-
document hybrids are a powerful combination.


NOTE

Codd’s original description of the relational model [3] actually allowed something
similar to JSON within a relational schema. He called it nonsimple domains. The idea
was that a value in a row doesn’t have to just be a primitive datatype like a number
or a string, but it could also be a nested relation (table)—so you can have an
arbitrarily nested tree structure as a value, much like the JSON or XML support that
was added to SQL over 30 years later.
Graph-Like Data Models
We saw earlier that the type of relationships is an important
distinguishing feature between different data models. If your
application has mostly one-to-many relationships (tree-
structured data) and few other relationships between records,
the document model is appropriate.

But what if many-to-many relationships are very common in
your data? The relational model can handle simple cases of
many-to-many relationships, but as the connections within your
data become more complex, it becomes more natural to start
modeling your data as a graph.

A graph consists of two kinds of objects: vertices (also known as
nodes or entities) and edges (also known as relationships or
arcs). Many kinds of data can be modeled as a graph. Typical
examples include:

  Social graphs

     Vertices are people, and edges indicate which people
     know each other.

  The web graph
     Vertices are web pages, and edges indicate HTML links to
     other pages.

  Road or rail networks

     Vertices are junctions, and edges represent the roads or
     railway lines between them.

Well-known algorithms can operate on these graphs: for
example, map navigation apps search for the shortest path
between two points in a road network, and PageRank can be
used on the web graph to determine the popularity of a web
page and thus its ranking in search results [31].

Graphs can be represented in several different ways. In the
adjacency list model, each vertex stores the IDs of its neighbor
vertices that are one edge away. Alternatively, you can use an
adjacency matrix, a two-dimensional array where each row and
each column corresponds to a vertex, where the value is zero
when there is no edge between the row vertex and the column
vertex, and where the value is one if there is an edge. The
adjacency list is good for graph traversals, and the matrix is
good for machine learning (see “Dataframes, Matrices, and
Arrays”).
In the examples just given, all the vertices in a graph represent
the same kind of thing (people, web pages, or road junctions,
respectively). However, graphs are not limited to such
homogeneous data: an equally powerful use of graphs is to
provide a consistent way of storing completely different types
of objects in a single database. For example:

  Facebook maintains a single graph with many different types
  of vertices and edges: vertices represent people, locations,
  events, checkins, and comments made by users; edges
  indicate which people are friends with each other, which
  checkin happened in which location, who commented on
  which post, who attended which event, and so on [32].
  Knowledge graphs are used by search engines to record facts
  about entities that often occur in search queries, such as
  organizations, people, and places [33]. This information is
  obtained by crawling and analyzing the text on websites;
  some websites, such as Wikidata, also publish graph data in a
  structured form.

There are several different, but related, ways of structuring and
querying data in graphs. In this section we will discuss the
property graph model (implemented by Neo4j, Memgraph,
KùzuDB [34], and others [35]) and the triple-store model
(implemented by Datomic, AllegroGraph, Blazegraph, and
others). These models are fairly similar in what they can
express, and some graph databases (such as Amazon Neptune)
support both models.

We will also look at four query languages for graphs (Cypher,
SPARQL, Datalog, and GraphQL), as well as SQL support for
querying graphs. Other graph query languages exist, such as
Gremlin [36], but these will give us a representative overview.

To illustrate these different languages and models, this section
uses the graph shown in Figure 3-6 as running example. It could
be taken from a social network or a genealogical database: it
shows two people, Lucy from Idaho and Alain from Saint-Lô,
France. They are married and living in London. Each person
and each location is represented as a vertex, and the
relationships between them as edges. This example will help
demonstrate some queries that are easy in graph databases, but
difficult in other models.
  Figure 3-6. Example of graph-structured data (boxes represent vertices, arrows
                                 represent edges).



Property Graphs

In the property graph (also known as labeled property graph)
model, each vertex consists of:

  A unique identifier
  A label (string) to describe what type of object this vertex
  represents
  A set of outgoing edges
  A set of incoming edges
  A collection of properties (key-value pairs)
Each edge consists of:

  A unique identifier
  The vertex at which the edge starts (the tail vertex)
  The vertex at which the edge ends (the head vertex)
  A label to describe the kind of relationship between the two
  vertices
  A collection of properties (key-value pairs)

You can think of a graph store as consisting of two relational
tables, one for vertices and one for edges, as shown in
Example 3-3 (this schema uses the PostgreSQL jsonb datatype
to store the properties of each vertex or edge). The head and tail
vertex are stored for each edge; if you want the set of incoming
or outgoing edges for a vertex, you can query the edges table
by head_vertex or tail_vertex , respectively.

Example 3-3. Representing a property graph using a
relational schema


   CREATE TABLE vertices (
       vertex_id   integer PRIMARY KEY,
       label       text,
       properties jsonb
   );
   CREATE TABLE edges (
       edge_id     integer PRIMARY KEY,
       tail_vertex integer REFERENCES vertices (vert
       head_vertex integer REFERENCES vertices (vert
        label           text,
        properties      jsonb
   );


   CREATE INDEX edges_tails ON edges (tail_vertex);
   CREATE INDEX edges_heads ON edges (head_vertex);



Some important aspects of this model are:

1. Any vertex can have an edge connecting it with any other
  vertex. There is no schema that restricts which kinds of
  things can or cannot be associated.
2. Given any vertex, you can efficiently find both its incoming
  and its outgoing edges, and thus traverse the graph—i.e.,
  follow a path through a chain of vertices—both forward and
  backward. (That’s why Example 3-3 has indexes on both the
  tail_vertex and head_vertex columns.)
3. By using different labels for different kinds of vertices and
  relationships, you can store several different kinds of
  information in a single graph, while still maintaining a clean
  data model.
The edges table is like the many-to-many associative table/join
table we saw in “Many-to-One and Many-to-Many
Relationships”, generalized to allow many different types of
relationship to be stored in the same table. There may also be
indexes on the labels and the properties, allowing vertices or
edges with certain properties to be found efficiently.


NOTE

A limitation of graph models is that an edge can only associate two vertices with each
other, whereas a relational join table can represent three-way or even higher-degree
relationships by having multiple foreign key references on a single row. Such
relationships can be represented in a graph by creating an additional vertex
corresponding to each row of the join table, and edges to/from that vertex, or by
using a hypergraph.




Those features give graphs a great deal of flexibility for data
modeling, as illustrated in Figure 3-6. The figure shows a few
things that would be difficult to express in a traditional
relational schema, such as different kinds of regional structures
in different countries (France has départements and régions,
whereas the US has counties and states), quirks of history such
as a country within a country (ignoring for now the intricacies
of sovereign states and nations), and varying granularity of
data (Lucy’s current residence is specified as a city, whereas her
place of birth is specified only at the level of a state).
You could imagine extending the graph to also include many
other facts about Lucy and Alain, or other people. For instance,
you could use it to indicate any food allergies they have (by
introducing a vertex for each allergen, and an edge between a
person and an allergen to indicate an allergy), and link the
allergens with a set of vertices that show which foods contain
which substances. Then you could write a query to find out
what is safe for each person to eat. Graphs are good for
evolvability: as you add features to your application, a graph
can easily be extended to accommodate changes in your
application’s data structures.


The Cypher Query Language

Cypher is a query language for property graphs, originally
created for the Neo4j graph database, and later developed into
an open standard as openCypher [37]. Besides Neo4j, Cypher is
supported by Memgraph, KùzuDB [34], Amazon Neptune,
Apache AGE (with storage in PostgreSQL), and others. It is
named after a character in the movie The Matrix and is not
related to ciphers in cryptography [38].

Example 3-4 shows the Cypher query to insert the lefthand
portion of Figure 3-6 into a graph database. The rest of the
graph can be added similarly. Each vertex is given a symbolic
name like usa or idaho . That name is not stored in the
database, but only used internally within the query to create
edges between the vertices, using an arrow notation: (idaho)
-[:WITHIN]-> (usa) creates an edge labeled WITHIN , with
idaho as the tail node and usa as the head node.

Example 3-4. A subset of the data in Figure 3-6, represented
as a Cypher query


   CREATE
     (namerica :Location {name:'North America', typ
     (usa      :Location {name:'United States', typ
     (idaho    :Location {name:'Idaho',         typ
     (lucy     :Person   {name:'Lucy' }),
     (idaho) -[:WITHIN ]-> (usa) -[:WITHIN]-> (name
     (lucy) -[:BORN_IN]-> (idaho)



When all the vertices and edges of Figure 3-6 are added to the
database, we can start asking interesting questions: for
example, find the names of all the people who emigrated from the
United States to Europe. That is, find all the vertices that have a
BORN_IN edge to a location within the US, and also a
LIVING_IN edge to a location within Europe, and return the
name property of each of those vertices.
Example 3-5 shows how to express that query in Cypher. The
same arrow notation is used in a MATCH clause to find patterns
in the graph: (person) -[:BORN_IN]-> () matches any two
vertices that are related by an edge labeled BORN_IN . The tail
vertex of that edge is bound to the variable person , and the
head vertex is left unnamed.

Example 3-5. Cypher query to find people who emigrated
from the US to Europe


   MATCH
     (person) -[:BORN_IN]-> () -[:WITHIN*0..]-> (:L
     (person) -[:LIVES_IN]-> () -[:WITHIN*0..]-> (:L
   RETURN person.name



The query can be read as follows:
  Find any vertex (call it person ) that meets both of the
  following conditions:

   1. person has an outgoing BORN_IN edge to some vertex.
     From that vertex, you can follow a chain of outgoing
      WITHIN edges until eventually you reach a vertex of type
      Location , whose name property is equal to "United
     States" .
   2. That same person vertex also has an outgoing
      LIVES_IN edge. Following that edge, and then a chain of
     outgoing WITHIN edges, you eventually reach a vertex of
     type Location , whose name property is equal to
      "Europe" .

  For each such person vertex, return the name property.

There are several possible ways of executing the query. The
description given here suggests that you start by scanning all
the people in the database, examine each person’s birthplace
and residence, and return only those people who meet the
criteria.

But equivalently, you could start with the two Location
vertices and work backward. If there is an index on the name
property, you can efficiently find the two vertices representing
the US and Europe. Then you can proceed to find all locations
(states, regions, cities, etc.) in the US and Europe respectively by
following all incoming WITHIN edges. Finally, you can look for
people who can be found through an incoming BORN_IN or
LIVES_IN edge at one of the location vertices.


Graph Queries in SQL

Example 3-3 suggested that graph data can be represented in a
relational database. But if we put graph data in a relational
structure, can we also query it using SQL?

The answer is yes, but with some difficulty. Every edge that you
traverse in a graph query is effectively a join with the edges
table. In a relational database, you usually know in advance
which joins you need in your query. On the other hand, in a
graph query, you may need to traverse a variable number of
edges before you find the vertex you’re looking for—that is, the
number of joins is not fixed in advance.

In our example, that happens in the () -[:WITHIN*0..]->
() pattern in the Cypher query. A person’s LIVES_IN edge
may point at any kind of location: a street, a city, a district, a
region, a state, etc. A city may be WITHIN a region, a region
WITHIN a state, a state WITHIN a country, etc. The LIVES_IN
edge may point directly at the location vertex you’re looking for,
or it may be several levels away in the location hierarchy.

In Cypher, :WITHIN*0.. expresses that fact very concisely: it
means “follow a WITHIN edge, zero or more times.” It is like
the * operator in a regular expression.

Since SQL:1999, this idea of variable-length traversal paths in a
query can be expressed using something called recursive
common table expressions (the WITH RECURSIVE syntax).
Example 3-6 shows the same query—finding the names of
people who emigrated from the US to Europe—expressed in
SQL using this technique. However, the syntax is very clumsy in
comparison to Cypher.

Example 3-6. The same query as Example 3-5, written in SQL
using recursive common table expressions


   WITH RECURSIVE

     -- in_usa is the set of vertex IDs of all locat
     in_usa(vertex_id) AS (
         SELECT vertex_id FROM vertices
            WHERE label = 'Location' AND properties->
        UNION
           SELECT edges.tail_vertex FROM edges
     JOIN in_usa ON edges.head_vertex = in_usa
     WHERE edges.label = 'within'
),


-- in_europe is the set of vertex IDs of all lo
in_europe(vertex_id) AS (
    SELECT vertex_id FROM vertices
      WHERE label = 'location' AND properties->
  UNION
    SELECT edges.tail_vertex FROM edges
      JOIN in_europe ON edges.head_vertex = in_
      WHERE edges.label = 'within'
),


-- born_in_usa is the set of vertex IDs of all
born_in_usa(vertex_id) AS (
  SELECT edges.tail_vertex FROM edges
    JOIN in_usa ON edges.head_vertex = in_usa.v
    WHERE edges.label = 'born_in'
),

-- lives_in_europe is the set of vertex IDs of
lives_in_europe(vertex_id) AS (
  SELECT edges.tail_vertex FROM edges
    JOIN in_europe ON edges.head_vertex = in_eu
    WHERE edges.label = 'lives_in'
)
SELECT vertices.properties->>'name'
FROM vertices
-- join to find those people who were both born i
JOIN born_in_usa     ON vertices.vertex_id = born
JOIN lives_in_europe ON vertices.vertex_id = live



 First find the vertex whose name property has the value
  "United States" , and make it the first element of the
 set of vertices in_usa .

 Follow all incoming within edges from vertices in the
 set in_usa , and add them to the same set, until all
 incoming within edges have been visited.

 Do the same starting with the vertex whose name
 property has the value "Europe" , and build up the set of
 vertices in_europe .

 For each of the vertices in the set in_usa , follow
 incoming born_in edges to find people who were born
 in some place within the United States.

 Similarly, for each of the vertices in the set in_europe ,
 follow incoming lives_in edges to find people who live
 in Europe.
      Finally, intersect the set of people born in the USA with
      the set of people living in Europe, by joining them.

The fact that a 4-line Cypher query requires 31 lines in SQL
shows how much of a difference the right choice of data model
and query language can make. And this is just the beginning;
there are more details to consider, e.g., around handling cycles,
and choosing between breadth-first or depth-first traversal [39].
Oracle has a different SQL extension for recursive queries,
which it calls hierarchical [40].

However, the situation may be improving: at the time of
writing, there are plans to add a graph query language called
GQL to the SQL standard [41, 42], which will provide a syntax
inspired by Cypher, GSQL [43], and PGQL [44].


Triple-Stores and SPARQL

The triple-store model is mostly equivalent to the property
graph model, using different words to describe the same ideas.
It is nevertheless worth discussing, because there are various
tools and languages for triple-stores that can be valuable
additions to your toolbox for building applications.

In a triple-store, all information is stored in the form of very
simple three-part statements: (subject, predicate, object). For
example, in the triple (Jim, likes, bananas), Jim is the subject,
likes is the predicate (verb), and bananas is the object.

The subject of a triple is equivalent to a vertex in a graph. The
object is one of two things:

1. A value of a primitive datatype, such as a string or a number.
  In that case, the predicate and object of the triple are
  equivalent to the key and value of a property on the subject
  vertex. Using the example from Figure 3-6, (lucy, birthYear,
  1989) is like a vertex lucy with properties {"birthYear":
  1989} .
2. Another vertex in the graph. In that case, the predicate is an
  edge in the graph, the subject is the tail vertex, and the object
  is the head vertex. For example, in (lucy, marriedTo, alain)
  the subject and object lucy and alain are both vertices, and
  the predicate marriedTo is the label of the edge that connects
  them.
NOTE

To be precise, databases that offer a triple-like data model often need to store some
additional metadata on each tuple. For example, AWS Neptune uses quads (4-tuples)
by adding a graph ID to each triple [45]; Datomic uses 5-tuples, extending each triple
with a transaction ID and a boolean to indicate deletion [46]. Since these databases
retain the basic subject-predicate-object structure explained above, this book
nevertheless calls them triple-stores.




Example 3-7 shows the same data as in Example 3-4, written as
triples in a format called Turtle, a subset of Notation3 (N3) [47].

Example 3-7. A subset of the data in Figure 3-6, represented
as Turtle triples


    @prefix : <urn:example:>.
    _:lucy             a             :Person.
    _:lucy             :name         "Lucy".
    _:lucy             :bornIn _:idaho.
    _:idaho            a             :Location.
    _:idaho            :name         "Idaho".
    _:idaho            :type         "state".
    _:idaho            :within _:usa.
    _:usa              a             :Location.
    _:usa              :name         "United States".
    _:usa              :type         "country".
    _:usa              :within _:namerica.
    _:namerica a                     :Location.
   _:namerica :name         "North America".
   _:namerica :type         "continent".



In this example, vertices of the graph are written as
_:someName . The name doesn’t mean anything outside of this
file; it exists only because we otherwise wouldn’t know which
triples refer to the same vertex. When the predicate represents
an edge, the object is a vertex, as in _:idaho :within _:usa .
When the predicate is a property, the object is a string literal, as
in _:usa :name "United States" .

It’s quite repetitive to repeat the same subject over and over
again, but fortunately you can use semicolons to say multiple
things about the same subject. This makes the Turtle format
quite readable: see Example 3-8.

Example 3-8. A more concise way of writing the data in
Example 3-7


   @prefix : <urn:example:>.
   _:lucy     a :Person;   :name           "Lucy";                :b
   _:idaho    a :Location; :name           "Idaho";               :t
   _:usa      a :Location; :name           "United States";       :t
   _:namerica a :Location; :name           "North America";       :t
THE SEMANTIC WEB

Some of the research and development effort on triple stores
was motivated by the Semantic Web, an early-2000s effort to
facilitate internet-wide data exchange by publishing data not
only as human-readable web pages, but also in a standardized,
machine-readable format. Although the Semantic Web as
originally envisioned did not succeed [48, 49], the legacy of the
Semantic Web project lives on in a couple of specific
technologies: linked data standards such as JSON-LD [50],
ontologies used in biomedical science [51], Facebook’s Open
Graph protocol [52] (which is used for link unfurling [53]),
knowledge graphs such as Wikidata, and standardized
vocabularies for structured data maintained by schema.org .

Triple-stores are another Semantic Web technology that has
found use outside of its original use case: even if you have no
interest in the Semantic Web, triples can be a good internal data
model for applications.



The RDF data model

The Turtle language we used in Example 3-8 is actually a way of
encoding data in the Resource Description Framework (RDF)
[54], a data model that was designed for the Semantic Web. RDF
data can also be encoded in other ways, for example (more
verbosely) in XML, as shown in Example 3-9. Tools like Apache
Jena can automatically convert between different RDF
encodings.

Example 3-9. The data of Example 3-8, expressed using
RDF/XML syntax


   <rdf:RDF xmlns="urn:example:"
       xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-s


     <Location rdf:nodeID="idaho">
       <name>Idaho</name>
       <type>state</type>
       <within>
         <Location rdf:nodeID="usa">
           <name>United States</name>
           <type>country</type>
           <within>
             <Location rdf:nodeID="namerica">
               <name>North America</name>
               <type>continent</type>
             </Location>
           </within>
         </Location>
       </within>
     </Location>
     <Person rdf:nodeID="lucy">
       <name>Lucy</name>
       <bornIn rdf:nodeID="idaho"/>
     </Person>
   </rdf:RDF>


RDF has a few quirks due to the fact that it is designed for
internet-wide data exchange. The subject, predicate, and object
of a triple are often URIs. For example, a predicate might be an
URI such as <http://my-company.com/namespace#within>
or <http://my-company.com/namespace#lives_in> , rather
than just WITHIN or LIVES_IN . The reasoning behind this
design is that you should be able to combine your data with
someone else’s data, and if they attach a different meaning to
the word within or lives_in , you won’t get a conflict
because their predicates are actually
<http://other.org/foo#within> and
<http://other.org/foo#lives_in> .

The URL <http://my-company.com/namespace> doesn’t
necessarily need to resolve to anything—from RDF’s point of
view, it is simply a namespace. To avoid potential confusion
with http:// URLs, the examples in this section use non-
resolvable URIs such as urn:example:within . Fortunately,
you can just specify this prefix once at the top of the file, and
then forget about it.


The SPARQL query language

SPARQL is a query language for triple-stores using the RDF data
model [55]. (It is an acronym for SPARQL Protocol and RDF
Query Language, pronounced “sparkle.”) It predates Cypher,
and since Cypher’s pattern matching is borrowed from SPARQL,
they look quite similar.

The same query as before—finding people who have moved
from the US to Europe—is similarly concise in SPARQL as it is in
Cypher (see Example 3-10).

Example 3-10. The same query as Example 3-5, expressed in
SPARQL


   PREFIX : <urn:example:>


   SELECT ?personName WHERE {
     ?person :name ?personName.
     ?person :bornIn / :within* / :name "United Sta
     ?person :livesIn / :within* / :name "Europe".
   }
The structure is very similar. The following two expressions are
equivalent (variables start with a question mark in SPARQL):


   (person) -[:BORN_IN]-> () -[:WITHIN*0..]-> (locat


   ?person :bornIn / :within* ?location.



Because RDF doesn’t distinguish between properties and edges
but just uses predicates for both, you can use the same syntax
for matching properties. In the following expression, the
variable usa is bound to any vertex that has a name property
whose value is the string "United States" :


   (usa {name:'United States'})           # Cypher


   ?usa :name "United States".            # SPARQL


SPARQL is supported by Amazon Neptune, AllegroGraph,
Blazegraph, OpenLink Virtuoso, Apache Jena, and various other
triple stores [35].
Datalog: Recursive Relational Queries

Datalog is a much older language than SPARQL or Cypher: it
arose from academic research in the 1980s [56, 57, 58]. It is less
well known among software engineers and not widely
supported in mainstream databases, but it ought to be better-
known since it is a very expressive language that is particularly
powerful for complex queries. Several niche databases,
including Datomic, LogicBlox, CozoDB, and LinkedIn’s LIquid
[59] use Datalog as their query language.

Datalog is actually based on a relational data model, not a
graph, but it appears in the graph databases section of this book
because recursive queries on graphs are a particular strength
of Datalog.

The contents of a Datalog database consists of facts, and each
fact corresponds to a row in a relational table. For example, say
we have a table location containing locations, and it has three
columns: ID, name, and type. The fact that the US is a country
could then be written as location(2, "United States",
"country") , where 2 is the ID of the US. In general, the
statement table(val1, val2, …​
                             ) means that table
contains a row where the first column contains val1 , the
second column contains val2 , and so on.
Example 3-11 shows how to write the data from the left-hand
side of Figure 3-6 in Datalog. The edges of the graph ( within ,
born_in , and lives_in ) are represented as two-column join
tables. For example, Lucy has the ID 100 and Idaho has the ID 3,
so the relationship “Lucy was born in Idaho” is represented as
born_in(100, 3) .

Example 3-11. A subset of the data in Figure 3-6, represented
as Datalog facts


   location(1, "North America", "continent").
   location(2, "United States", "country").
   location(3, "Idaho", "state").


   within(2, 1).         /* US is in North America */
   within(3, 2).         /* Idaho is in the US              */


   person(100, "Lucy").
   born_in(100, 3). /* Lucy was born in Idaho */


Now that we have defined the data, we can write the same
query as before, as shown in Example 3-12. It looks a bit
different from the equivalent in Cypher or SPARQL, but don’t let
that put you off. Datalog is a subset of Prolog, a programming
language that you might have seen before if you’ve studied
computer science.
Example 3-12. The same query as Example 3-5, expressed in
Datalog


   within_recursive(LocID, PlaceName) :- location(Lo


   within_recursive(LocID, PlaceName) :- within(LocI
                                                     within_recu

   migrated(PName, BornIn, LivingIn)             :- person(Pers
                                                    born_in(Per
                                                    within_recu
                                                    lives_in(Pe
                                                    within_recu

   us_to_europe(Person) :- migrated(Person, "United
   /* us_to_europe contains the row "Lucy". */



Cypher and SPARQL jump in right away with SELECT , but
Datalog takes a small step at a time. We define rules that derive
new virtual tables from the underlying facts. These derived
tables are like (virtual) SQL views: they are not stored in the
database, but you can query them in the same way as a table
containing stored facts.

In Example 3-12 we define three derived tables:
within_recursive , migrated , and us_to_europe . The
name and columns of the virtual tables are defined by what
appears before the :- symbol of each rule. For example,
migrated(PName, BornIn, LivingIn) is a virtual table
with three columns: the name of a person, the name of the
place where they were born, and the name of the place where
they are living.

The content of a virtual table is defined by the part of the rule
after the :- symbol, where we try to find rows that match a
certain pattern in the tables. For example, person(PersonID,
PName) matches the row person(100, "Lucy") , with the
variable PersonID bound to the value 100 and the variable
PName bound to the value "Lucy" . A rule applies if the system
can find a match for all patterns on the righthand side of the
:- operator. When the rule applies, it’s as though the lefthand
side of the :- was added to the database (with variables
replaced by the values they matched).

One possible way of applying the rules is thus (and as
illustrated in Figure 3-7):

1. location(1, "North America", "continent") exists in
  the database, so rule 1 applies. It generates
   within_recursive(1, "North America") .
2. within(2, 1) exists in the database and the previous step
  generated within_recursive(1, "North America") , so
  rule 2 applies. It generates within_recursive(2, "North
  America") .
3. within(3, 2) exists in the database and the previous step
  generated within_recursive(2, "North America") , so
  rule 2 applies. It generates within_recursive(3, "North
  America") .

By repeated application of rules 1 and 2, the
within_recursive virtual table can tell us all the locations in
North America (or any other location) contained in our
database.




Figure 3-7. Determining that Idaho is in North America, using the Datalog rules from
                                   Example 3-12.



Now rule 3 can find people who were born in some location
BornIn and live in some location LivingIn . Rule 4 invokes
rule 3 with BornIn = 'United States' and LivingIn =
'Europe' , and returns only the names of the people who
match the search. By querying the contents of the virtual
us_to_europe table, the Datalog system finally gets the same
answer as in the earlier Cypher and SPARQL queries.

The Datalog approach requires a different kind of thinking
compared to the other query languages discussed in this
chapter. It allows complex queries to be built up rule by rule,
with one rule referring to other rules, similarly to the way that
you break down code into functions that call each other. Just
like functions can be recursive, Datalog rules can also invoke
themselves, like rule 2 in Example 3-12, which enables graph
traversals in Datalog queries.


GraphQL

GraphQL is a query language that, by design, is much more
restrictive than the other query languages we have seen in this
chapter. The purpose of GraphQL is to allow client software
running on a user’s device (such as a mobile app or a JavaScript
web app frontend) to request a JSON document with a
particular structure, containing the fields necessary for
rendering its user interface. GraphQL interfaces allow
developers to rapidly change queries in client code without
changing server-side APIs.

GraphQL’s flexibility comes at a cost. Organizations that adopt
GraphQL often need tooling to convert GraphQL queries into
requests to internal services, which often use REST or gRPC (see
[Link to Come]). Authorization, rate limiting, and performance
challenges are additional concerns [60]. GraphQL’s query
language is also limited since GraphQL come from an untrusted
source. The language does not allow anything that could be
expensive to execute, since otherwise users could perform
denial-of-service attacks on a server by running lots of
expensive queries. In particular, GraphQL does not allow
recursive queries (unlike Cypher, SPARQL, SQL, or Datalog), and
it does not allow arbitrary search conditions such as “find
people who were born in the US and are now living in Europe”
(unless the service owners specifically choose to offer such
search functionality).

Nevertheless, GraphQL is useful. Example 3-13 shows how you
might implement a group chat application such as Discord or
Slack using GraphQL. The query requests all the channels that
the user has access to, including the channel name and the 50
most recent messages in each channel. For each message it
requests the timestamp, the message content, and the name and
profile picture URL for the sender of the message. Moreover, if a
message is a reply to another message, the query also requests
the sender name and the content of the message it is replying to
(which might be rendered in a smaller font above the reply, in
order to provide some context).

Example 3-13. Example GraphQL query for a group chat
application


   query ChatApp {
     channels {
        name
        recentMessages(latest: 50) {
            timestamp
            content
            sender {
                fullName
                imageUrl
            }
            replyTo {
                content
                sender {
                    fullName
                }
            }
        }
       }
   }


Example 3-14 shows what a response to the query in Example 3-
13 might look like. The response is a JSON document that
mirrors the structure of the query: it contains exactly those
attributes that were requested, no more and no less. This
approach has the advantage that the server does not need to
know which attributes the client requires in order to render the
user interface; instead, the client can simply request what it
needs. For example, this query does not request a profile
picture URL for the sender of the replyTo message, but if the
user interface were changed to add that profile picture, it would
be easy for the client to add the required imageUrl attribute
to the query without changing the server.

Example 3-14. A possible response to the query in
Example 3-13


   {
       "data": {
         "channels": [
           {
             "name": "#general",
             "recentMessages": [
               {
                  "timestamp": 1693143014,
                  "content": "Hey! How are y'all doing?
                  "sender": {"fullName": "Aaliyah", "im
                  "replyTo": null
                },
                {
                  "timestamp": 1693143024,
                  "content": "Great! And you?",
                  "sender": {"fullName": "Caleb", "imag
                  "replyTo": {
                    "content": "Hey! How are y'all doin
                    "sender": {"fullName": "Aaliyah"}
                  }
                },
                ...



In Example 3-14 the name and image URL of a message sender
is embedded directly in the message object. If the same user
sends multiple messages, this information is repeated on each
message. In principle, it would be possible to reduce this
duplication, but GraphQL makes the design choice to accept a
larger response size in order to make it simpler to render the
user interface based on the data.

The replyTo field is similar: in Example 3-14, the second
message is a reply to the first, and the content (“Hey!…”) and
sender Aaliyah are duplicated under replyTo . It would be
possible to instead return the ID of the message being replied
to, but then the client would have to make an additional request
to the server if that ID is not among the 50 most recent
messages returned. Duplicating the content makes it much
simpler to work with the data.

The server’s database can store the data in a more normalized
form, and perform the necessary joins to process a query. For
example, the server might store a message along with the user
ID of the sender and the ID of the message it is replying to;
when it receives a query like the one above, the server would
then resolve those IDs to find the records they refer to.
However, the client can only ask the server to perform joins
that are explicitly offered in the GraphQL schema.

Even though the response to a GraphQL query looks similar to a
response from a document database, and even though it has
“graph” in the name, GraphQL can be implemented on top of
any type of database—relational, document, or graph.
Event Sourcing and CQRS
In all the data models we have discussed so far, the data is
queried in the same form as it is written—be it JSON
documents, rows in tables, or vertices and edges in a graph.
However, in complex applications it can sometimes be difficult
to find a single data representation that is able to satisfy all the
different ways that the data needs to be queried and presented.
In such situations, it can be beneficial to write data in one form,
and then to derive from it several representations that are
optimized for different types of reads.

We previously saw this idea in “Systems of Record and Derived
Data”, and ETL (see “Data Warehousing”) is one example of
such a derivation process. Now we will take the idea further. If
we are going to derive one data representation from another
anyway, we can choose different representations that are
optimized for writing and for reading, respectively. How would
you model your data if you only wanted to optimize it for
writing, and if efficient queries were of no concern?

Perhaps the simplest, fastest, and most expressive way of
writing data is an event log: every time you want to write some
data, you encode it as a self-contained string (perhaps as JSON),
including a timestamp, and then append it to a sequence of
events. Events in this log are immutable: you never change or
delete them, you only ever append more events to the log
(which may supersede earlier events). An event can contain
arbitrary properties.

Figure 3-8 shows an example that could be taken from a
conference management system. A conference can be a
complex business domain: not only can individual attendees
register and pay by card, but companies can also order seats in
bulk, pay by invoice, and then later assign the seats to
individual people. Some number of seats may be reserved for
speakers, sponsors, volunteer helpers, and so on. Reservations
may also be cancelled, and meanwhile, the conference
organizer might change the capacity of the event by moving it
to a different room. With all of this going on, simply calculating
the number of available seats becomes a challenging query.
    Figure 3-8. Using a log of immutable events as source of truth, and deriving
                             materialized views from it.



In Figure 3-8, every change to the state of the conference (such
as the organizer opening registrations, or attendees making and
cancelling registrations) is first stored as an event. Whenever
an event is appended to the log, several materialized views (also
known as projections or read models) are also updated to reflect
the effect of that event. In the conference example, there might
be one materialized view that collects all information related to
the status of each booking, another that computes charts for the
conference organizer’s dashboard, and a third that generates
files for the printer that produces the attendees’ badges.

The idea of using events as the source of truth, and expressing
every state change as an event, is known as event sourcing [61,
62]. The principle of maintaining separate read-optimized
representations and deriving them from the write-optimized
representation is called command query responsibility
segregation (CQRS) [63]. These terms originated in the domain-
driven design (DDD) community, although similar ideas have
been around for a long time, for example in state machine
replication (see [Link to Come]).

When a request from a user comes in, it is called a command,
and it first needs to be validated. Only once the command has
been executed and it has been determined to be valid (e.g.,
there were enough available seats for a requested reservation),
it becomes a fact, and the corresponding event is added to the
log. Consequently, the event log should contain only valid
events, and a consumer of the event log that builds a
materialized view is not allowed to reject an event.

When modelling your data in an event sourcing style, it is
recommended that you name your events in the past tense (e.g.,
“the seats were booked”), because an event is a record of the
fact that something has happened in the past. Even if the user
later decides to change or cancel, the fact remains true that they
formerly held a booking, and the change or cancellation is a
separate event that is added later.

A similarity between event sourcing and a star schema fact
table, as discussed in “Stars and Snowflakes: Schemas for
Analytics”, is that both are collections of events that happened
in the past. However, rows in a fact table all have the same set
of columns, wheras in event sourcing there may be many
different event types, each with different properties. Moreover,
a fact table is an unordered collection, while in event sourcing
the order of events is important: if a booking is first made and
then cancelled, processing those events in the wrong order
would not make sense.

Event sourcing and CQRS have several advantages:

  For the people developing the system, events better
  communicate the intent of why something happened. For
  example, it’s easier to understand the event “the booking was
  cancelled” than “the active column on row 4001 of the
   bookings table was set to false , three rows associated
  with that booking were deleted from the
   seat_assignments table, and a row representing the
refund was inserted into the payments table”. Those row
modifications may still happen when a materialized view
processes the cancellation event, but when they are driven
by an event, the reason for the updates becomes much
clearer.
A key principle of event sourcing is that the materialized
views are derived from the event log in a reproducible way:
you should always be able to delete the materialized views
and recompute them by processing the same events in the
same order, using the same code. If there was a bug in the
view maintenance code, you can just delete the view and
recompute it with the new code. It’s also easier to find the
bug because you can re-run the view maintenance code as
often as you like and inspect its behavior.
You can have multiple materialized views that are optimized
for the particular queries that your application requires.
They can be stored either in the same database as the events
or a different one, depending on your needs. They can use
any data model, and they can be denormalized for fast reads.
You can even keep a view only in memory and avoid
persisting it, as long as it’s okay to recompute the view from
the event log whenever the service restarts.
If you decide you want to present the existing information in
a new way, it is easy to build a new materialized view from
  the existing event log. You can also evolve the system to
  support new features by adding new types of events, or new
  properties to existing event types (any older events remain
  unmodified). You can also chain new behaviors off existing
  events (for example, when a conference attendee cancels,
  their seat could be offered to the next person on the waiting
  list).
  If an event was written in error you can delete it again, and
  then you can rebuild the views without the deleted event. On
  the other hand, in a database where you update and delete
  data directly, a committed transaction is often difficult to
  reverse. Event sourcing can therefore reduce the number of
  irreversible actions in the system, making it easier to change
  (see “Evolvability: Making Change Easy”).
  The event log can also serve as an audit log of everything that
  happened in the system, which is valuable in regulated
  industries that require such auditability.

However, event sourcing and CQRS also have downsides:

  You need to be careful if external information is involved.
  For example, say an event contains a price given in one
  currency, and for one of the views it needs to be converted
  into another currency. Since the exchange rate may fluctuate,
  it would be problematic to fetch the exchange rate from an
  external source when processing the event, since you would
  get a different result if you recompute the materialized view
  on another date. To make the event processing logic
  deterministic, you either need to include the exchange rate in
  the event itself, or have a way of querying the historical
  exchange rate at the timestamp indicated in the event,
  ensuring that this query always returns the same result for
  the same timestamp.
  The requirement that events are immutable creates
  problems if events contain personal data from users, since
  users may exercise their right (e.g., under the GDPR) to
  request deletion of their data. If the event log is on a per-user
  basis, you can just delete the whole log for that user, but that
  doesn’t work if your event log contains events relating to
  multiple users. You can try storing the personal data outside
  of the actual event, or encrypting it with a key that you can
  later choose to delete, but that also makes it harder to
  recompute derived state when needed.
  Reprocessing events requires care if there are externally
  visible side-effects—for example, you probably don’t want to
  resend confirmation emails every time you rebuild a
  materialized view.

You can implement event sourcing on top of any database, but
there are also some systems that are specifically designed to
support this pattern, such as EventStoreDB, MartenDB (based
on PostgreSQL), and Axon Framework. You can also use
message brokers such as Apache Kafka to store the event log,
and stream processors can keep the materialized views up-to-
date; we will return to these topics in [Link to Come].

The only important requirement is that the event storage
system must guarantee that all materialized views process the
events in exactly the same order as they appear in the log; as
we shall see in [Link to Come], this is not always easy to achieve
in a distributed system.



Dataframes, Matrices, and Arrays
The data models we have seen so far in this chapter are
generally used for both transaction processing and analytics
purposes (see “Transaction Processing versus Analytics”). There
are also some data models that you are likely to encounter in an
analytical or scientific context, but that rarely feature in OLTP
systems: dataframes and multidimensional arrays of numbers
such as matrices.

Dataframes are a data model supported by the R language, the
Pandas library for Python, Apache Spark, ArcticDB, Dask, and
other systems. They are a popular tool for data scientists
preparing data for training machine learning models, but they
are also widely used for data exploration, statistical data
analysis, data visualization, and similar purposes.

At first glance, a dataframe is similar to a table in a relational
database or a spreadsheet. It supports relational-like operators
that perform bulk operations on the contents of the dataframe:
for example, applying a function to all of the rows, filtering the
rows based on some condition, grouping rows by some columns
and aggregating other columns, and joining the rows in one
dataframe with another dataframe based on some key (what a
relational database calls join is typically called merge on
dataframes).

Instead of a declarative query such as SQL, a dataframe is
typically manipulated through a series of commands that
modify its structure and content. This matches the typical
workflow of data scientists, who incrementally “wrangle” the
data into a form that allows them to find answers to the
questions they are asking. These manipulations usually take
place on the data scientist’s private copy of the dataset, often on
their local machine, although the end result may be shared with
other users.
Dataframe APIs also offer a wide variety of operations that go
far beyond what relational databases offer, and the data model
is often used in ways that are very different from typical
relational data modelling [64]. For example, a common use of
dataframes is to transform data from a relational-like
representation into a matrix or multidimensional array
representation, which is the form that many machine learning
algorithms expect of their input.

A simple example of such a transformation is shown in
Figure 3-9. On the left we have a relational table of how
different users have rated various movies (on a scale of 1 to 5),
and on the right the data has been transformed into a matrix
where each column is a movie and each row is a user (similarly
to a pivot table in a spreadsheet). The matrix is sparse, which
means there is no data for many user-movie combinations, but
this is fine. This matrix may have many thousands of columns
and would therefore not fit well in a relational database, but
dataframes and libraries that offer sparse arrays (such as
NumPy for Python) can handle such data easily.
   Figure 3-9. Transforming a relational database of movie ratings into a matrix
                                  representation.



A matrix can only contain numbers, and various techniques are
used to transform non-numerical data into numbers in the
matrix. For example:

  Dates (which are omitted from the example matrix in
  Figure 3-9) could be scaled to be floating-point numbers
  within some suitable range.
  For columns that can only take one of a small, fixed set of
  values (for example, the genre of a movie in a database of
  movies), a one-hot encoding is often used: we create a column
  for each possible value (one for “comedy”, one for “drama”,
  one for “horror”, etc.), and for each row representing a
  movie, we put a 1 in the column corresponding to the genre
  of that movie, and a 0 in all the other columns. This
  representation also easily generalizes to movies that fit
  within several genres.

Once the data is in the form of a matrix of numbers, it is
amenable to linear algebra operations, which form the basis of
many machine learning algorithms. For example, the data in
Figure 3-9 could be a part of a system for recommending
movies that the user may like. Dataframes are flexible enough
to allow data to be gradually evolved from a relational form
into a matrix representation, while giving the data scientist
control over the representation that is most suitable for
achieving the goals of the data analysis or model training
process.

There are also databases such as TileDB [65] that specialize in
storing large multidimensional arrays of numbers; they are
called array databases and are most commonly used for
scientific datasets such as geospatial measurements (raster data
on a regularly spaced grid), medical imaging, or observations
from astronomical telescopes [66]. Dataframes are also used in
the financial industry for representing time series data, such as
the prices of assets and trades over time [67].
Summary
Data models are a huge subject, and in this chapter we have
taken a quick look at a broad variety of different models. We
didn’t have space to go into all the details of each model, but
hopefully the overview has been enough to whet your appetite
to find out more about the model that best fits your
application’s requirements.

The relational model, despite being more than half a century
old, remains an important data model for many applications—
especially in data warehousing and business analytics, where
relational star or snowflake schemas and SQL queries are
ubiquitous. However, several alternatives to relational data
have also become popular in other domains:

  The document model targets use cases where data comes in
  self-contained JSON documents, and where relationships
  between one document and another are rare.
  Graph data models go in the opposite direction, targeting use
  cases where anything is potentially related to everything, and
  where queries potentially need to traverse multiple hops to
  find the data of interest (which can be expressed using
  recursive queries in Cypher, SPARQL, or Datalog).
  Dataframes generalize relational data to large numbers of
  columns, and thereby provide a bridge between databases
  and the multidimensional arrays that form the basis of much
  machine learning, statistical data analysis, and scientific
  computing.

To some degree, one model can be emulated in terms of another
model—for example, graph data can be represented in a
relational database—but the result can be awkward, as we saw
with the support for recursive queries in SQL.

Various specialist databases have therefore been developed for
each data model, providing query languages and storage
engines that are optimized for a particular model. However,
there is also a trend for databases to expand into neighboring
niches by adding support for other data models: for example,
relational databases have added support for document data in
the form of JSON columns, document databases have added
relational-like joins, and support for graph data within SQL is
gradually improving.

Another model we discussed is event sourcing, which represents
data as an append-only log of immutable events, and which can
be advantageous for modeling activities in complex business
domains. An append-only log is good for writing data (as we
shall see in [Link to Come]); in order to support efficient
queries, the event log is translated into read-optimized
materialized views through CQRS.

One thing that non-relational data models have in common is
that they typically don’t enforce a schema for the data they
store, which can make it easier to adapt applications to
changing requirements. However, your application most likely
still assumes that data has a certain structure; it’s just a
question of whether the schema is explicit (enforced on write)
or implicit (assumed on read).

Although we have covered a lot of ground, there are still data
models left unmentioned. To give just a few brief examples:

  Researchers working with genome data often need to
  perform sequence-similarity searches, which means taking
  one very long string (representing a DNA molecule) and
  matching it against a large database of strings that are
  similar, but not identical. None of the databases described
  here can handle this kind of usage, which is why researchers
  have written specialized genome database software like
  GenBank [68].
  Many financial systems use ledgers with double-entry
  accounting as their data model. This type of data can be
    represented in relational databases, but there are also
    databases such as TigerBeetle that specialize in this data
    model. Cryptocurrencies and blockchains are typically based
    on distributed ledgers, which also have value transfer built
    into their data model.
    Full-text search is arguably a kind of data model that is
    frequently used alongside databases. Information retrieval is
    a large specialist subject that we won’t cover in great detail
    in this book, but we’ll touch on search indexes and vector
    search in [Link to Come].

 We have to leave it there for now. In the next chapter we will
 discuss some of the trade-offs that come into play when
 implementing the data models described in this chapter.



 FOOTNOTES



 REFERENCES

Jamie Brandon. Unexplanations: query optimization works because sql is declarative.
 scattered-thoughts.net, February 2024. Archived at perma.cc/P6W2-WMFZ


Joseph M. Hellerstein. The Declarative Imperative: Experiences and Conjectures in
 Distributed Logic. Tech report UCB/EECS-2010-90, Electrical Engineering and
 Computer Sciences, University of California at Berkeley, June 2010. Archived at
 perma.cc/K56R-VVQM
Edgar F. Codd. A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks.
 Communications of the ACM, volume 13, issue 6, pages 377–387, June 1970.
 doi:10.1145/362384.362685


Michael Stonebraker and Joseph M. Hellerstein. What Goes Around Comes Around. In
 Readings in Database Systems, 4th edition, MIT Press, pages 2–41, 2005. ISBN:
 9780262693141


Markus Winand. Modern SQL: Beyond Relational. modern-sql.com, 2015. Archived at
 perma.cc/D63V-WAPN


Martin Fowler. OrmHate. martinfowler.com, May 2012. Archived at perma.cc/VCM8-
 PKNG


Vlad Mihalcea. N+1 query problem with JPA and Hibernate. vladmihalcea.com, January
 2023. Archived at perma.cc/79EV-TZKB


Jens Schauder. This is the Beginning of the End of the N+1 Problem: Introducing Single
 Query Loading. spring.io, August 2023. Archived at perma.cc/6V96-R333


William Zola. 6 Rules of Thumb for MongoDB Schema Design. mongodb.com, June 2014.
 Archived at perma.cc/T2BZ-PPJB


 Sidney Andrews and Christopher McClister. Data modeling in Azure Cosmos DB.
 learn.microsoft.com, February 2023. Archived at archive.org


 Raffi Krikorian. Timelines at Scale. At QCon San Francisco, November 2012. Archived
 at perma.cc/V9G5-KLYK


 Ralph Kimball and Margy Ross. The Data Warehouse Toolkit: The Definitive Guide to
 Dimensional Modeling, 3rd edition. John Wiley & Sons, July 2013. ISBN:
 9781118530801
Michael Kaminsky. Data warehouse modeling: Star schema vs. OBT. fivetran.com,
August 2022. Archived at perma.cc/2PZK-BFFP


Joe Nelson. User-defined Order in SQL. begriffs.com, March 2018. Archived at
perma.cc/GS3W-F7AD


Evan Wallace. Realtime Editing of Ordered Sequences. figma.com, March 2017.
Archived at perma.cc/K6ER-CQZW


David Greenspan. Implementing Fractional Indexing. observablehq.com, October
2020. Archived at perma.cc/5N4R-MREN


Martin Fowler. Schemaless Data Structures. martinfowler.com, January 2013.


Amr Awadallah. Schema-on-Read vs. Schema-on-Write. At Berkeley EECS RAD Lab
Retreat, Santa Cruz, CA, May 2009. Archived at perma.cc/DTB2-JCFR


Martin Odersky. The Trouble with Types. At Strange Loop, September 2013. Archived
at perma.cc/85QE-PVEP


Conrad Irwin. MongoDB—Confessions of a PostgreSQL Lover. At HTML5DevConf,
October 2013. Archived at perma.cc/C2J6-3AL5


Percona Toolkit Documentation: pt-online-schema-change. docs.percona.com, 2023.
Archived at perma.cc/9K8R-E5UH


Shlomi Noach. gh-ost: GitHub’s Online Schema Migration Tool for MySQL. github.blog,
August 2016. Archived at perma.cc/7XAG-XB72


Shayon Mukherjee. pg-osc: Zero downtime schema changes in PostgreSQL.
shayon.dev, February 2022. Archived at perma.cc/35WN-7WMY
Carlos Pérez-Aradros Herce. Introducing pgroll: zero-downtime, reversible, schema
migrations for Postgres. xata.io, October 2023. Archived at archive.org


James C. Corbett, Jeffrey Dean, Michael Epstein, Andrew Fikes, Christopher Frost, JJ
Furman, Sanjay Ghemawat, Andrey Gubarev, Christopher Heiser, Peter Hochschild,
Wilson Hsieh, Sebastian Kanthak, Eugene Kogan, Hongyi Li, Alexander Lloyd, Sergey
Melnik, David Mwaura, David Nagle, Sean Quinlan, Rajesh Rao, Lindsay Rolig, Dale
Woodford, Yasushi Saito, Christopher Taylor, Michal Szymaniak, and Ruth Wang.
Spanner: Google’s Globally-Distributed Database. At 10th USENIX Symposium on
Operating System Design and Implementation (OSDI), October 2012.


Donald K. Burleson. Reduce I/O with Oracle Cluster Tables. dba-oracle.com. Archived
at perma.cc/7LBJ-9X2C


Fay Chang, Jeffrey Dean, Sanjay Ghemawat, Wilson C. Hsieh, Deborah A. Wallach,
Mike Burrows, Tushar Chandra, Andrew Fikes, and Robert E. Gruber. Bigtable: A
Distributed Storage System for Structured Data. At 7th USENIX Symposium on
Operating System Design and Implementation (OSDI), November 2006.


Priscilla Walmsley. XQuery, 2nd Edition. O’Reilly Media, December 2015. ISBN:
9781491915080


Paul C. Bryan, Kris Zyp, and Mark Nottingham. JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)
Pointer. RFC 6901, IETF, April 2013.


Stefan Gössner, Glyn Normington, and Carsten Bormann. JSONPath: Query
Expressions for JSON. RFC 9535, IETF, February 2024.


Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, and Terry Winograd. The PageRank
Citation Ranking: Bringing Order to the Web. Technical Report 1999-66, Stanford
University InfoLab, November 1999. Archived at perma.cc/UML9-UZHW
Nathan Bronson, Zach Amsden, George Cabrera, Prasad Chakka, Peter Dimov, Hui
Ding, Jack Ferris, Anthony Giardullo, Sachin Kulkarni, Harry Li, Mark Marchukov,
Dmitri Petrov, Lovro Puzar, Yee Jiun Song, and Venkat Venkataramani. TAO:
Facebook’s Distributed Data Store for the Social Graph. At USENIX Annual Technical
Conference (ATC), June 2013.


Natasha Noy, Yuqing Gao, Anshu Jain, Anant Narayanan, Alan Patterson, and Jamie
Taylor. Industry-Scale Knowledge Graphs: Lessons and Challenges. Communications
of the ACM, volume 62, issue 8, pages 36–43, August 2019. doi:10.1145/3331166


Xiyang Feng, Guodong Jin, Ziyi Chen, Chang Liu, and Semih Salihoğlu. KÙZU Graph
Database Management System. At 3th Annual Conference on Innovative Data Systems
Research (CIDR 2023), January 2023.


Maciej Besta, Emanuel Peter, Robert Gerstenberger, Marc Fischer, Michał Podstawski,
Claude Barthels, Gustavo Alonso, Torsten Hoefler. Demystifying Graph Databases:
Analysis and Taxonomy of Data Organization, System Designs, and Graph Queries.
arxiv.org, October 2019.


Apache TinkerPop 3.6.3 Documentation. tinkerpop.apache.org, May 2023. Archived at
perma.cc/KM7W-7PAT


Nadime Francis, Alastair Green, Paolo Guagliardo, Leonid Libkin, Tobias Lindaaker,
Victor Marsault, Stefan Plantikow, Mats Rydberg, Petra Selmer, and Andrés Taylor.
Cypher: An Evolving Query Language for Property Graphs. At International
Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), pages 1433–1445, May 2018.
doi:10.1145/3183713.3190657


Emil Eifrem. Twitter correspondence, January 2014. Archived at perma.cc/WM4S-
BW64


Francesco Tisiot. Explore the new SEARCH and CYCLE features in PostgreSQL® 14.
aiven.io, December 2021. Archived at perma.cc/J6BT-83UZ
Gaurav Goel. Understanding Hierarchies in Oracle. towardsdatascience.com, May
2020. Archived at perma.cc/5ZLR-Q7EW


Alin Deutsch, Nadime Francis, Alastair Green, Keith Hare, Bei Li, Leonid Libkin,
Tobias Lindaaker, Victor Marsault, Wim Martens, Jan Michels, Filip Murlak, Stefan
Plantikow, Petra Selmer, Oskar van Rest, Hannes Voigt, Domagoj Vrgoč, Mingxi Wu,
and Fred Zemke. Graph Pattern Matching in GQL and SQL/PGQ. At International
Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), pages 2246–2258, June 2022.
doi:10.1145/3514221.3526057


Alastair Green. SQL... and now GQL. opencypher.org, September 2019. Archived at
perma.cc/AFB2-3SY7


Alin Deutsch, Yu Xu, and Mingxi Wu. Seamless Syntactic and Semantic Integration of
Query Primitives over Relational and Graph Data in GSQL. tigergraph.com, November
2018. Archived at perma.cc/JG7J-Y35X


Oskar van Rest, Sungpack Hong, Jinha Kim, Xuming Meng, and Hassan Chafi. PGQL: a
property graph query language. At 4th International Workshop on Graph Data
Management Experiences and Systems (GRADES), June 2016.
doi:10.1145/2960414.2960421


Amazon Web Services. Neptune Graph Data Model. Amazon Neptune User Guide,
docs.aws.amazon.com. Archived at perma.cc/CX3T-EZU9


Cognitect. Datomic Data Model. Datomic Cloud Documentation, docs.datomic.com.
Archived at perma.cc/LGM9-LEUT


David Beckett and Tim Berners-Lee. Turtle – Terse RDF Triple Language. W3C Team
Submission, March 2011.


Sinclair Target. Whatever Happened to the Semantic Web? twobithistory.org, May
2018. Archived at perma.cc/M8GL-9KHS
Gavin Mendel-Gleason. The Semantic Web is Dead – Long Live the Semantic Web!
terminusdb.com, August 2022. Archived at perma.cc/G2MZ-DSS3


Manu Sporny. JSON-LD and Why I Hate the Semantic Web. manu.sporny.org, January
2014. Archived at perma.cc/7PT4-PJKF


University of Michigan Library. Biomedical Ontologies and Controlled Vocabularies,
guides.lib.umich.edu/ontology. Archived at perma.cc/Q5GA-F2N8


Facebook. The Open Graph protocol, ogp.me. Archived at perma.cc/C49A-GUSY


Matt Haughey. Everything you ever wanted to know about unfurling but were afraid
to ask /or/ How to make your site previews look amazing in Slack. medium.com,
November 2015. Archived at perma.cc/C7S8-4PZN


W3C RDF Working Group. Resource Description Framework (RDF). w3.org, February
2004.


Steve Harris, Andy Seaborne, and Eric Prud’hommeaux. SPARQL 1.1 Query Language.
W3C Recommendation, March 2013.


Todd J. Green, Shan Shan Huang, Boon Thau Loo, and Wenchao Zhou. Datalog and
Recursive Query Processing. Foundations and Trends in Databases, volume 5, issue 2,
pages 105–195, November 2013. doi:10.1561/1900000017


Stefano Ceri, Georg Gottlob, and Letizia Tanca. What You Always Wanted to Know
About Datalog (And Never Dared to Ask). IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, volume 1, issue 1, pages 146–166, March 1989. doi:10.1109/69.43410


Serge Abiteboul, Richard Hull, and Victor Vianu. Foundations of Databases. Addison-
Wesley, 1995. ISBN: 9780201537710, available online at webdam.inria.fr/Alice
Scott Meyer, Andrew Carter, and Andrew Rodriguez. LIquid: The soul of a new graph
database, Part 2. engineering.linkedin.com, September 2020. Archived at
perma.cc/K9M4-PD6Q


Matt Bessey. Why, after 6 years, I’m over GraphQL. bessey.dev, May 2024. Archived at
perma.cc/2PAU-JYRA


Dominic Betts, Julián Domínguez, Grigori Melnik, Fernando Simonazzi, and Mani
Subramanian. Exploring CQRS and Event Sourcing. Microsoft Patterns & Practices,
July 2012. ISBN: 1621140164, archived at perma.cc/7A39-3NM8


Greg Young. CQRS and Event Sourcing. At Code on the Beach, August 2014.


Greg Young. CQRS Documents. cqrs.wordpress.com, November 2010. Archived at
perma.cc/X5R6-R47F


Devin Petersohn, Stephen Macke, Doris Xin, William Ma, Doris Lee, Xiangxi Mo,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, Joseph M. Hellerstein, Anthony D. Joseph, and Aditya
Parameswaran. Towards Scalable Dataframe Systems. Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment, volume 13, issue 11, pages 2033–2046. doi:10.14778/3407790.3407807


Stavros Papadopoulos, Kushal Datta, Samuel Madden, and Timothy Mattson. The
TileDB Array Data Storage Manager. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 10,
issue 4, pages 349–360, November 2016. doi:10.14778/3025111.3025117


Florin Rusu. Multidimensional Array Data Management. Foundations and Trends in
Databases, volume 12, numbers 2–3, pages 69–220, February 2023.
doi:10.1561/1900000069


Ed Targett. Bloomberg, Man Group team up to develop open source “ArcticDB”
database. thestack.technology, March 2023. Archived at perma.cc/M5YD-QQYV
Dennis A. Benson, Ilene Karsch-Mizrachi, David J. Lipman, James Ostell, and David L.
Wheeler. GenBank. Nucleic Acids Research, volume 36, database issue, pages D25–
D30, December 2007. doi:10.1093/nar/gkm929
About the Author
Martin Kleppmann is a researcher in distributed systems at
the University of Cambridge, UK. Previously he was a software
engineer and entrepreneur at internet companies including
LinkedIn and Rapportive, where he worked on large-scale data
infrastructure. In the process he learned a few things the hard
way, and he hopes this book will save you from repeating the
same mistakes.

Martin is a regular conference speaker, blogger, and open
source contributor. He believes that profound technical ideas
should be accessible to everyone, and that deeper
understanding will help us develop better software.

Chris Riccomini is a software engineer, startup investor, and
author with 15+ years of experience at PayPal, LinkedIn, and
WePay. He runs Materialized View Capital, where he invests in
infrastructure startups. He is also the cocreator of Apache
Samza and SlateDB, and coauthor of The Missing README: A
Guide for the New Software Engineer.
