1
2
3
4
5
6
              Introduction to Kubernetes

Official Definition of Kubernetes
Kubernetes is an open-source container orchestration engine designed for automating the
deployment, scaling, and management of containerized applications. This open-source project is
hosted by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF).


Understanding of Kubernetes and Docker
To grasp Kubernetes, also known as K8s, it’s essential to have a foundation in Docker. In
Docker, we deploy our applications inside containers. However, in Kubernetes, we manage
containers on a larger scale, often numbering in the thousands or more, depending on the
application’s traffic.

Visualizing Docker and Kubernetes
In Docker, imagine a ship containing containers.
Now, in Kubernetes, picture that same ship, but this time, it has a steering wheel. Just like a
captain operates the ship’s wheel to make decisions about its course, Kubernetes acts as the
“ship wheel” for managing containers.
Kubernetes is an open-source platform, meaning its source code is freely available for anyone
to use, modify, and redistribute.

What are Monolithic Architecture and Microservices
Architecture?
Monolithic Architecture:
Imagine a restaurant where everything happens in one big kitchen. This kitchen handles taking
orders, cooking food, and serving customers all in a single place.

In this scenario, if the kitchen gets too crowded or if there’s a problem with one part of the
kitchen, it can affect the entire restaurant’s operation.
If the chef is sick, the entire kitchen may come to a halt, impacting the entire dining experience.

Microservices Architecture:
Now, consider a food delivery service like Zomato or Swiggy. Instead of one big kitchen, they
have a network of different restaurants, each specializing in a specific type of regional food or
cuisine.
When you place an order, it’s not prepared in a single kitchen rather, each restaurant
(microservice) prepares its own portion of the order. These portions are then assembled and
delivered to you.
If one restaurant has an issue, it doesn’t necessarily impact the others. For example, if the
burger place is busy, it won’t affect the rolls restaurant’s ability to fulfill orders.




                                                                                                 8
Key Differences:
   ●    Monolithic architecture is like a single kitchen handling all tasks, while microservices
        architecture is like multiple specialized restaurants working together.
    ● Monoliths are typically easier to set up and manage initially, while microservices offer
        more flexibility and scalability.
    ● Monoliths can have a single point of failure, while microservices are more fault-tolerant
        because a failure in one microservice doesn’t necessarily affect the others.
In the end, Kubernetes helps to achieve microservice-based architecture which is good for
business aspects, etc.

Why do we need Kubernetes?
After Docker came into the Picture, the deployment of the applications was very easy on the
containers because containers are lightweight. But after some time, there were a lot of issues
arose such as managing the huge amount of containers in the Production environment where
Containers failed leading to huge Business losses.

After Kubernetes came, it automates many tasks such as:
    ● Autoscaling of Containers according to the peak or normal hours.
    ● Load balancing of multiple containers.
    ● Automatically deployment of containers to the available nodes in the cluster.
    ● Self-healing if containers fail.


Kubernetes Origins and Open Source:
Kubernetes was created by Google in 2013 in Golang. Initially, Kubernetes was not open source
but in 2014, google introduced Kubernetes open source and donated to CNCF.


Languages Supported by Kubernetes
Kubernetes supports both YAML and JSON for configuration.


Features of Kubernetes
   ●   AutoScaling: Kubernetes supports two types of autoscaling horizontal and vertical
       scaling for large-scale production environments which helps to reduce the downtime of
       the applications.
   ●   Auto Healing: Kubernetes supports auto healing which means if the containers fail or
       are stopped due to any issues, with the help of Kubernetes components(which will talk in
       upcoming days), containers will automatically repaired or heal and run again properly.
   ●   Load Balancing: With the help of load balancing, Kubernetes distributes the traffic
       between two or more containers.
   ●   Platform Independent: Kubernetes can work on any type of infrastructure whether it’s
       On-premises, Virtual Machines, or any Cloud.
   ●   Fault Tolerance: Kubernetes helps to notify nodes or pods failures and create new pods
       or containers as soon as possible
   ●   Rollback: You can switch to the previous version.
   ●   Health Monitoring of Containers: Regularly check the health of the monitor and if any
       container fails, create a new container.
   ●   Orchestration: Suppose, three containers are running on different networks
       (On-premises, Virtual Machines, and On the Cloud). Kubernetes can create one cluster

                                                                                               9
      that has all three running containers from different networks.



Alternatives of Kubernetes


  ●   Docker Swarm
  ●   Apache Mesos
  ●   Openshift
  ●   Nomad, etc

      We don’t need to know the other alternative in depth except Docker Swarm as our main
      focus is Kubernetes.


Difference between Docker Swarm and Kubernetes




Master-Slave/ Client-Server Architecture in Kubernetes


                                                                                        10
11
  Kubernetes Architecture- Master
              Node




Kubernetes Architecture By Kubernetes



Kubernetes follows client-server architecture where the Master Node and Worker node
exist which constitutes a ‘Kubernetes Cluster’. We can have multiple worker nodes and
Master nodes according to the requirement.




Control Plane
The control plane components, including the API server, etcd, scheduler, and controller
manager, are typically found on the master node(s) of a Kubernetes cluster. These
components are responsible for managing and controlling the cluster as a whole.




                                                                                          12
   Master Node
   The master node is responsible for the entire Kubernetes cluster and manages all the
   activities inside the cluster in which master nodes communicate with the worker node to
   run the applications on the containers smoothly. Master Node has four primary
   components which help to manage all the things that we have discussed earlier:

           1. API Server: In Simple terms, after installing the kubectl on the master node
              developers run the commands to create pods. So, the command will go to the
              API Server, and then, the API Server forwards it to that component which will
              help to create the pods. In other words, the API Server is an entry point for
              any Kubernetes task where the API Server follows the hierarchical approach
              to implement the things.



           2. Etcd: Etcd is like a database that stores all the pieces of information of the
              Master node and Worker node(entire cluster) such as Pods IP, Nodes,
              networking configs, etc. Etcd stored data in key-value pair. The data comes
              from the API Server to store in etc.



           3. Controller Manager: The controller Manager collects the data/information
              from the API Server of the Kubernetes cluster like the desired state of the
              cluster and then decides what to do by sending the instructions to the API
              Server.



           4. Scheduler: Once the API Server gathers the information from the Controller
              Manager, the API Server notifies the Scheduler to perform the respective task
              such as increasing the number of pods, etc. After getting notified, the
              Scheduler takes action on the provided work.

Let’s understand all four components with a real-time example.

Master Node — Mall Management:
   ●   In a shopping mall, you have a management office that takes care of everything. In
       Kubernetes, this is the Master Node.
   ●   The Master Node manages and coordinates all activities in the cluster, just like mall
       management ensures the mall runs smoothly.

kube-apiserver — Central Control Desk:
   ●   Think of the kube-apiserver as the central control desk of the mall. It’s where all
       requests (like store openings or customer inquiries) are directed.
   ●   Just like mall management communicates with stores, kube-apiserver communicates
       with all Kubernetes components.

etcd — Master Records:
   ●   etcd can be compared to the master records of the mall, containing important
       information like store locations and hours.
                                                                                               13
  ●   It’s a key-value store that stores configuration and cluster state data.

kube-controller-manager — Task Managers:
  ●   Imagine having specialized task managers for different mall departments, like
      security and maintenance.
  ●   In Kubernetes, the kube-controller-manager handles various tasks, such as ensuring
      the desired number of Pods are running.

kube-scheduler — Scheduler Manager:
  ●   Think of the kube-scheduler as a manager who decides which employees (Pods)
      should work where (on which Worker Node).
  ●   It ensures even distribution and efficient resource allocation.




                                                                                           14
      Kubernetes Architecture- Worker
                  Node




Kubernetes Architecture By Kubernetes(Credit)

Worker Node
The Worker Node is the mediator who manages and takes care of the containers and
communicates with the Master Node which gives the instructions to assign the resources to the
containers scheduled. A Kubernetes cluster can have multiple worker nodes to scale resources
as needed.

The Worker Node contains four components that help to manage containers and communicate
with the Master Node:

   1. Kubelet: kubelet is the primary component of the Worker Node which manages the
      Pods and regularly checks whether the pod is running or not. If pods are not working
      properly, then kubelet creates a new pod and replaces it with the previous one because
      the failed pod can’t be restarted hence, the IP of the pod might be changed. Also,
      kubelet gets the details related to pods from the API Server which exists on the Master
      Node.
   2. Kube-proxy: kube-proxy contains all the network configuration of the entire cluster such
      as pod IP, etc. Kube-proxy takes care of the load balancing and routing which comes
      under networking configuration. Kube-proxy gets the information about pods from the
      API Server which exists on Master Node.




                                                                                           15
   3. Pods: A pod is a very small unit that contains a container or multiple containers where
      the application is deployed. Pod has a Public or Private IP range that distributes the
      proper IP to the containers. It’s good to have one container under each pod.
   4. Container Engine: To provide the runtime environment to the container, Container
      Engine is used. In Kubernetes, the Container engine directly interacts with container
      runtime which is responsible for creating and managing the containers. There are a lot of
      Container engines present in the market such as CRI-O, containerd, rkt(rocket), etc. But
      Docker is one of the most used and trusted Container Engine. So, we will use that in our
      upcoming day while setting up the Kubernetes cluster.

Let’s continue to understand all four components with a real-time example.

Worker Nodes — Storefronts:

Kubelet — Store Managers:
   ●   In each store (Worker Node), you have a store manager (Kubelet) who ensures
       employees (Pods) are working correctly.
   ●   Kubelet communicates with the Master Node and manages the Pods within its store.

kube-proxy — Customer Service Desk:
   ●   kube-proxy acts like a customer service desk in each store. It handles customer inquiries
       (network requests) and directs them to the right employee (Pod).
   ●   It maintains network rules for load balancing and routing.

Container Runtime — Employee Training:
   ●   In each store, you have employees (Pods) who need training to perform their tasks.
   ●   The container runtime (like Docker) provides the necessary training (runtime
       environment) for the employees (Pods) to execute their tasks.




                                                                                             16
              Setting up Minikube on Your
                        Machine

Why Set Up Minikube?
Before we begin, you might be wondering why it’s essential to set up Minikube. Well,
Minikube provides an excellent environment for learning and experimenting with Kubernetes
without the need for a full-scale cluster. It’s perfect for developers and enthusiasts who want
to get hands-on experience with Kubernetes in a controlled environment.

Prerequisites
To follow along with this tutorial, you’ll need the following:

    ●   An AWS account (if you’re setting up on an AWS instance).
    ●   Basic knowledge of AWS and Linux terminal commands.



Let’s get started!

Setting Up Minikube on AWS Instance

Here, I am creating an EC2 Instance to set up minikube on the server. If you are comfortable
setting up minikube on your local then feel free to jump on the minikube setup.

Enter the name of the machine and select the Ubuntu22.04 AMI Image.




Make sure to select the t2.medium instance type as Master node 2CPU cores which is
present in the t2.medium instance type.


                                                                                                  17
Create a new key pair and select the Private key file format according to your OS(For
Windows select .ppk or for Linux select .pem).




Open port 22 and rest you can leave it.




                                                                                        18
Now, go to your Downloads folder or where you have downloaded your pem file and change
the permission by running the command ‘chmod 400 <Pem_file_name>




Now, connect your instance by copying the given command below.




As you can see I logged in to the Instance.




                                                                                         19
Now, run the following commands to install minikube on your local machine or AWS
machine.

sudo apt update -y && sudo apt upgrade -y

sudo reboot

After 3 to 4 minutes, reconnect with the instance through ssh

sudo apt install docker.io

sudo usermod -aG docker $USER && newgrp docker

sudo apt install -y curl wget apt-transport-https

curl -LO https://storage.googleapis.com/minikube/releases/latest/minikube-linux-amd64

sudo install minikube-linux-amd64 /usr/local/bin/minikube

minikube version

I have given the line break in the below curl command, Kindly avoid the break and any
whitespaces after `. You can refer to the below screenshot.

curl -LO https://storage.googleapis.com/kubernetes-release/release/`

curl -s
https://storage.googleapis.com/kubernetes-release/release/stable.txt`/bin/linux/amd64/kubec
tl




                                                                                              20
chmod +x kubectl

sudo mv kubectl /usr/local/bin

kubectl version -o yaml

minikube start - vm-driver=docker

Now, to verify the installation you can run the given command and if you get the result in the
snippet then your installation is completed.

minikube status




You can also validate your kubectl version by running the command.

kubectl version

Now, run the given command after 4 to 5 minutes which will show the nodes.

kubectl get nodes




Creating Your First Pod
To get some hands-on experience, let’s create a simple manifest file and deploy a pod on
your Minikube cluster. Don’t worry if you don’t understand everything in the manifest file;
we’ll cover that in later days.

Create a new file and copy the given content to your file without editing anything. While
running the manifest file, if you get any error then it must be related to the indentation of the
file. So, check the file again.

vim Day04.yml
kind: Pod
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
 name: testpod
spec:
 containers:
  - name: c00
    image: ubuntu
    command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo Hello-Kubernetes; sleep 5 ; done"]



                                                                                                    21
  - name: container2
    image: ubuntu
    command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo Second Container is still running; sleep
3 ; done"]
restartPolicy: Never



Deploy the Pod:


Run the following command to deploy the pod:

kubectl apply -f Day04.yml

List Pods:

To list all the pods, use this command:

kubectl get pods




Check Logs:

You can check the logs of the primary container with:

kubectl logs -f pod1




To check the logs of the primary container, specify the container name:

kubectl logs -f pod1 -c container1




To check the logs of the second container, specify the container name:




                                                                                                 22
kubectl logs -f pod1 -c container2




Delete the Pod:

To delete the pod, use this command:

kubectl delete pod pod1




To list the IP of the pod, use the below command.

kubectl pod pod1 -c container1 — hostname -i




To delete the pod by specifying the manifest file name

kubectl delete -f Day04.yml




                                                         23
           Kubeconfig, Services, and
          Deployments Files Explained

Kubeconfig Files
   ●   Purpose: Kubeconfig files are used for cluster access and authentication. Kubeconfig
       defines how ‘kubectl’ or any other Kubernetes clients interact with the Kubernetes
       cluster.
   ●   Contents: The Kubeconfig file contains information about the cluster, user credentials,
       certificates, and context.
   ●   Usage: Kubeconfig files are used by Administrators, developers, or CI/CD systems to
       authenticate the Kubernetes cluster. They decide who can access and how to access
       the cluster.

Kubeconfig files can be stored in the user’s home directory (~/.kube/config) or specified
using the KUBECONFIG environment variable.

Service File
   ●   Purpose: Service files contain all information about networking. The service file defines
       how networking will be handled on the cluster. Also, the Service file enabled the load
       balancing option for the applications which is a premium feature of Kubernetes.
   ●   Contents: The service file specifies the service’s name, type(ClusterIP, NodePort,
       LoadBalancer, etc[Discuss in Upcoming Blogs]), and selectors to route traffic to pods.
   ●   Usage: Service files are used by developers and administrators to expose and connect
       applications within the Kubernetes cluster.

Note: Services can also be used for internal communication between Pods within the cluster,
not just for exposing applications externally.



Deployment files
   ●   Purpose: Deployment files contain all information about the application and define how
       the application or microservices will be deployed on the Kubernetes cluster. In
       deployment files, we can define the desired state, pod replicas, update strategies, and
       pod templates.
   ●   Contents: Deployment files define the desired state of a deployment, pod replicas,
       container images, and resource limits.
   ●   Usage: Deployment files are mainly used by developers and administrators to manage
       the application lifecycle within Kubernetes. They enable declarative application
       management, scaling, and rolling updates.




                                                                                              24
Practical Examples
To make things even clearer, let’s dive into some practical examples:



Kubeconfig file explained
apiVersion: v1
kind: Config
clusters:
- name: my-cluster
 cluster:
  server: https://api.example.com
  certificate-authority-data: <ca-data>
users:
- name: my-user
 user:
  client-certificate-data: <client-cert-data>
  client-key-data: <client-key-data>
contexts:
- name: my-context
 context:
  cluster: my-cluster
  user: my-user
  namespace: my-namespace
current-context: my-context

In this example,

    ●   apiVersion and kind define the resource type.
    ●   clusters specifies the clusters with its server and URL and Certificate Authority(CA)
        data. Here we have to define the server link or Kubernetes API Server of the Kubernetes
        cluster. So, when we run any command using kubectl then kubectl interacts with the
        given link or Kubernetes API Server of the Kubernetes cluster.
    ●   users specify the users with their client certificate and client key name. So, only
        authorized users can access the Kubernetes cluster.
    ●   contexts specify the cluster, user, and namespace information that has been defined
        above. You can create multiple contexts and switch between any different clusters at any
        time.
    ●   current-context specifies that on which cluster the command should run. If you set the
        current-context one time then you won’t have to specify again and again while running
        the commands.



Service file explained
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: my-app-service
spec:
 selector:


                                                                                             25
  app: my-app
ports:
- protocol: TCP
  port: 80
  targetPort: 8080



In this example,

   ●   apiVersion and kind specify the resource type
   ●   metadata specify the name of the service
   ●   spec specify the desired state of the Service
   ●   selector specifies on which pod the configurations will be invoked. If the pod label
       matches by app value then it will apply the configuration on that pod
   ●   In the ports section, protocol specifies the network protocol such as TCP, UDP, etc.
   ●   ports specifies on which port the service listens for the incoming traffic from the external
       sources.
   ●   targetports specify on which port the pod is listening.



Example for port and targetports:
Suppose you have a React.js application running inside a Kubernetes Pod, and it’s configured
to listen on port 3000 within the Pod. However, you want external traffic to reach your
application on port 80 because that’s the standard HTTP port. To achieve this, you create a
Kubernetes Service with a targetPort set to 3000 and a port set to 80. The Service acts as a
bridge, directing incoming traffic from port 80 to the application running on port 3000 inside the
Pod. This redirection allows users to access your React.js app seamlessly over the standard
HTTP port.

Deployment file explained
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: my-app
spec:
 replicas: 3
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: my-app
 template:
   metadata:
    labels:
      app: my-app
   spec:
    containers:
    - name: my-app-container
      image: my-app-image:latest




                                                                                                26
In this example,
    ● apiVersion and kind define the resource type
    ● metadata specify the details of deployment such as the name of the deployment, and
         labels.
    ● spec defines the desired state of the Deployment.
    ● replicas specify the desired number of pods to maintain.
    ● The selector specifies on which pod the replica configuration should be applied with the
         help of the label of the pod.
    ● template describes the pod template and how deployment will use it to create new pods.
    ● containers will list the containers to run within the pod.
    ● name specifies the name of the container
    ● image specifies the name that will be used to run the container. The image will be a
         Docker Image.
    ● containerport specifies the port at which the container will listen for incoming traffic.




                                                                                           27
      Deploying Your First Nodejs
    Application on Kubernetes Cluster

To follow this, you need to install minikube on your local/AWS machine. If you don’t know then
you can refer to my step-by-step blog which will help you to do it.

Day 04: Setting up Minikube on Your Local Machine or AWS Instance | by Aman Pathak |
DevOps.dev

Step 1: Create a Docker Image

Assuming you’re already familiar with Docker, let’s create a Docker image for your Node.js
project. Open your terminal and use the following command to build the image:

docker build --tag avian19/node-app .




Step 2: Push the Docker Image to Docker Hub

To share your Docker image with your Kubernetes cluster, you can push it to Docker Hub. First,
log in to Docker Hub using your terminal:

docker login




Then, push the Docker image:




                                                                                             28
You can confirm that your image has been successfully pushed to Docker Hub.




Step 3: Prepare Kubernetes Deployment and Service Files

Create a dedicated directory for your Node.js application’s deployment. Inside this directory, add
the contents of your deployment.yml and service.yml files.

deployment.yml file


apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: node-app-deployment
 labels:
   app: node-app
spec:
 replicas: 2
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: node-app
 template:
   metadata:
    labels:
      app: node-app
   spec:
    containers:
    - name: node-container
      image: avian19/node-app:latest
      ports:
      - containerPort: 3000
service.yml file
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: node-app-service
spec:
 selector:
   app: node-app
 type: LoadBalancer


                                                                                               29
ports:
- protocol: TCP
  port: 5000
  targetPort: 3000
  nodePort: 30001




Step 4: Deploy Pods

To deploy the pods, use the deployment.yml file with the following command:

kubectl apply -f deployment.yml




Step 5: Deploy Services

Next, deploy the services using the service.yml file:

kubectl apply -f service.yml




Step 6: Validate the Deployment

You can check the status of your deployment by running the following command:

kubectl get deployment




Step 7: Access Your Application




                                                                                30
To access your deployed application, use the following command to get the URL:

minikube service node-app-service

You can now use curl to access the content of your Node.js application through the provided
URL.




In nodejs code, you can see that the content is the same at both places.




                                                                                              31
    Kubernetes Labels, Selectors, and
            Node Selectors

Labels
   ●   Labels are used to organize Kubernetes Objects such as Pods, nodes, etc.
   ●   You can add multiple labels over the Kubernetes Objects.
   ●   Labels are defined in key-value pairs.
   ●   Labels are similar to tags in AWS or Azure where you give a name to filter the
       resources quickly.
   ●   You can add labels like environment, department or anything else according to you.



Labels-Selectors
Once the labels are attached to the Kubernetes objects those objects will be filtered out with
the help of labels-Selectors known as Selectors.

The API currently supports two types of label-selectors equality-based and set-based. Label
selectors can be made of multiple selectors that are comma-separated.

Node Selector
Node selector means selecting the nodes. If you are not aware of what is nodes. There are
two types of nodes Master Nodes and Worker Nodes.

Master Nodes is responsible for the entire Kubernetes Cluster that communicates with the
Worker Node and runs the applications on containers smoothly. Master nodes can have
multiple Worker Nodes.

Worker Nodes work as a mediator where the nodes communicate with Master nodes and
run the applications on the containers smoothly.

So, the use of node selector is choosing the nodes which means on which worker node the
command should be applied. This is done by Labels where in the manifest file, we
mentioned the node label name. While running the manifest file, master nodes find the node
that has the same label and create the pod on that container. Make sure that the node must
have the label. If the node doesn’t have any label then, the manifest file will jump to the next
node.



Label and Label-Selector HandsOn
If you don’t understand properly, don’t worry. We will do hands-on which will make it easy to
understand the concepts of labels, labels-selectors, and node selectors.


                                                                                                   32
YAML file
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: day07
 labels:
   env: testing
   department: DevOps
spec:
 containers:
   - name: containers1
     image: ubuntu
     command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo This is Day07 of 30DaysOfKubernetes;
sleep 5 ; done"]
After creating the pods by the following command.
List the pods to see the labels that are attached to the pod by the given command
kubectl get pods — show-labels




I have created one more manifest file that doesn’t have any label as you can see in the
below screenshot.




Now, I want to list those pods that have the label env=testing.

As we have discussed earlier, there are two types of label-selectors equality and set-based.

This is the example of equality based where we used equalsTo(=).

kubectl get pods -l env=testing




                                                                                               33
Now, here I want to list those pods that don’t have the label department=DevOps.

kubectl get pods -l department!=DevOps




Now, Suppose I forgot to add the label through the declarative(via manifest) method. So, I
can add labels after creating the pods as well which is known as the imperative(via
command) method.

In the below screenshot, I have added the new label location and given it the value India.

kubectl label pods day07 Location=India




As we discussed the type of label-selector, let’s see the example of a set-based
label-selector where we use in, notin, and exists.

In the below screenshot, we are trying to list all those pods that have an env label with value
for either testing or development.

kubectl get pods -l ‘env in (testing, development)




Here, we are trying to list all those pods that don’t have the India or US value for the
Location key in the Label.

kubectl get pods -l ‘Location not in (India, US)’




                                                                                                  34
We can also delete the pods as per the label.

Here, We have deleted all those pods that don’t have the Chinda value for the location key
in the Label.

kubectl delete pod -l Location!=China




Here, We have completed the HandsOn for the label and label-selector. You can explore
more yourself.



Let’s move it to node-selector



nodeSelector HandsOn
As you remember, we have set up minikube on our machine. So, our master and worker
node is on the same machine.

To list the nodes on the master node, use the command

kubectl get nodes




apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: nodelabels
 labels:
   env: testing
spec:
containers:
   - name: container1



                                                                                             35
  image: ubuntu
  command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo Node-Selector Example; sleep 5 ;
done"]
nodeSelector:
 hardware: t2-medium

Here, I have created the pod but when I list the pods the status is pending for the created
pod.




If you observe the manifest file, the master node is looking for that worker node which has
the label hardware=t2-medium.




As you can see there is no label added like hardware=t2-medium




Here we have added the label to the worker node
kubectl label nodes minikube hardware=t2-medium




As sooner the label is added, the sooner the pod will be in a running state.




                                                                                              36
  ReplicationController & ReplicaSet


Before Kubernetes, other tools did not provide important and customized features like
scaling and replication.

When Kubernetes was introduced, replication and scaling were the premium features that
increased the popularity of this container orchestration tool.

Replication means that if the pod's desired state is set to 3 and whenever any pod fails, then
with the help of replication, the new pod will be created as soon as possible. This will lead to
a reduction in the downtime of the application.

Scaling means if the load becomes increases on the application, then Kubernetes increases
the number of pods according to the load on the application.

ReplicationController is an object in Kubernetes that was introduced in v1 of Kubernetes
which helps to meet the desired state of the Kubernetes cluster from the current state.
ReplicationController works on equality-based controllers only.

ReplicaSet is an object in Kubernetes and it is an advanced version of ReplicationController.
ReplicaSet works on both equality-based controllers and set-based controllers.

Let’s do some hands-on to get a better understanding of ReplicationController & ReplicaSet.

YML file

apiVersion: v1
kind: ReplicationController
metadata:
 name: myreplica
spec:
 replicas: 2
 selector:
   Location: India
 template:
   metadata:
     name: testpod6
     labels:
       Location: India
   spec:
    containers:
      - name: c00
        image: ubuntu
        command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo ReplicationController Example; sleep
5 ; done"]

Create the replication controller by running the command


                                                                                                   37
kubectl apply -f myrc.yml




Now, you can see the replication controller that we created earlier and observe the desired
state, current state, ready, and age.




If you list all the pods, you will see that my replica created two pods that are running.




If you try to delete the pods, you will see that the new pod will be created quickly. You can
observe through the AGE of both pods.




If you want to modify the replicas, you can do that by running the command


kubectl scale --replicas=5 rc -l Location=India




                                                                                                38
If you try to delete pods, you will see again that the new pod is creating quickly.




Now, if you want to delete all the pods. You can do it by just deleting the replicationController
by the given command.

kubectl delete -f myrc.yml




                                                                                                    39
ReplicaSet HandsOn

YML file
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: ReplicaSet
metadata:
 name: myrs
spec:
 replicas: 2
 selector:
   matchExpressions:
     - {key: Location, operator: In, values: [India, US, Russia]}
     - {key: env, operator: NotIn, values: [testing]}
 template:
   metadata:
     name: testpod7
     labels:
       Location: Russia
   spec:
    containers:
      - name: container1
        image: ubuntu
        command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo ReplicaSet Example; sleep 5 ; done"]

Create the replicaSet by running the command

kubectl apply -f myrs.yml




Now, you can see the pods that have been created through replicaSet with labels




                                                                                                 40
If you try to delete the pods, you will see that the new pod is created with the same
configuration.




If you want to increase or decrease the number of replicas, you can do it by the given
command.

kubectl scale --replicas=5 rs myrs




If you want to delete all the pods, you can do it by deleting the replicaSet with the help of the
given command.

kubectl delete -f myrs.yml




                                                                                                    41
       Deployment Object in Kubernetes

   ●   Replication Controller and Replica Set don’t provide the updates and rollback for the
       application in the cabinets cluster. But in a deployment, the object does.
   ●   The deployment object works as a supervisor for the pods which gives granular
       control over the pods. Deployment objects can decide how and when the pods
       should be deployed, rollback or updated.
   ●   In Deployment, we define the desired state and the deployment controller will help to
       achieve the desired state from the current state.
   ●   You can achieve this by declarative(manifest) method only.
   ●   A Deployment provides declarative updates for Pods and ReplicaSets.
   ●   The deployment object supports updates which means if there is any update in the
       applications that needs to be deployed in the new version then, the deployment
       object helps to achieve it.
   ●   Deployment object supports rollback which means if the app is crashing in a new
       update then you can easily switch to the previous version by rollback.
   ●   The deployment object doesn’t work directly with the pods. Under the deployment
       object, there will be a replica set or replica controller that manages the pods and
       helps to manage the desired state.

Use Cases for the Deployment Object

   ●   With the help of deployment, the replica set will be rolled out, which will deploy the
       pods and check the status in the background whether the rollout has succeeded or
       not.
   ●   If the pod template spec is modified then, the new replica set will be created with the
       new desired state and the old replica set will still exist and you can roll back
       according to the situation.
   ●   You can roll back to the previous deployment if the current state of the deployment is
       not stable.
   ●   You can scale up the deployment to manage the loads.
   ●   You can pause the deployment if you are fixing something in between the
       deployment and then resume it after fixing it.
   ●   You can clean up those replica sets which are older and no longer needed.



HandsOn
YML file
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: thedeployment
spec:
 replicas: 3
 selector:


                                                                                                 42
  matchLabels:
  name: deploy-pods
 template:
  metadata:
    name: ubuntu-pods
    labels:
      name: deploy-pods
  spec:
   containers:
     - name: container1
       image: ubuntu
       command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo This is Day09 of
30DaysOfKubernetes; sleep 5; done"]

Creating the deployment by running the command ‘kubectl apply -f da-deployment.yml’.

If you observe that the replica set has 3 desired states and same as the current state.

Also, all three pods are in ready and running status.




Now, if you try to delete any pod, because of a replica set, the new pod will be created
quickly.




Here, we have increased the number of replicas set from 3 to 5 by the command

‘kubectl scale — replicas=5 deployment <deployment_name>’.




                                                                                           43
Here, we are checking the logs for the particular pod.




Here, I made some changes in the previous YML file as you can see in the file. I have
updated the image and command for the needed YML file.
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: thedeployment
spec:
 replicas: 3
 selector:
  matchLabels:
   name: deploy-pods
 template:
   metadata:
     name: ubuntu-pods
     labels:
       name: deploy-pods
   spec:
    containers:
      - name: container1
        image: centos
       command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo DevOps is a Culture; sleep 5; done"]

After updating the file, I have applied the updated file and as you can see, ‘thedeployment’
has 3 replicas which were previously 5. This happened because, in the YML file the replicas
are 3.

Also, if you observe that the previous rs is still present with 0 desired and current state.




                                                                                                44
Now, if you will check the logs of the new pods. You will see the updated command running
that we have written in the YML file.




Also, We have updated the image for the OS and you can see that we are getting the
expected result for the image.




                                                                                            45
Here, we have increased the number of replicas set from 3 to 5 by the command ‘kubectl
scale — replicas=5 deployment <deployment_name>’.




Now, if you want to switch to the previous deployment you can do it by the given command.

kubectl rollout undo deployment <deployment_name>

If you compare the first kubectl get rs command with the second kubectl get rs, then the
desired state shifts to the other deployment.




Now, if you see the logs of the running pods. You will see that the previous command is
running because we have switched to the previous deployment.




                                                                                            46
If you see the OS Image, you will understand that in our previous deployment, we used an
Ubuntu image which is expected.




If you want to delete all those running pods and replica sets, then use the given command.

kubectl delete -f <deployment_file>




                                                                                             47
48
   Kubernetes Cluster(Master+Worker
     Node) using kubeadm on AWS


Create three EC2 instances with Ubuntu 22.04 and the necessary security group settings.
Configure the instances to prepare for Kubernetes installation.
Install Docker and Kubernetes components on all nodes.
Initialize the Kubernetes cluster on the master node.
Join the worker nodes in the cluster.
Deploy an Nginx application on the cluster for validation.




Step 1:
Create three EC2 Instances with the given configuration

Instance type- t2.medium

Ubuntu Version- 22.04

Create the keypair so you can connect to the instance using SSH.

Create the new Security group and once the instances are initialized/created then, make
sure to add the Allow All traffic in inbound rule in the attached security group.




                                                                                          49
50
Rename the instances according to you. Currently, I am setting up the One Master and two
Workers nodes.




After creating the instances, we have to configure the all instances. Let’s do that and follow
the steps carefully.

Commands need to run on all Nodes(Master and Worker)

Once we log in the all three instances, run the following command.

Step 2:
sudo su
swapoff -a; sed -i '/swap/d' /etc/fstab




Step 3:


cat <<EOF | sudo tee /etc/modules-load.d/k8s.conf
overlay
br_netfilter
EOF



                                                                                                 51
sudo modprobe overlay
sudo modprobe br_netfilter
# sysctl params required by setup, params persist across reboots
cat <<EOF | sudo tee /etc/sysctl.d/k8s.conf
net.bridge.bridge-nf-call-iptables = 1
net.bridge.bridge-nf-call-ip6tables = 1
net.ipv4.ip_forward             =1
EOF
# Apply sysctl params without reboot
sudo sysctl --system




Step 4:
apt update




                                                                   52
Step 5:
Install dependencies by running the command

sudo apt-get install -y apt-transport-https ca-certificates curl




Step 6:
Fetch the public key from Google to validate the Kubernetes packages once it will be
installed.

curl -fsSL https://packages.cloud.google.com/apt/doc/apt-key.gpg | sudo gpg --dearmor -o
/etc/apt/keyrings/kubernetes-archive-keyring.gpg



                                                                                           53
Step 7:
Add the Kubernetes package in the sources.list.d directory

echo "deb [signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/kubernetes-archive-keyring.gpg]
https://apt.kubernetes.io/ kubernetes-xenial main" | sudo tee
/etc/apt/sources.list.d/kubernetes.list




Step 8:
Update the packages as we have added some keys and packages.

apt update




Step 9:
Install kubelet, kubeadm, kubectl and kubernets-cni

apt-get install -y kubelet kubeadm kubectl kubernetes-cni




Step 10:



                                                                         54
This is one of the important dependencies to setting up the Master and Worker nodes.
Installing docker.

apt install docker.io -y




Step 11:
Configuring containerd to ensure compatibility with Kubernetes
sudo mkdir /etc/containerd
sudo sh -c "containerd config default > /etc/containerd/config.toml"
sudo sed -i 's/ SystemdCgroup = false/ SystemdCgroup = true/' /etc/containerd/config.toml




Step 12:
Restart containerd, kubelet, and enable kubelet so when we reboot our machine the nodes
will restart it as well and connect properly.
systemctl restart containerd.service
systemctl restart kubelet.service
systemctl enable kubelet.service




Now, we have completed the installation of the things that are needed on both nodes
(Master and Worker). But in the next steps, we have to configure things only on the Master
Node.




                                                                                             55
Only on the Master Node

Step 13:

Initialize the Kubernetes cluster and it will pull some images such as kube-apiserver,
kube-controller, and many other important components.

kubeadm config images pull




Step 14:

Now, initialize the Kubernetes cluster which will give you the token or command to connect
with this Master node from the Worker node. At the end of this command, you will get some
commands that need to run and at the bottom, you will get the kubeadm join command that
will be run from the Worker Node to connect with the Master Node. I have highlighted the
commands in the second next snipped. Please keep the kubeadm join command
somewhere in the notepad.

kubeadm init




Keep the kubeadm join command in your notepad or somewhere for later.




                                                                                             56
Step 15:

As you have to manage the cluster that’s why you need to create a .kube file copy it to the
given directory and change the ownership of the file.
mkdir -p $HOME/.kube
sudo cp -i /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf $HOME/.kube/config
sudo chown $(id -u):$(id -g) $HOME/.kube/config




Step 16:

Verify the kubeconfig by kube-system which will list all the pods. If you observe, there are
starting twopods that are not ready status because the network plugin is not installed.


kubectl get po -n kube-system




Step 17:

Verify all the cluster component health statuses

kubectl get --raw='/readyz?verbose'




                                                                                               57
Step 18:

Check the cluster-info

kubectl cluster-info




Step 19:

To install the network plugin on the Master node

kubectl apply -f
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/projectcalico/calico/v3.25.0/manifests/calico.yaml




Step 20:

Now, If you run the below command, you will observe the two remaining pods are in ready
status which means we are ready to bootstrap by our Workers Node or connect to the
Master node through the Worker Node.

kubectl get po -n kube-system




                                                                                          58
Step 21:

Now, you have to run the command on Worker Node1. If you remember, I told you to keep
the command somewhere in Step 14. Here you have to use your command because your
token is different as well as mine.

Worker Node1

kubeadm join 10.0.0.15:6443 — token 6c8w3o.5r89f9cfbhiunrep —
discovery-token-ca-cert-hash
sha256:eec45092dc7341079fc9f2a3399ad6089ed9e86d4eec950ac541363dbc87e6aa




Step 22:

Follow the Step 21.

Worker Node2

kubeadm join 10.0.0.15:6443 --token 6c8w3o.5r89f9cfbhiunrep
--discovery-token-ca-cert-hash
sha256:eec45092dc7341079fc9f2a3399ad6089ed9e86d4eec950ac541363dbc87e6aa




Step 23:

Now, from here all the commands will be run on Master Node only.

If you run the below command you will see that the Worker Nodes are present with their
respective Private IPs and it is in Ready. status

kubectl get nodes




                                                                                         59
Here, we have completed our Setup of Master and Worker Node. Now let’s try to deploy a
simple nginx pod on both worker nodes.

Step 23:

Run the command, which includes the deployment file to deploy nginx on both worker Node.
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: nginx-deployment
spec:
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: nginx
 replicas: 2
 template:
   metadata:
    labels:
      app: nginx
   spec:
    containers:
    - name: nginx
      image: nginx:latest
      ports:
      - containerPort: 80
EOF




Step 24:

To expose your deployment on NodePort 32000 which means you can access your nginx
application on port 32000 through your browser easily.


cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: nginx-service



                                                                                           60
spec:
 selector:
   app: nginx
 type: NodePort
 ports:
   - port: 80
     targetPort: 80
     nodePort: 32000
EOF




Step 25:

Now, check the pods by the below command and you can see that your pods are in running
status.

kubectl get pods




Step 26:

On Worker Node1

You can validate your deployment by copying the Public IP of your WorkerNode1 and adding
a colon(:) with port(32000).




On Worker Node2

You can validate your deployment by copying the Public IP of your WorkerNode2 and adding
a colon(:) with port(32000).




                                                                                           61
  Kubernetes Networking (Services)


Objectives
By the end of this topic, you will:
Understand the basics of how pods and containers can communicate within the same pod
and node.
Explore the critical role of Service objects in Kubernetes networking.
Gain insights into different Service types, including ClusterIP, NodePort, LoadBalancer, and
ExternalName.

Things to know about accessing pods or containers in some scenarios:
   ● Multiple containers within the pod access each other through a loopback
      address(localhost).
   ● The cluster provides communication between multiple pods.
   ● To access your application from outside of the cluster, you need a Services object in
      Kubernetes.
   ● You can also use the Services object to publish services only for access within the
      cluster.

Access containers within the same pod

apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: day10
 labels:
   env: testing
   department: DevOps
spec:
 containers:
   - name: container1
     image: nginx
   - name: container2
     image: ubuntu
     command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo This is Day07 of 30DaysOfKubernetes;
sleep 5 ; done"]
     ports:
      - containerPort: 80




                                                                                               62
kubectl exec day07 -it -c container2 — /bin/bash

Update the packages and install the curl




Run the below command.
curl localhost:80




Access containers within the same Node.
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: day10-pod1
 labels:
   env: testing
   department: DevOps
spec:
 containers:
   - name: container1
     image: nginx
     ports:
      - containerPort: 80
apiVersion: v1


                                                   63
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: day10-pod2
 labels:
   env: testing
   department: DevOps
spec:
 containers:
   - name: container2
     image: httpd
     ports:
      - containerPort: 80




                            64
Service Object in Kubernetes
To configure Networking for deployed applications on pods and containers, we use Service
objects.

There are four main types of Kubernetes Services:

   1. ClusterIP: As the name suggests, With the help of this Service. Kubernetes expose
      the service within the cluster which means the service or application won’t be
      accessible outside of the cluster.

You can view the Service YML file and see how to use this service.
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: httpd-service
spec:
 ports:
  - port: 80



                                                                                           65
   targetPort: 80
selector:
  name: DevOps
type: ClusterIP


   2. NodePort: This is the next stage of the ClusterIP where you want to deploy your
      application or service that should be accessible to the world without any interruption.
      In this Service, the node port exposes the service or application through the static
      port on each node’s IP.

You can view the Service YML file and see how to use this service.
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: httpd-service
spec:
 ports:
   - port: 80
     targetPort: 80
 selector:
   name: DevOps
 type: NodePort

   3. LoadBalancer: Load balancers are used to distribute the traffic between the multiple
      pods. With the help of this service object, the services will be exposed via the cloud’s
      load balancer.

You can view the Service YML file and see how to use this service.
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: svc-lb
spec:
 type: LoadBalancer
 selector:
   tag: DevOps
 ports:
 - name: port-lb
   protocol: TCP
   port: 80
   targetPort: 80



   4. ExternalName: This is a similar object service to ClusterIP but it does have DNS
      CName instead of Selectors and labels. In other words, services will be mapped to a
      DNS name.

You can view the Service YML file and see how to use this service.

apiVersion: v1


                                                                                                 66
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: k8-service
namespace: dev
spec:
 type:           ExternalName
 externalName: k8.learning.com




                                 67
   Kubernetes Advanced Networking:
            CNI and Calico

What is CNI?
CNI stands for Container Network Interface. As the name suggests, CNI works on the
networking level where CNI takes care of the pods and other things in Kubernetes. CNI
ensures how the containers and pods should connect to the network. There are many CNIs
available in the market but today we will discuss Calico CNI.

What is Calico CNI?
Calico is an open-source network and network security solution designed for Kubernetes.

Calico is one of the most popular CNIs which used to manage the networking between
containers, pods, nodes, or multiple clusters. Calico works only on networking to provide
fine-grained control over the containers, pods, nodes, or multiple clusters where Services
and

Alternative of Calico CNI
   ●   Flannel: Flannel is a straightforward CNI plugin that uses Layer 3 networking. It is
       good for small to medium size clusters but the networking policies feature is not good
       where Calico provides good control over networking policies.
   ●   Weave: Weave is quite a good CNI plugin as compared to Flannel as it provides
       secure, scalable networking and networking policies as well. But it does not have rich
       features as Calico does.
   ●   Cilium: Cilium is one of the best CNI plugins which competes with Calico CNI where
       Cilium provides the best security and observability. Cilium is a good choice for large
       complex clusters where security is a top concern.
   ●   kube-router: kube-router is a lightweight CNI plugin where that provides good
       features like serving load balancing and network policies. It is good for small to
       medium size clusters.

Why you should use Calico CNI over other CNIs(Features)
   ●   Advanced Networking Policies: With Calico CNI, we can define fine-grained
       networking policies over the containers or pods such as which pod can communicate
       to which other pod and apply rules based on labels, ports, and more. This level of
       control is not possible through Kubernetes Native Networking.
   ●   Scalability: Calico is known for its Scalability where it can handle large clusters with
       ease and efficiently manage network traffic which makes it suitable for
       enterprise-level applications with multiple pods.
   ●   Cross-Cluster Networking: Calico can be used to connect multiple Kubernetes
       clusters together, which can be beneficial in hybrid or multi-cluster scenarios.



                                                                                                  68
    ●   Border Gateway Protocol(BGP) routing: Calico supports BGP for routing which is
        quite good if you want to integrate with on-premises data centers or public cloud
        environments.
    ●   Security: Calico supports a very good level of security over the network traffic where
        Calico encrypts the network traffic so only authorized pods can communicate with
        the respective pods.

Key Concepts and Real-time Example
    ●   IP Address Management: Calico supports managing the IP address for each pod
        where each pod is assigned to a unique IP address from the cluster’s IP address
        range.
    ●   Routing and Network Policy: Calico enables routing for the network traffic between
        pods. The Network policies can be applied to control traffic between pods. So, you
        can allow or deny communications between specific pods.
    ●   Load Balancing: Calico handles load balancing in which it distributes the traffic
        between multiple pods.
    ●   Security and Encryption: Calico provides security features to protect your
        Kubernetes clusters. It encrypts the network traffic so that you can ensure only
        authorized pods can communicate.

Think of Calico as a traffic control system in a city, where every vehicle(pod) gets a unique
plate number and license and follows the traffic rules. The Traffic lights(network policies)
ensure safe and fully controlled movement. Police officers(security) check for unauthorized
actions and keep the movement controlled.

HandsOn
If you want to do HandsOn where you want to install the Calico Network. So you can refer to
the Day10 of #30DaysOfKubernetes where we have set up the Master and Worker Node on
the AWS EC2 Instance in which I have installed the Calico CNI Plugin.

For now, this is a link to install the Calico and list all the networks, and validate the Calico
network

kubectl get pods -n kube-system




kubectl apply -f
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/projectcalico/calico/v3.25.0/manifests/calico.yaml




                                                                                                   69
kubectl get pods -n kube-system




                                  70
                Kubernetes Volumes and
                   LivenessProbes

The data is a very important thing for an application. In Kubernetes, data is kept for a short
time in the applications in the pods/containers. There is no data persistent things available
by default by Kubernetes. To overcome this issue, Kubernetes supports Volumes.

But before going into the types of Volumes. Let’s understand some facts about pods and
containers' short live data.

   ●   The volumes reside inside the Pod which stores the data of all containers in that pod.
   ●   If the container gets deleted, then the data will persist and it will be available for the
       new container which was created recently.
   ●   Multiple containers within a pod can share one volume because the volume is
       attached to the pod.
   ●   If the Pod gets deleted, then the volume will also get deleted which leads to a loss of
       data for all containers permanently.
   ●   After deleting the pod, the new pod will be created with volume but this time volumes
       don’t have any previous data or any data.

There are some types of Volumes supported by Kubernetes

EmptyDir
   ●   This is one of the basic volume types that we have discussed earlier in the facts.
       This volume is used to share the volumes between multiple containers within a pod
       instead of the host machine or any Master/Worker Node.
   ●   EmptyDir volume is created when the pod is created and it exists as long as a pod.
   ●   There is no data available in the EmptyDir volume type when it is created for the first.
   ●   Containers within the pod can access the other containers' data. However, the mount
       path can be different for each container.
   ●   If the Containers get crashed then, the data will still persist and can be accessible by
       other or newly created containers.

HandsOn
In this snippet, I have created one file in container1 and looking for the same file and content
from container2 which is possible.

EmptyDir YML file
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: emptydir
spec:
containers:



                                                                                                    71
 - name: container1
   image: ubuntu
   command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo This is Day13 of 30DaysOfKubernetes;
sleep 5 ; done"]
   volumeMounts:
    - name: day13
      mountPath: "/tmp/container1"
 - name: container2
   image: centos
   command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo Chak de INDIA!; sleep 5 ; done"]
   volumeMounts:
    - name: day13
      mountPath: "/tmp/container2"
 volumes:
 - name: day13
   emptyDir: {}




In this snippet, I am creating a file in container2 and looking for the file and the same content
through container1 which is possible.




2. hostPath

       This volume type is the advanced version of the previous volume type EmptyDir.

       In EmptyDir, the data is stored in the volumes that reside inside the Pods only where
       the host machine doesn’t have the data of the pods and containers.




                                                                                                    72
       hostpath volume type helps to access the data of the pods or container volumes from
       the host machine.

       hostpath replicates the data of the volumes on the host machine and if you make the
       changes from the host machine then the changes will be reflected to the pods
       volumes(if attached).

HandsOn
In this snippet, once the pod has been created the data directory is also created on the local
machine(Minikube Cluster).

hostPath YML file
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: hostpath
spec:
 containers:
 - name: container1
   image: ubuntu
   command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo This is Day13 of 30DaysOfKubernetes;
sleep 5 ; done"]
   volumeMounts:
   - mountPath: "/tmp/cont"
     name: hp-vm
 volumes:
 - name: hp-vm
   hostPath:
     path: /tmp/data




In this snippet, I am creating a txt file inside the pod's mapped directory /tmp/cont which is
mapped to the local directory /tmp/data and after that, I am looking for the same file and
content on the local machine directory /tmp/data.




3. Persistent Volume
   ●   Persistent Volume is an advanced version of EmptyDir and hostPath volume types.
   ●   Persistent Volume does not store the data over the local server. It stores the data on
       the cloud or some other place where the data is highly available.


                                                                                                 73
   ●   In previous volume types, if pods get deleted then the data will be deleted as well.
       But with the help of Persistent Volume, the data can be shared with other pods or
       other worker node’s pods as well after the deletion of pods.
   ●   One Persistent Volume is distributed across the entire Kubernetes Cluster. So that,
       any node or any node’s pod can access the data from the volume accordingly.
   ●   With the help of Persistent Volume, the data will be stored on a central location such
       as EBS, Azure Disks, etc.
   ●   Persistent Volumes are the available storage(remember for the next volume type).
   ●   If you want to use Persistent Volume, then you have to claim that volume with the
       help of the manifest YAML file.

4. Persistent Volume Claim(PVC)

   ●   To get the Persistent Volume, you have to claim the volume with the help of PVC.
   ●   When you create a PVC, Kubernetes finds the suitable PV to bind them together.
   ●   After a successful bound to the pod, you can mount it as a volume.
   ●   Once a user finishes its work, then the attached volume gets released and will be
       used for recycling such as new pod creation for future usage.
   ●   If the pod is terminating due to some issue, the PV will be released but as you know
       the new pod will be created quickly then the same PV will be attached to the newly
       created Pod.

Now, As you know the Persistent Volume will be on Cloud. So, there are some facts and
terms and conditions are there for EBS because we are using AWS cloud for our K8
learning. So, let’s discuss it as well:



   ●   EBS Volumes keeps the data forever where the emptydir volume did not. If the pods
       get deleted then, the data will still exist in the EBS volume.
   ●   The nodes on which running pods must be on AWS Cloud only(EC2 Instances).
   ●   Both(EBS Volume & EC2 Instances) must be in the same region and availability
       zone.
   ●   EBS only supports a single EC2 instance mounting a volume

HandsOn
To perform this demo, Create an EBS volume by clicking on ‘Create volume’.




Pass the Size for the EBS according to you, and select the Availability zone where your EC2
instance is created, and click on Create volume.




                                                                                                74
Now, copy the volume ID and paste it into the PV YML file(12th line)




PV YML file

In this snippet, we have created a Persistent Volume where the EBS volume is attached and
created 1GB of capacity.
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata:
 name: myebsvol
spec:
 capacity:
  storage: 1Gi
 accessModes:
  - ReadWriteOnce
 persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy: Recycle
 awsElasticBlockStore:
  volumeID: #Your_VolumeID
  fsType: ext4




PVC YML file
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:


                                                                                            75
 name: myebsvolclaim
spec:
 accessModes:
  - ReadWriteOnce
 resources:
  requests:
    storage: 1Gi

In this snippet, we have created a Persistent Volume Claim in which PVC requests PV to get
1GB, and as you can see the volume is bound successful.




Deployment YML file
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: pvdeploy
spec:
 replicas: 1
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: mypv
 template:
   metadata:
    labels:
      app: mypv
   spec:
    containers:
    - name: shell
      image: centos
      command: ["bin/bash", "-c", "sleep 10000"]
      volumeMounts:
      - name: mypd
        mountPath: "/tmp/persistent"
    volumes:
      - name: mypd
        persistentVolumeClaim:
         claimName: myebsvolclaim

In this snippet, we have created a deployment for PV and PVC demonstration.




                                                                                             76
In this snippet, we have logged in to the created container and created one file with some
text.




In this snippet, we have deleted the pod, and then because of replicas the new pod was
created quickly. Now, we have logged in to the newly created pod and checked for the file
that we created in the previous step, and as you can see the file is present which is
expected.




The demonstration has been completed now feel free to delete the volume.




LivenessProbe (HealthCheck)
   ●   LivenessProbe is a rich feature in Kubernetes that is used to check the health of your
       application.
   ●   Kubernetes by default doesn’t check the health check of the applications.
   ●   If you want to use the livenessProve feature and want to check the health of your
       application, you have to mention it in the manifest file.




                                                                                                77
   ●   livenessProbe expects a 0 output which means the application is running perfectly.
       But if there is any other output except 0 then livenessProbe recreates the container
       and repeats the same process.
   ●   livenessProbe repeats the process after particular seconds or minutes(specified by
       you) to check the health of the application.
   ●   If there is a load balancer attached to multiple pods then, livenessProbe checks the
       health of the application and if the application’s health check status is not healthy
       then livenessProbe removes the particular pod from the load balancer and recreates
       the new pod and repeats the same process.

HandsOn
In this snippet, we have created a pod, and if you observe there is a new thing added while
describing the pod through the kubectl describe pod command in the bottom which comes
under Containers liveness.

livenessProbe YML file
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 labels:
   test: liveness
 name: mylivenessprobe
spec:
 containers:
 - name: liveness
   image: ubuntu
   args:
   - /bin/sh
   - -c
   - touch /tmp/healthy; sleep 1000
   livenessProbe:
     exec:
       command:
       - cat
       - /tmp/healthy
     initialDelaySeconds: 5
     periodSeconds: 5
     timeoutSeconds: 30




                                                                                               78
If you see the YML file, there is one condition if the file healthy is not present in /tmp
directory then livenessProbe will recreate the container. So, we have deleted that file.




After deleting the file, if you run kubectl describe pod <pod-name> you will see in the last
two lines that the container is failing because the condition is not meeting.




                                                                                               79
    Kubernetes ConfigMaps & Secrets

ConfigMap
ConfigMap is used to store the configuration data in key-value pairs within Kubernetes. This
is one of the ways to decouple the configuration from the application to get rid of hardcoded
values. Also, if you observe some important values keep changing according to the
environments such as development, testing, production, etc ConfigMap helps to fix this
issue to decouple the configurations. ConfigMap stores non-confidential data. ConfigMap
can be created through an imperative or declarative way.

   ●   Creating the configMap is the first process which can be done by commands only or
       a YAML file.
   ●   After creating the configMap, we use the data in the pod by injecting the pods.
   ●   After injecting the pods, if there is any update in the configuration we can modify the
       configMap, and the changes will be reflected in the injected pod.



Secrets
There are lot of confidential information that needs to be stored on the server such as
database usernames, passwords, or API Keys. To keep all the important data secure,
Kubernetes has a Secrets feature that encrypts the data. Secrets can store data up to 1MB
which would be enough. Secrets can be created via imperative or declarative ways. Secrets
are stored in the /tmps directory and can be accessible to pods only.

   ●   Creating the Secrets is the first process that can be created by commands or a
       YAML file.
   ●   After creating the Secrets, applications need to use the credentials or database
       credentials which will be done by injecting with the pods.



ConfigMap HandsOn
Creating ConfigMap from literal

In this snippet, we have created the configMap through — from-literal which means you just
need to provide the key value instead of providing the file with key-value pair data.

At the bottom, you can see the data that we have created through the Literal.




                                                                                                 80
CM from file

In this snippet, We have created one file first.conf which has some data, and created the
configMap with the help of that file.

At the bottom, you can see the data that we have created through the file.




CM from the env file

In this snippet, We have created one environment file first.env which has some data in
key-value pairs, and created the configMap with the help of the environment file.

At the bottom, you can see the data that we have created through the env file.




                                                                                            81
What if you have to create configMap for tons of files?

In this snippet, We have created multiple files in a directory with different extensions that
have different types of data and created the configMap for the entire directory.

At the bottom, you can see the data that we have created for the entire directory.




CM from the YAML file

The imperative way is not very good if you have to repeat the same tasks again and again.
Now, we will look at how to create configMap through the YAML file.



                                                                                                82
In this snippet, We have created one file and run the command with --from-file, and in the
end, we add -o yaml which generates the YAML file. You can copy that YAML file modify it
according to your key-value pairs and apply the file.

At the bottom, you can see the data that we have created through the YAML file.




In the above steps, we have created four types of configMaps but here, we will learn how to
use those configMaps by injecting configMaps into the pods.

Injecting CM into the pod with specific key pairs

In this snippet, We have created a YAML file in which we have mentioned the configMap
name with the key name which will be added to the pod’s environment variable.
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: firstpod
spec:
 containers:
  - image: coolgourav147/nginx-custom
    name: firstcontainer
    imagePullPolicy: Never


                                                                                              83
   env:
    - name: valuefromenv
      valueFrom:
       configMapKeyRef:
        key: Subject2
        name: cm-from-env




At the bottom, you can see the configuration in the pod’s environment.




Injecting multiple CMs with specific and multiple values

In this snippet, we have added multiple key pairs from different files.

At the bottom, you can see the data that is from different files.
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: firstpod
spec:
 containers:
  - image: coolgourav147/nginx-custom
    name: firstcontainer
    imagePullPolicy: Never


                                                                          84
   env:
    - name: valuefromenv
      valueFrom:
       configMapKeyRef:
        key: Subject2
        name: cm-from-env
    - name: valuefromenv2
      valueFrom:
       configMapKeyRef:
        key: env.sh
        name: cm2


   - name: valuefromenv3
     valueFrom:
      configMapKeyRef:
       key: Subject4
       name: cm-from-env




Injecting the created environment file single cms and getting all the value
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: firstpod
spec:
 containers:
  - image: coolgourav147/nginx-custom
    name: firstcontainer
    imagePullPolicy: Never
    envFrom:
     - configMapRef:
        name: cm-from-env




                                                                              85
Injecting cm in the pod with the entire proper file
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: firstpod
spec:
 containers:
  - image: coolgourav147/nginx-custom
    name: firstcontainer
    imagePullPolicy: Never
    volumeMounts:
    - name: test
      mountPath: "/env-values"
      readOnly: true
 volumes:
  - name: test
    configMap:
        name: cm-from-env




Injecting CM and creating a file in the pod with the selected key pairs
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: firstpod
spec:
 containers:
  - image: coolgourav147/nginx-custom


                                                                          86
   name: firstcontainer
   imagePullPolicy: Never
   volumeMounts:
   - name: test
     mountPath: "/env-values"
     readOnly: true
volumes:
 - name: test
   configMap:
       name: cm-from-env
       items:
        - key: Subject3
          path: "topic3"
        - key: Subject5
          path: "topic5"




Secrets HandsOn
Creating Secrets from literal

In this snippet, we have created the Secrets through — from-literal which means you just
need to provide the key value instead of providing the file with key-value pair data.

At the bottom, you can see the key and encrypted value because Kubernetes encrypts the
secrets.




Secrets from file




                                                                                           87
In this snippet, We have created one file first.conf which has some data, and created the
Secrets with the help of that file.

At the bottom, you can see the encrypted data..




Secrets from the env file

In this snippet, We have created one environment file first.env which has some data in
key-value pairs, and created the Secrets with the help of the environment file.

At the bottom, you can see the encrypted data.




What if you have to create Secrets for tons of files?

In this snippet, We have created multiple files in a directory with a different extension that
has different types of data and created the Secrets for the entire directory.

At the bottom, you can see the encrypted data.




                                                                                                 88
CM from the YAML file

In this snippet, We have created one file and run the command with — from-file, and in the
end, we add -o yaml which generates the YAML file. You can copy that YAML file modify it
according to your key-value pairs and apply the file.

At the bottom, you can see the encrypted data.




In the above steps, we have created four types of Secrets but here, we will learn how to use
those Secrets by injecting Secrets to the pods.

Injecting Secret with a pod for a particular key pairs

In this snippet, We have created a YAML file in which we have mentioned the Secrets name
with the key name which will be added to the pod’s environment variable.
apiVersion: v1


                                                                                               89
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: secret-pod
spec:
 containers:
  - image: coolgourav147/nginx-custom
    name: firstcontainer
    imagePullPolicy: Never
    env:
     - name: the-variable
       valueFrom:
        secretKeyRef:
         key: Subject1
         name: third




Injecting the created environment file single cms and getting all the value


apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: secret-pod
spec:
 containers:
  - image: coolgourav147/nginx-custom
    name: firstcontainer
    imagePullPolicy: Never
    volumeMounts:
     - name: test
       mountPath: "/secrets-values"
 volumes:
  - name: test
    secret:
        secretName: seonc




                                                                              90
Injecting Secrets and creating a file in the pod with the selected key pairs


apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: secret-pod
spec:
 containers:
  - image: coolgourav147/nginx-custom
    name: firstcontainer
    imagePullPolicy: Never
    volumeMounts:
     - name: test
       mountPath: "/secrets-values"
 volumes:
  - name: test
    secret:
        secretName: third
        items:
         - key: Subject3
           path: "topic3"
         - key: Subject5
           path: "topic5"




                                                                               91
                           Kubernetes Jobs

Kubernetes Jobs is a resource that is used to achieve a particular work such as a backup
script and, once the work is completed the pod will be deleted.

Use cases:
   ●   Database backup script needs to run
   ●   Running batch processes
   ●   Running the task on the scheduled interval
   ●   Log Rotation

Key-Features:
   ●   One-time Execution: If you have a task that needs to be executed one time whether
       it’s succeed or fail then the job will be finished.
   ●   Parallelism: If you want to run multiple pods at the same time.
   ●   Scheduling: If you want to schedule a specific number of pods after a specific time.
   ●   Restart Policy: You can specify whether the Job should restart if fails.



Let’s do some hands-on work to get a better understanding of Kubernetes Jobs.

Work completed and pod deleted


apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: Job
metadata:
 name: testjob
spec:
 template:
   metadata:
    name: testjob
   spec:
    containers:
     - image: ubuntu
       name: container1
       command: ["bin/bash", "-c", "sudo apt update; sleep 30"]
    restartPolicy: Never




                                                                                              92
Create and run the pods simultaneously and delete once the work is completed.
apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: Job
metadata:
 name: testjob
spec:
 parallelism: 3 # Create 3 pods and run simultaneously
 activeDeadlineSeconds: 10 # Pods will terminate after 40 secs(10+30(command sleep
time))
 template:
   metadata:
    name: testjob
   spec:
    containers:
     - image: ubuntu
       name: container1
       command: ["bin/bash", "-c", "sudo apt update; sleep 30"]
    restartPolicy: Never




Scheduling a pod after each minute
apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: CronJob
metadata:
 name: testjob
spec:
 schedule: "* * * * *"
 jobTemplate:



                                                                                     93
spec:
 template:
  spec:
   containers:
    - image: ubuntu
      name: container1
      command: ["bin/bash", "-c", "sudo apt update; sleep 30"]
   restartPolicy: Never




                                                                 94
                Kubernetes InitContainer

   ●   Init Containers are those containers that run before the main or app container for the
       particular work.
   ●   Init Containers motive for completion which means that the given work needs to be
       completed.
   ●   If a pod fails due to Init Containers then, Kubernetes restarts the init Container until it will
       succeed.

Use cases:
   ●   To Install the dependencies before running the application on the main container
   ●   Clone a git repository into the volume
   ●   Generate configuration files dynamically
   ●   Database Configuration



Let’s do some hands-on to get a better understanding of Init Containers.

In this snippet, we are creating a new pod in which we have created two containers and the first
container is initcontainer.
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: initcontainer
spec:
 initContainers:
 - name: container1
   image: ubuntu
   command: ["bin/bash", "-c", "echo We are at 16 Days of 30DaysOfKubernetes >
/tmp/xchange/testfile; sleep 15"]
   volumeMounts:
    - name: xchange
      mountPath: "/tmp/xchange"
 containers:
 - name: container2
   image: ubuntu
   command: ["bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo `cat /tmp/data/testfile`; sleep 10; done"]
   volumeMounts:
    - name: xchange
      mountPath: /tmp/data
 volumes:
 - name: xchange
   emptyDir: {}




                                                                                                    95
In this snippet, you will see the initcontainer is configured and then the main application
container is running.




                                                                                              96
               Kubernetes Pod Lifecycle

There are multiple types of states for the Pod lifecycle that we will discuss here:

   1. Pending: When a pod is created it has to go through the pending status in which Master
      nodes allocate the nodes to where to create the pod. The pods will remain in the
      pending state until all the necessary resources are allocated such as CPU, memory, and
      storage.
   2. Running: Once the pod has been scheduled to a node, it comes into the Running
      Status. Once the pod comes into a running state, the containers within the pods will be
      creating and doing the tasks that have been provided in the manifest file.
   3. Succeeded: Once the pods have completed their task then, the pods come in the
      Succeeded state and then terminates.
   4. Failed: Once the pods intend to create but due to some issues the pods are not creating
      and showing the Failed state leads to issues with the configurations which need to be
      addressed by the creator of the file.
   5. CrashLoopBackOff: This is the advanced state of a Failed state where the container is
      crashing and restarts. To fix this issue, the creator of the file needs to check the manifest
      file.
   6. Unknown: In some cases, the Kubernetes may lose the connection with the nodes to
      create the pods that show the unknown status of the particular pod.
   7. Termination: When a pod is no longer available it comes in the termination process.
      Once the pod is deleted, it can not restart again the same pods and is removed from the
      entire Kubernetes cluster.

There are some conditions that come under while creating Pods:

   ●   Initialized: This condition shows whether all the init containers have started successfully
       or not. If the status is false it means the init containers have not started.
   ●   Ready: This condition shows the pod is ready to use.
   ●   ContainersReady: As the name suggests, if the containers are ready within a pod it will
       show True in the status.
   ●   PodScheduled: This condition shows that the pod has been scheduled on the node.

If you create any pod and describe that pod by running the command kubectl describe pod
<pod-name>. You will see the status like this, the pod is scheduled but other things are not
because it is in progress.




                                                                                                97
After some seconds, if you describe again the same pod. You will see that everything is perfect
and configured properly.




                                                                                             98
                 Kubernetes Namespace




About Namespace

   ●   A namespace is a logical entity that is used to organize the Kubernetes Cluster into
       virtual sub-clusters.
   ●   The namespace is used when an organization shares the same Kubernetes cluster for
       multiple projects.
   ●   There can be any number of namespaces can be created inside the Kubernetes cluster.
   ●   Nodes and Kubernetes Volumes do not come under the namespaces and are visible to
       every namespace.



Pre-existed Kubernetes namespaces

   ●   default: As the name suggests, whenever we create any Kubernetes object such as
       pod, replicas, etc it will create in the default namespace. If you want to create the
       particular pod in the different namespace you have to create the namespace and while
       creating the pod you have to mention the namespace(Will do in handsOn).
   ●   kube-system: This namespace contains the Kubernetes components such as
       kube-controller-manager, kube-scheduler, kube-dns or other controllers. This




                                                                                           99
       namespace must be avoided to create pods or other objects if you want to keep the
       Kubernetes cluster stable.
   ●   kube-public: This namespace is used to share non-sensitive information that can be
       viewed by any of the members who are part of the Kubernetes cluster.

When should we consider Kubernetes Namespaces?

   ●   Isolation: When there are multiple numbers of projects running then we can consider
       making namespaces and put the projects accordingly in the namespaces.
   ●   Organization: If there is only one Kubernetes Cluster which has different environments
       to keep isolated. If something happens to the particular environment then it won’t affect
       the other environments.
   ●   Permission: If some objects are confidential and must need access to the particular
       persons then, Kubernetes provides RBAC roles as well which we can use in the
       namespace. It means that only authorized users can access the objects within the
       namespaces.



HandsOn
If you observe the first command, while running the command ‘kubectl get pods’ you are getting
‘No resources found in default namespace’ which means that we are trying to list the pods from
the default namespace.

If you observe the second command ‘kubectl get namespaces’ which is used to list all the
namespaces.

The default one is created for pods and others for Kubernetes itself which we don’t use for
ourselves.




In this snippet, we have created one new namespace named tech-mahindra and you can
validate whether the namespace is created or not by running ‘kubectl get namespaces’
command.



                                                                                              100
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
 name: tech-mahindra
 labels:
   name: tech-mahindra




In this snippet, we have created one pod in a namespace that we created in the previous
step(tech-mahindra). If you want to list the pods from the other namespace except the default
namespace then you have to mention the namespace name by following -n
<namespace-name>.


apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: ns-demo-pod
spec:
 containers:
 - name: container1
   image: ubuntu
   command: ["bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo We are on 18th Day of
30DaysOfKubernetes; sleep 30; done"]
 restartPolicy: Never




                                                                                                101
If you want to delete the pod from the different namespace except default then you have to
mention the namespace otherwise it will throw the error.




If you want to set your namespace as the default namespace, you can use the command
‘kubectl config set-context $(kubectl config current-context) — namespace
<namespace-name>’’ and if you want to see the default namespace use the command ‘kubectl
config view | grep namespace’




                                                                                             102
            Kubernetes ResourceQuota




ResourceQuota is one of the rich features of Kubernetes that helps to manage and distribute
resources according to the requirements.



Suppose in an Organization, two teams share the same Kubernetes Cluster where the first team
needs more CPUs and Memory because of heavy workload tasks. Now, in this situation, if the
CPUs and other resources go to another team then it might increase the chance of failure. To
resolve this issue, we can allocate particular CPU cores and Memory to every project.



   ●   A pod in Kubernetes will run with no limits on CPU and memory by default.
   ●   You can specify the RAM, Memory, or CPUs for each container and pod.
   ●   The scheduler decides which node will create pods, if the node has enough CPU
       resources available then, the node will place the pods.
   ●   CPU is specified in units of cores and memory is specified in units of bytes.
   ●   As you know, the Kubernetes cluster can be divided into namespaces and if a container
       is created in a namespace that has a default CPU limit and container does not specify
       the CPU limit then the container will have the default CPI limit.
   ●   A namespace can be assigned to ResourceQuota objects, this will help to limit the
       amount of usage to the objects within the namespaces. You can limit the computer
       (CPU), Memory, and Storage.
   ●   Restrictions that a resource-quotas imposes on namespaces



                                                                                              103
   ●   Every container that is running on the namespace must have its own CPU limit.
   ●   The total amount of CPU used by all the containers in the namespace should not exceed
       a specified limit.

There are two types of constraints that need to be mentioned while using
ResourceQuota:

   ●   Limit: Limit specifies that the container, pod, or namespace will have the limit resources
       where if the objects will exceed the limit then, the object won’t create.
   ●   Request: The request specifies that the container, pod, or namespace needs a particular
       amount of resources such as CPU and memory. But if the request is greater than the
       limit then, Kubernetes won’t allow the creation of pods or containers.

Now, there are some conditions or principles for requests and limit which needs to be
understood.



Let’s understand with hands-on and theoretical.

   1. If the requests and limits are given in the manifest file, it works accordingly.
   2. If the requests are given but the limit is not provided then, the default limit will be used.
   3. If the requests are not provided but the limit is provided then, the requests will be equal
      to the limit.

When booth requests and limits have been mentioned for a pod then it will create the pod
according to the provided resources


apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: resources
spec:
 containers:
 - image: ubuntu
   name: res-pod
   command: ["bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo We are on 18th Day of
30DaysOfKubernetes; sleep 30; done"]
   resources:
    requests:


     memory: "32Mi"
     cpu: "200m"
   limits:
     memory: "64Mi"
     cpu: "400m"




                                                                                                 104
Creating ResourceQuota


apiVersion: v1
kind: ResourceQuota
metadata:
 name: res-quota
spec:
 hard:
   limits.cpu: "200m"
   requests.cpu: "150m"
   limits.memory: "38Mi"
   requests.memory: "12Mi"




Creating deployment but the pod is not creating due to out of limit


apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: rq-deployments
spec:
 replicas: 4
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    objtype: rq-deployments
 template:


                                                                      105
  metadata:
   name: rq-pod
   labels:
     objtype: rq-deployments
  spec:
   containers:
   - name: rq-cont
     image: ubuntu
     command: ["bin/bash", "-c", "while true; do echo We are on 18th Day of
30DaysOfKubernetes; sleep 30; done"]
     resources:
      requests:


       cpu: "50m"




Error logs for the above work




When I did not provide requests

In this snippet, we have created a limit range where we have set the default value for CPU as 1
and from that 1 cpu we are requesting 0.5 CPU only to create a container, if the container needs
more than 0.5 CPU then due to the limit range it won’t happen


apiVersion: v1
                                                                                             106
kind: LimitRange
metadata:
 name: cpulimitrange
spec:
 limits:
 - default:
    cpu: 1


  defaultRequest:
    cpu: 0.5
  type: Container




When I did not provide the limit




apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: no-request-demo
spec:
 containers:
 - name: container1
   image: ubuntu
   resources:
    limits:
      cpu: "2"



When I did not provide limits
                                   107
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: default-cpu-demo-3
spec:
 containers:
 - name: default-cpu-demo-3-ctr
   image: nginx
   resources:
    requests:


    cpu: "0.75"




                                  108
              Kubernetes AutoScaling

Kubernetes supports autoscaling. If you don’t know about autoscaling, let me explain
you in a simple way. As you know, to run the application we need CPU and memory.
Sometimes, there will be a chance where the CPU gets loaded, and this might fail the
server or affect the application. Now, we can’t afford the downtime of the applications. To
get rid of these, we need to increase the number of servers or increase the capacity of
servers.

Let’s understand with a real-time example
There are some OTT platforms such as Netflix or Hotstar. If any web show or movie is
coming on the platform the audience is eagerly waiting for that. Then, the OTT platform
can’t handle the lot of users that might crash the application. This will lead to a loss of
business and the OTT platform can’t afford this business loss. Now, they have two
options to solve this.

●   First, The Platform knows that they need a particular amount of servers such as 100.
    So, they can buy those servers forever but in this situation, when the load decreases
    then the other servers will become unused. Now, if the server is unused, still they
    have paid for those servers which is not a cost-effective method.
●   Second, The Platform doesn’t know when the load will increase. So, they have one
    option which is autoscaling in which when the CPU utilization crosses a particular
    number, it creates new servers. So, the platform can handle loads easily which is
    very cost effective as well.

Types of Autoscaling

●   Horizontal Pod AutoScaling: In this type of scaling, the number of servers will
    increase according to CPU utilization. In this, you define the minimum number of
    servers, maximum number of servers, and CPU utilization. If the CPU utilization
    crosses more than 50% then, it will add the one server automatically.
●   Vertical Pod AutoScaling: In this type of scaling, the server will remain the same in
    numbers but the server’s configuration will increase such as from 4GB RAM to 8GM
    RAM, and the same with the other configurations. But this is not cost-effective and
    business-effective. So, we use Horizontal Pod AutoScaling.




                                                                                              109
Key Features of Horizontal Pod AutoScaler

   ●   By default, Kubernetes does not provide AutoScaling. If you need AutoScaling, then
       you have to create hpa(Horizontal Pod AutoScaling) and vpa(Vertical Pod
       AutoScaling) objects.
   ●   Kubernetes supports the autoscaling of the pods based on Observed CPU
       Utilization.
   ●   Scaling only supports Scalable objects like Controller, deployment, or ReplicaSet.
   ●   HPA is implemented as a Kubernetes API resource and a controller.
   ●   The Controller periodically adjusts the number of replicas in a replication controller or
       deployment to match the observed average CPU utilization to the target specified in
       the manifest file or command.

   We will not cover Vertical Scaling, but you must be aware of it. To get a better
   understanding of VPA. Refer this:
   Kubernetes VPA


   Let’s do some hands-on for Horizontal Pod AutoScaler.
   We can perform HPA through two types:
   ● Imperative way: In this way, you will create hpa object by command only.
   ● Declarative way: In this way, you will create a proper manifest file and then create
      an object by applying the manifest file.

   HandsOn
   To perform HPA, we need one Kubernetes component which is a metrics server. To
   download this, use the below command.
   curl -LO
   https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server/releases/latest/download/components.
   yaml




                                                                                                   110
Now, edit the components.yml file
add
hostNetwork: true
under spec: line and,
add
- --kubelet-insecure-tls
under the metric-resolutions line, then save the file.




Now, you have to apply this by the below command
kubectl apply -f components.yml
To validate, run the command below
kubectl get pods -n kube-system
If the metrics-server pod is running then, you are ready to scale.




Through Imperative way
Create the deployment by the below file
kind: Deployment
apiVersion: apps/v1
metadata:
 name: thdeploy
spec:
 replicas: 1
 selector:
  matchLabels:
   name: deployment
 template:
   metadata:
     name: testpod8
     labels:
       name: deployment
   spec:
    containers:
      - name: container1
        image: nginx
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80



                                                                     111
     resources:
      limits:
        cpu: 500m
      requests:
        cpu: 200m

Apply the deployment file
kubectl apply -f <file_name.yml>

Now, I have opened two windows to show you whether the pod is scaling or not.
Run the watch ‘kubectl get all’ command to see the pod creation.
On the other window, we are creating an hpa object through command.
kubectl autoscale deployment <deployment_name_from_yml> — cpu-percent=20 —
min=1 — max=5

Now on the other window, go into the container using the below command:
kubectl exec <pod_name> -it — /bin/bash/

Now run the below command inside the container and see the magic.
while true; do apt update; done




In this scenario, you can observe that the pod count has increased, reaching its
maximum value of 5. If you intend to downscale, simply halt the command currently
executing within the container. Afterward, Kubernetes will automatically delete the pods
within approximately 5 minutes. This delay is designed to allow Kubernetes to assess
the system load, if the load surges once more, Kubernetes will need to scale up the
number of pods. This phase is commonly referred to as the “cooldown period.




                                                                                           112
Here, you can see the pod number again comes to 1 because there is no load on the
container.




Through declarative way
apiVersion: autoscaling/v2
kind: HorizontalPodAutoscaler
metadata:
 name: demo-hpa
spec:
scaleTargetRef:


                                                                                    113
 apiVersion: apps/v1
 kind: Deployment
 name: thdeploy
minReplicas: 1
maxReplicas: 5
metrics:
 - type: Resource
   resource:
    name: cpu
    target:
      type: Utilization
      averageUtilization: 20

Create a file for the hpa object and copy the above content in the file.
kubectl apply -f <hpa.yml>

The hpa object has been created. Now, you can perform the above steps to increase the
load on the container to see the pod scaling.

I have opened two windows to show you whether the pod is scaling or not.
Run the watch ‘kubectl get all’ command to see the pod creation.
Now on the other window, go into the container using the below command:
kubectl exec <pod_name> -it — /bin/bash/

Now run the below command inside the container and see the magic.
while true; do apt update; done




In this scenario, you can observe that the pod count has increased, reaching its
maximum value of 5. If you intend to downscale, simply halt the command currently
executing within the container. Afterward, Kubernetes will automatically delete the pods
within approximately 5 minutes. This delay is designed to allow Kubernetes to assess



                                                                                           114
the system load, if the load surges once more, Kubernetes will need to scale up the
number of pods. This phase is commonly referred to as the “cooldown period.




Here, you can see the pod number again comes to 1 because there is no load on the
container.




                                                                                      115
          Multi-Cluster Kubernetes with
                    HAProxy

Why Multi Cluster
Multi-cluster Kubernetes setups are beneficial for various reasons, including high availability,
disaster recovery, and geographical distribution. Having multiple clusters can ensure that if
one cluster fails, your application remains available in other clusters. It also helps distribute
workloads geographically, improving latency for users in different regions.

HAproxy
HAProxy is used as a load balancer to distribute traffic across multiple Kubernetes clusters.
It plays a crucial role in maintaining high availability by redirecting traffic to available
clusters. In the provided setup, it acts as an entry point, routing requests to the appropriate
Kubernetes cluster.

I have added the details for all Five servers. So, you will be able to understand the high
overview of all the servers




We have to set up five servers where two will be Master Nodes, the other two will be Worker
Nodes, and the last one HAproxy.

Create HAproxy Server(EC2 Instance)
Click on Launch instances




Enter the name of the instance and select Ubuntu 22.04(must).




                                                                                                    116
The instance type will be t2.micro and click on Create new key pair for this demo.




Enter the name, keep the things as it is, and click on Create key pair.




                                                                                     117
Select the default vpc and select the subnet from the availability zone us-east-1a and create
the new security group with All Traffic type where the Source type will be Anywhere.

Here we have configured everything for HAproxy, So click on Launch Instance.




Creating Master Nodes(EC2 Instance)
Here, we have to set up the two Master Nodes.

Enter the name of the instance and select Ubuntu 22.04(must) and in the right number of
instances will be 2. So that, we will save us some time.



                                                                                                118
The master node needs 2CPU that will get in the t2.medium instance type.

Provide the same key that we have provided for the HAproxy server.

Select the same VPC and same Subnet that we have provided for the HAproxy server.




Select the same Security Group that we have created for the HAproxy server.




                                                                                    119
Creating Worker Nodes(EC2 Instance)

Here, we have to set up the two Worker Nodes.

Enter the name of the instance and select Ubuntu 22.04(must) and in the right number of
instances will be 2. So that, we will save us some time.




The master node doesn’t need 2CPU that’s why the instance type will be the same t2.micro

Provide the same key that we have provided for the HAproxy server.

Select the same VPC and same Subnet that we have provided for the HAproxy server.




                                                                                           120
Select the same Security Group that we have created for the HAproxy server.




Now, both the master and worker nodes' names will be the same. So, you can modify the
name of each by masternode1 and masternode2, the same for the worker node.

This is the total of five servers that we have created.




Now, we have to do the configurations in all the servers. Let’s do this and start with the
HAproxy server.

On HAproxy Server

Before doing SSH, modify the permission of the PEM file that we will use to do SSH.
sudo su
chmod 400 Demo-MultiCluster.pem

Now, use the command to SSH into the HAproxy server.


                                                                                             121
To become a root user run the below command

sudo su

Now, update the package and install haproxy which will help us to set our Kubernetes
multi-cluster

apt update && apt install -y haproxy



Here, we have to set the backend and frontend to set up Kubernetes Multi-Cluster.

Open the file haproxy.cfg and add the code snippets according to your Private IPs
vim /etc/haproxy/haproxy.cfg

Remember, in frontend block HAproxy Private IP needs to be present.

In the backend block, Both Master Node IP needs to be present.
frontend kubernetes-frontend
  bind 172.31.22.132:6443
  mode tcp
  option tcplog
  default_backend kubernetes-backend

backend kubernetes-backend
  mode tcp
  option tcp-check
  balance roundrobin
  server kmaster1 172.31.23.243:6443 check fall 3 rise 2
  server kmaster2 172.31.28.74:6443 check fall 3 rise 2


                                                                                       122
Once you add the frontend and backend, restart the haproxy service
systemctl restart haproxy

Now, check the status of whether the haproxy service is running or not

systemctl status haproxy

If you look at some bottom lines, the kmaster1 and kmaster2 nodes are down which is
correct. But this indicates that the frontend and backend code are reflected.




Now, add the hostnames in the /etc/hosts files with all five servers' Private IPs like below

vim /etc/hosts


172.31.23.243 k8master1.node.com node.com k8master1
172.31.28.74 k8master2.node.com node.com k8master2
172.31.31.111 k8worker1.node.com node.com k8worker1
172.31.22.133 k8worker2.node.com node.com k8worker2
172.31.22.132 lb.node.com node.com lb




Now, try to ping all four servers(Master+Worker) from HAproxy. If your machine is receiving
the packets then we are good to go for the next step which is configuring the Master Nodes




                                                                                               123
On Master Nodes

I have provided you the snippets of One Master Nodes only. But I configured both Master
nodes. So, make sure to configure each and everything simultaneously on both Master
Nodes.

Login to your both Master Nodes

Once you log into both machines, run the command that is necessary for both Master Nodes

Now, add the hostnames in the /etc/hosts files with all five servers' Private IPs like below
vim /etc/hosts

172.31.23.243 k8master1.node.com node.com k8master1
172.31.28.74 k8master2.node.com node.com k8master2
172.31.31.111 k8worker1.node.com node.com k8worker1
172.31.22.133 k8worker2.node.com node.com k8worker2
172.31.22.132 lb.node.com node.com lb




After closing the host's file, run the below commands.
sudo su
ufw disable
reboot

Now, log in again to your both machines after 2 to 3 minutes.

Run the below commands
sudo su
swapoff -a; sed -i '/swap/d' /etc/fstab




                                                                                               124
Run the below commands
cat <<EOF | sudo tee /etc/modules-load.d/k8s.conf
overlay
br_netfilter
EOF
sudo modprobe overlay
sudo modprobe br_netfilter
# sysctl params required by setup, params persist across reboots
cat <<EOF | sudo tee /etc/sysctl.d/k8s.conf
net.bridge.bridge-nf-call-iptables = 1
net.bridge.bridge-nf-call-ip6tables = 1
net.ipv4.ip_forward = 1
EOF
# Apply sysctl params without reboot
sudo sysctl - system




Install some dependencies packages and add the Kubernetes package


sudo apt-get install -y apt-transport-https ca-certificates curl
curl -fsSL https://packages.cloud.google.com/apt/doc/apt-key.gpg | sudo gpg - dearmor -o
/etc/apt/keyrings/kubernetes-archive-keyring.gpg
echo "deb [signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/kubernetes-archive-keyring.gpg]
https://apt.kubernetes.io/ kubernetes-xenial main" | sudo tee
/etc/apt/sources.list.d/kubernetes.list




                                                                                           125
As we have added the gpg keys, we need to run the update command
apt update




Now, we have to install docker on our both master nodes
apt install docker.io -y




Do some configurations for containerd service
mkdir /etc/containerd
sh -c "containerd config default > /etc/containerd/config.toml"
sed -i 's/ SystemdCgroup = false/ SystemdCgroup = true/' /etc/containerd/config.toml
systemctl restart containerd.service




Now, we will install our kubelet, kubeadm, and kubectl services on the Master node
apt-get install -y kubelet kubeadm kubectl kubernetes-cni




                                                                                       126
Now, restart the kubelet service, and don’t forget to enable the kubelet service. So that, if
any master node will reboot then we don’t need to start the kubelet service.
sudo systemctl restart kubelet.service
sudo systemctl enable kubelet.service




Only on Master Node1
This command must need to run on Master Node1

We have to init the kubeadm and provide the endpoint which will be the haproxy server
Private IP and in the end provide the Master Node1 IP only.
kubeadm init — control-plane-endpoint=”<hap-private-ip:6443" — upload-certs —
apiserver-advertise-address=<master-node1-private-ip>

kubeadm init — control-plane-endpoint=”172.31.22.132:6443" — upload-certs —
apiserver-advertise-address=172.31.28.74

Once you run the above command, scroll down.




Once you scroll down, you will see Kubernetes control plan has initialized successfully which
means Master node1 joined the HAproxy server. Now, we have to initialize Kubernetes
Master Node2 as well. Follow the below steps:

   ●   Copy the Red highlighted commands, Blue highlighted commands and Green
       highlighted commands and paste them into your notepad.
   ●   Now, run the Red highlighted commands on the Master node1 itself.




                                                                                                127
mkdir -p $HOME/.kube
sudo cp -i /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf $HOME/.kube/config
sudo chown $(id -u):$(id -g) $HOME/.kube/config




On Master Node2
Now, we need to do one more thing so that Master Node2 joins the HAproxy server as well.
Follow the steps:

   ●   We have to use the Blue highlighted command, but we need to add one more thing
       with the command, refer to the below(add —
       apiserver-advertise-address=<PrivateIP-of-MasterNode2>


kubeadm join 172.31.22.132:6443 - token 0vzbaf.slplmyokc1lqland \
- discovery-token-ca-cert-hash
sha256:75c9d830b358fd6d372e03af0e7965036bce657901757e8b0b789a2e82475223 \
- control-plane - certificate-key
0a5bec27de3f27d623c6104a5e46a38484128cfabb57dbd506227037be6377b4 -
apiserver-advertise-address=172.31.28.74




Once you followed the above steps, you can run the below commands on Master Node2


mkdir -p $HOME/.kube
sudo cp -i /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf $HOME/.kube/config
sudo chown $(id -u):$(id -g) $HOME/.kube/config




                                                                                           128
Now, if you run the command ‘kubectl get nodes’ on Master Node1 to see the nodes. You
will get both nodes but they are not in ready status because we did not configure the
network. We will configure that once the Worker Nodes are configured.

Note: Copy the Green highlighted command, which we will use to connect with Worker
Nodes




Now, if you run the command ‘kubectl get nodes’ on Master Node2 to see the nodes. You
will get both nodes but they are not in ready status because we did not configure the
network. We will configure that once the Worker Nodes are configured.

Note: Copy the Green highlighted command, which we will use to connect with Worker
Nodes




On Both Worker Nodes
Now, Let’s configure our Worker Nodes.

I have provided you the snippets of One Master Nodes only. But I configured both Worker
nodes. So, make sure to configure each and everything simultaneously on both Worker
Nodes.

Login to your both Worker Nodes
Once you log into your both machines, run the command that is necessary for both Master
Nodes

Now, add the hostnames in the /etc/hosts files with all five servers' Private IPs like below
vim /etc/hosts

172.31.23.243 k8master1.node.com node.com k8master1
172.31.28.74 k8master2.node.com node.com k8master2
172.31.31.111 k8worker1.node.com node.com k8worker1
172.31.22.133 k8worker2.node.com node.com k8worker2
172.31.22.132 lb.node.com node.com lb




After closing the host's file, run the below commands.
sudo su
ufw disable



                                                                                               129
reboot




Now, log in again to both machines after 2 to 3 minutes.

Run the below commands
sudo su
swapoff -a; sed -i '/swap/d' /etc/fstab




Run the below commands:
cat <<EOF | sudo tee /etc/modules-load.d/k8s.conf
overlay
br_netfilter
EOF
sudo modprobe overlay
sudo modprobe br_netfilter
# sysctl params required by setup, params persist across reboots
cat <<EOF | sudo tee /etc/sysctl.d/k8s.conf
net.bridge.bridge-nf-call-iptables = 1
net.bridge.bridge-nf-call-ip6tables = 1
net.ipv4.ip_forward = 1
EOF
# Apply sysctl params without reboot
sudo sysctl - system




Install some dependencies packages and add the Kubernetes package
sudo apt-get install -y apt-transport-https ca-certificates curl
curl -fsSL https://packages.cloud.google.com/apt/doc/apt-key.gpg | sudo gpg - dearmor -o
/etc/apt/keyrings/kubernetes-archive-keyring.gpg
echo "deb [signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/kubernetes-archive-keyring.gpg]
https://apt.kubernetes.io/ kubernetes-xenial main" | sudo tee
/etc/apt/sources.list.d/kubernetes.list



                                                                                           130
As we have added the gpg keys, we need to run the update command
apt update




Now, we have to install docker on our both worker nodes

apt install docker.io -y




Do some configurations for containerd service
mkdir /etc/containerd
sh -c "containerd config default > /etc/containerd/config.toml"
sed -i 's/ SystemdCgroup = false/ SystemdCgroup = true/' /etc/containerd/config.toml
systemctl restart containerd.service




Now, we will install our kubelet, kubeadm, and kubectl services on the Worker node
apt-get install -y kubelet kubeadm kubectl kubernetes-cni




                                                                                       131
Now, restart the kubelet service, and don’t forget to enable the kubelet service. So that, if
any worker node will reboot then we don’t need to start the kubelet service.
sudo systemctl restart kubelet.service
sudo systemctl enable kubelet.service




If you remember, I told you to copy the Green highlighted command.
Paste that command, on both Worker Node1 and Worker Node2.

Once you do that, you will see the output like the below snippet.




Run on any Master Node

Let’s validate whether both Worker Nodes are joined in the Kubernetes Cluster by running
the below command.
kubectl get nodes

If you can see four servers then, Congratulations you did 99% work.




As you know, our all nodes are not in ready status because of network components.

Run the below command to add the Calico networking components in the Kubernetes
Cluster.
kubectl apply -f
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/projectcalico/calico/v3.25.0/manifests/calico.yaml




                                                                                                132
After 2 to 3 minutes, if you run the command ‘kubectl get nodes’. You will see that all nodes
are getting ready.




Let’s deploy the Nginx Container on Worker Node1 and the Apache Container on Worker
Node2

To achieve this, you have to perform the commands on Master Nodes only.

Add a label on both worker nodes

For WorkerNode1
kubectl label nodes <WorkerNode1-Private-IP> mynode=node1

For WorkerNode2
kubectl label nodes <WorkerNode2-Private-IP> mynode=node2

You can also validate whether the labels are added to both Worker Nodes or not by running
the below command
kubectl get nodes — show-labels




Let’s create two Container on both different Worker nodes from different Master nodes

I am creating an Nginx Container on Worker Node1 from Master node1


                                                                                                133
Here is the deployment YML file
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: nginx-deployment
spec:
 replicas: 1
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: nginx
 template:
   metadata:
    labels:
      app: nginx
   spec:
    nodeSelector:
      mynode: node1 # This deploys the container on node1
    containers:
    - name: nginx
      image: nginx:latest
      ports:
      - containerPort: 80
Here is the service YML file
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: nginx-service
spec:
 selector:
   app: nginx
 ports:
 - protocol: TCP
   port: 80
   targetPort: 80
 type: LoadBalancer # Use LoadBalancer for external access

Apply both files by the below commands
kubectl apply -f deployment.yml
kubectl apply -f service.yml

Validate whether the deployment is complete or not by running the below commands
kubectl get deploy
kubectl get pods
kubectl get svc

Now, to check whether the application is running or not from outside of the cluster. Copy the
worker node1 public ip and then use the port that is showing when you run the ‘kubectl get
svc’ command that i have highlighted in the snippet.




                                                                                                134
Here, you can see our nginx container is perfectly running outside of the Cluster.




The second Container from the Second Master Node on the Second Worker Node

I am creating Apache Container on Worker Node2 from Master node2

Here is the deployment YML file


apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: apache-deployment
spec:
 replicas: 1
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: apache
 template:
   metadata:
    labels:
      app: apache
   spec:
    nodeSelector:
      mynode: node2 # This deploys the container on node1
    containers:



                                                                                     135
   - name: apache
     image: httpd:latest
     ports:
     - containerPort: 80

Here is the service YML file
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: apache-service
spec:
 selector:
   app: apache
 ports:
 - protocol: TCP
   port: 80
   targetPort: 80
 type: LoadBalancer # Use LoadBalancer for external access

Apply both files by the below commands
kubectl apply -f deployment.yml
kubectl apply -f service.yml

Validate whether the deployment is complete or not by running the below commands
kubectl get deploy
kubectl get pods
kubectl get svc

Now, to check whether the application is running or not from outside of the cluster. Copy the
worker node2 public IP and then use the port that is showing when you run the ‘kubectl get
svc’ command corresponding to port 80.




Here, you can see our Apache container is perfectly running outside of the Cluster.




                                                                                                136
                        Kubernetes Ingress

In the world of Kubernetes, Ingress is your ticket to managing external traffic to services
within the cluster. Before we dive into the details, let’s recap what we’ve learned so far.
Before Ingress, the Service provides a Load balancer, which is used to distribute the traffic
between multiple applications or pods.

Ingress helps to expose the HTTP and HTTPS routes from outside of the cluster.

Ingress enables Path-based and Host-based routing.

Ingress supports Load balancing and SSL termination.



Simple Definition/Explanation

Kubernetes Ingress is like a cop for your applications that are running on your Kubernetes
cluster. It redirects the incoming requests to the right services based on the Web URL or
path in the address.

Ingress provides the encryption feature and helps to balance the load of the applications.

In simple words, Ingress is like a receptionist who provides the correct path for the hotel
room to the visitor or person.



Why do we use Ingress because the load balancer supports the same thing?

Ingress is used to manage the external traffic to the services within the cluster which
provides features like host-based routing, path-based routing, SSL termination, and more.
Where a Load balancer is used to manage the traffic but the load balancer does not provide
the fine-grained access control like Ingress.

Example:
Suppose you have multiple Kubernetes services running on your cluster and each service
serves a different application such as example.com/app1 and example.com/app2. With the
help of Ingress, you can achieve this. However, the Load Balancer routes the traffic based
on the ports and can't handle the URL-based routing.

There are two types of Routing in Ingress:
   ●   Path-based routing: Path-based routing directs traffic to the different services
       based on the path such as example.com/app1.
   ●   Host-based routing: Host-based routing directs traffic to the different services
       based on the Website’s URL such as demo.example.com.




                                                                                                137
138
To implement Ingress, we have to deploy Ingress Controllers. We can use any Ingress
Controllers according to our requirements.

Hands-On
Here, we will use the nginx ingress controller.

To install it, use the command.

minikube addons enable ingress




Validate whether the controller is deployed or not

kubectl get pods -n ingress-nginx




Now, let’s do some hands-on for Path-based routing.

Deploy home page
deployment1.yml file
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: nginx-deployment
spec:
 replicas: 1
 selector:


                                                                                      139
   matchLabels:
    app: nginx
 template:
   metadata:
    labels:
      app: nginx
   spec:
    containers:
    - name: nginx
      image: avian19/choco-shop-home
      ports:
      - containerPort: 80
service1.yml file
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: nginx-service
spec:
 selector:
   app: nginx
 ports:
 - protocol: TCP
   port: 80
 type: NodePort

kubectl apply -f deployment1.yml
kubectl apply -f service1.yml

Once you created the deployment and service, now we have to create the ingress for
path-based routing. As we want to direct the requests to the default path use the below
YAML file.

ingress.yml


kind: Ingress
metadata:
 name: ingress-deployment
 annotations:
  nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/rewrite-target: /$1
spec:
 rules:
  - host: example.devops.in
    http:
     paths:
       - path: /
         pathType: Prefix
         backend:
          service:


         name: nginx-service
         port:
                                                                                          140
           number: 80

kubectl apply -f ingress.yml




Add the IP ADDRESS that you got in the above snippet from
ingress-deployment(192.168.49.2).

vim /etc/hosts




If you do curl from the terminal then you can able to see the content of your application.



If you map the DNS name with ingress Private IP, then you can able to see the content of
your application from the browser.




Now I have one more module whose name is Menu that I want to deploy on the other
services.

To do that, Create a deployment file and a service file.

deploy2.yml file


apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: nginx-deployment2
spec:
 replicas: 1
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: nginx2
 template:
   metadata:



                                                                                             141
    labels:
      app: nginx2
   spec:
    containers:
    - name: nginx2
      image: avian19/choco-shop-menu
      ports:
      - containerPort: 80
service2.yml file
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: nginx-service2
spec:
 selector:
   app: nginx2
 ports:
 - protocol: TCP
   port: 80
 type: NodePort

kubectl apply -f deploy2.yml
kubectl apply -f service2.yml

Now, Here we have to modify our ingress file as we have added a new service which has a
new application. To avoid confusion, just remove the previous content from the ingress.yml
file copy and paste the entire content in the ingress.yml file, and apply the updated
configurations.

Updated ingress.yml file
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
 name: ingress-deployment
 annotations:
  nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/rewrite-target: /$1
spec:
 rules:
  - host: example.devops.in
    http:
     paths:
       - path: /
         pathType: Prefix
         backend:
          service:


         name: nginx-service
         port:
          number: 80
     - path: /menu
       pathType: Prefix
       backend:
                                                                                             142
        service:
         name: nginx-service2
         port:
          number: 80

kubectl apply -f ingress.yml




Now, we can access our application on the /menu path.




Now I have one more module which name is Reviews that I want to deploy on other
services.

To do that, Create a deployment file and a service file.

deploy3.yml file


apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: nginx-deployment3
spec:
 replicas: 1
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: nginx3
 template:
   metadata:
    labels:
      app: nginx3
   spec:
    containers:
    - name: nginx3
      image: avian19/choco-shop-reviews
      ports:
      - containerPort: 80
service3.yml file
apiVersion: v1


                                                                                  143
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: nginx-service3
spec:
 selector:
   app: nginx3
 ports:
 - protocol: TCP
   port: 80
 type: NodePort

kubectl apply -f deploy3.yml
kubectl apply -f service3.yml

Now, Here we have to modify our ingress file as we have added a new service which has a
new application. To avoid confusion, just remove the previous content from the ingress.yml
file copy and paste the entire content in the ingress.yml file, and apply the updated
configurations.

Updated ingress.yml file


apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
 name: ingress-deployment
 annotations:
  nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/rewrite-target: /$1
spec:
 rules:
  - host: example.devops.in
    http:
     paths:
       - path: /
         pathType: Prefix
         backend:
          service:


         name: nginx-service
         port:
          number: 80
     - path: /menu
       pathType: Prefix
       backend:
        service:


         name: nginx-service2
         port:
          number: 80
     - path: /reviews
       pathType: Prefix
                                                                                             144
backend:
 service:




            145
         name: nginx-service3
         port:
          number: 80

kubectl apply -f ingress.yml




Now, we can access our application on the /reviews path.




Host-based Routing
Now, we have completed our hands-on for Path-based Routing.

I want to create one more application to order anything from different hosts. Let’s do that.

Deploy the applications and services.

deploy4.yml file


apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: nginx-deployment4
spec:
 replicas: 1
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: nginx4
 template:
   metadata:
    labels:
      app: nginx4
   spec:
    containers:
    - name: nginx4
      image: avian19/choco-shop-order
      ports:
      - containerPort: 80



                                                                                               146
service4.yml file
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: nginx-service4
spec:
 selector:
   app: nginx4
 ports:
 - protocol: TCP
   port: 80
 type: NodePort

kubectl apply -f deploy4.yml
kubectl apply -f service4.yml

Now, Here we have to modify our ingress file as we have added a new service which has a
new application. To avoid confusion, just remove the previous content from the ingress.yml
file copy and paste the entire content into the ingress.yml file, and apply the updated
configurations.

Updated ingress.yml file
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
 name: ingress-deployment
 annotations:
  nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/rewrite-target: /$1
spec:
 rules:
  - host: example.devops.in
    http:
     paths:
       - path: /
         pathType: Prefix
         backend:
          service:


         name: nginx-service
         port:
          number: 80
     - path: /menu
       pathType: Prefix
       backend:
        service:


         name: nginx-service2
         port:
          number: 80
     - path: /reviews
       pathType: Prefix
                                                                                             147
backend:
 service:




            148
         name: nginx-service3
         port:
          number: 80
# Host Based Routing


  - host: example2.devops.in
    http:
     paths:
       - path: /
         pathType: Prefix
         backend:
          service:


          name: nginx-service4
          port:
           number: 80



kubectl apply -f ingress.yml




Now, if you try to curl from the terminal then you will be able to get the content. But if you try
from the browser then you won’t be able to get the content.




Now, we have added a new host in the ingress file. To get the content on our local host, we
need to add this host in the /etc/hosts file.




Now check on the browser by hitting the new hostname.




                                                                                                     149
              Kubernetes StatefulSets

What are the Stateful applications?
Stateful applications are those applications that contain the previous states or data of the
applications. If the applications restart or move to other environments then, the data and
the state of the applications still exist.



Examples of Stateful applications includes PostgreSQL, MySQL, messages queues.
These applications ensures that the data, application reliability, and state of the
applications will be taken care of by the StatefulSets Object in Kubernetes.

Difference between Stateful and Stateless applications
Let’s understand the Stateful and Stateless applications with real-time examples.
Stateful applications
● “Remember when we used to play GTA Vice City during our teen years? Completing
    that game required hours because we were in school at the time.”
● “Once I completed a mission, I saved the game. So, whenever I wanted to continue, I
    just went to the save game section and resumed from where I left off.”
● “At that moment, we didn’t think about how it worked, but now we understand that
    there were sessions that helped us save the game data, which was stored in our root
    folder.”

Stateless applications
●   “If you used old keypad mobiles, you might have used a calculator application.”
●   “Your father asked you to perform operations like addition and subtraction.”
●   “By mistake, you tapped the red button, which took you back to the home screen.”
●   “Now, you can’t retrieve the numbers you were entering. This means there is no
    session involved.”

StatefulSets VS Deployment
Kubernetes has rich features like StatefulSets and deployment. But Statefulsets
eliminates the previous states and data stored problems.
Let’s understand both.

StatefulSets
●   Identity and Stable Network hostnames: StatefulSets are used for those
    applications that require stable network identity and hostnames. Whenever the pod is
    created, it gets a unique name, an ordinal index appended to its name. For example,
    the pod name looks like web-1, web-2, web-3, and so on.
●   Order deployment and Scaling: StatefulSets deploy the pods in sequential order. If
    you observe in deployment, the multiple pods in replicas are created at one time. But
    In StatefulSets, each pod will be created once the previous pod is created. If pods



                                                                                               150
    are deleted, the newest created pod will be deleted first which means, that to delete
    the pod StatefulSets follows the reverse order.
●   Data Persistence: StatefulSets are used for those applications that require data
    persistence such as databases. StatefulSets allow to attachment and mount of the
    permanent volumes to the disk. So, if any pod is rescheduled or restarted it will have
    the all data.
●   Headless Services: StatefulSets have one more rich feature which is Headless
    Services. StatefulSets can be associated with the headless services that provide the
    DNS for each pod’s hostnames. This will help to communicate with the specific pods.

Deployment
●   Scalability and Rolling updates: Deployments are often used for stateless
    applications. Deployments provide the replicas and no downtime feature.
●   No Stable Hostnames: Deployments do not provide the feature of stable hostnames
    which means, that if the pod is created then it will have a randomly generated name.
●   No Data Persistence: As deployment objects are often used for stateless
    applications So, pods are stateless too which means it does not provide data
    persistence. Whenever a pod is replaced, the data will be lost of the previous pod.
●   Load Balancing: Deployment works with Services objects which provides Load
    Balancing. It distributes the traffic between multiple pods to make the application
    highly available.

Key Features and Facts of StatefulSets:
1. StatefulSets provides the Order pod creation which provides the unique name to
   each pod in a predictable order such as web-1, web-2, and so on.
2. StatefulSets provides the Stable Network Identity which makes it easy to connect
   with the pods.
3. StatefulSets provides the Data Persistence which stores the data in the databases
   and whenever the pod is restarted or rescheduled, the pods get the same persistent
   data.
4. StatefulSets provides the PV and PVC to provide the persistent storage to
   StatefulSets pods.
5. StatefulSets provides the Backup and Recovery features which are very crucial for
   maintaining data integrity with StatefulSets.

Hands-On
Open the two terminals
We have to see how the pods are created. To do that, run the below command on
terminal1
kubectl get pods -w -l app=nginx




Create a service file and StatefulSet file copy the below content in the respective file and
apply it.
service.yml



                                                                                               151
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: nginx
 labels:
   app: nginx
spec:
 ports:
 - port: 80
   name: web
 clusterIP: None
 selector:
   app: nginx
StatefulSets.yml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: StatefulSet
metadata:
 name: web
spec:
 serviceName: "nginx"
 replicas: 2
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: nginx
 template:
   metadata:
    labels:
      app: nginx
   spec:
    containers:
    - name: nginx
      image: registry.k8s.io/nginx-slim:0.8
      ports:
      - containerPort: 80
        name: web
      volumeMounts:
      - name: www
        mountPath: /usr/share/nginx/html
 volumeClaimTemplates:
 - metadata:
    name: www
   spec:
    accessModes: [ "ReadWriteOnce" ]
    resources:
      requests:


      storage: 1Gi




                                              152
The Pods are creating sequential, observations in the first command output.




As we have created pods from statefulset, So the pod's names have sticky and unique
names.




If you run the below command, you will see that both pods have stable hostnames on their
ordinal index.

for i in 0 1; do kubectl exec “web-$i” — sh -c ‘hostname’; done




Now, I want to check the pod’s dns addresses. Run the below command

kubectl run -i — tty — image busybox:1.28 dns-test — restart=Never — rm



Once you enter the container, run the below command.

nslookup web-0.nginx

Now, you can check the dns address.




Open two terminals, run the below command on terminal1

kubectl get pod -w -l app=nginx




                                                                                           153
As you can see both pods are running.




Now, run the below command to delete both pods on terminal 2.

kubectl delete pod -l app=nginx




As you know, we have set up the replicas=2. So, if we delete any pod it will create a   new
pod to meet with the desired state of the replicas.

But there is one more thing to notice here, that the pod is deleting sequentially.

If you run the last command, you will see that both pods have been created again.




If you run the below command, you will see the same hostnames that were present for
previous delete pods.

for i in 0 1; do kubectl exec web-$i — sh -c ‘hostname’; done




Now, if you log in to the container. You will be able to see the same dns address but the IP
might have changed.




Run the command to get a list of all the persistent volume claims that are attached to the
app nginx.




                                                                                               154
As we have mounted our persistent volume to the path /usr/share/nginx/html in the
Stateful.yml file. So, the path will be backed by the Persistent Volume.

Now, to check the hostnames of both pods run the below command.

for i in 0 1; do kubectl exec "web-$i" - sh -c 'echo "$(hostname)" >
/usr/share/nginx/html/index.html'; done

for i in 0 1; do kubectl exec -i -t "web-$i" - curl http://localhost/; done




Delete both pods

kubectl delete pod -l app=nginx




Validate the pods' deletion and creation on the other window

kubectl get pod -w -l app=nginx




Now, validate the web servers whether the hostname is the same or not

for i in 0 1; do kubectl exec -i -t “web-$i” — curl http://localhost/; done




Now, let’s scale up the StatefulSets. You can use the kubectl scale or kubectl patch to scale
up or scale down the replicas.

kubectl scale sts web — replicas=5




                                                                                                155
If you see the persistent volume claim, it will be increased as pods are created.

kubectl get pvc -l app=nginx




Now, scale down the number of replicas through the kubectl patch

kubectl patch sts web -p ‘{“spec”:{“replicas”:3}}’




If you list the Persistent volume claims, you will see all 5 PVCs present. This is because
StatefulSets assumes that you deleted the pods by mistake.




Now, to rollback use the below command

kubectl patch statefulset web -p ‘{“spec”:{“updateStrategy”:{“type”:”RollingUpdate”}}}’

The below command will change the image of the container.

kubectl patch statefulset web — type=’json’ -p=’[{“op”: “replace”, “path”:
“/spec/template/spec/containers/0/image”,
“value”:”gcr.io/google_containers/nginx-slim:0.8"}]’




Use the below command to check the container image

for p in 0 1 2; do kubectl get pod “web-$p” — template ‘{{range $i, $c :=
.spec.containers}}{{$c.image}}{{end}}’; echo; done




If you want to delete StatefulSets then you have two options Non-Cascading deletion and
Cascading deletion.


                                                                                             156
In Non Cascading deletion, the StatefulSet’s Pods are not deleted when StatefulSets is
deleted.

In Cascading deletion, both the StatefulSet’s Pod and StatefulSets are deleted.

Non-Cascading deleted

Open the two terminals and run the below command on the first terminal.

kubectl get pods -w -l app=nginx




On the second terminal, this command will delete only StatefulSets only, not the StatefulSets
pods.

kubectl delete statefulset web — cascade=orphan




If you go to the first terminal, you will see the pods still exist.




If you try to delete any pod, you will observe that the deleted pods are not relaunching.




Now, we have to perform the StatefulSets deletion through the Cascading method.

To do that, apply the both service and StatefulSets files.




If you see both pods are running




                                                                                                157
Check the hostname of both pods by running the below command

for i in 0 1; do kubectl exec -i -t “web-$i” — curl http://localhost/; done




Cascading deleted

In this method, the StatefulSets will be deleted with StatefulSet’s Pod.

kubectl delete statefulset web




                                                                              158
                  Kubernetes DaemonSet

“A DaemonSet ensures that all (or some) Nodes run a copy of a Pod. As nodes are added to
the cluster, Pods are added to them. As nodes are removed from the cluster, those Pods are
garbage collected. Deleting a DaemonSet will clean up the Pods it created.” — Kubernetes
DaemonSet Official Definition

Suppose you have to deploy the same pod on all nodes for monitoring. DaemonSet ensures
that a specific pod runs on all nodes within the cluster.

Key Features
   1. DaemonSets Ensure Uniformly: DaemonSets ensures that a designated pod which
      is used for logs and monitoring will be deployed on every node within the cluster.
   2. Perfect for Infrastructure Services: DaemonSets are great for services that need
      to run on every node like networking, storage, or security agents.
   3. Scaling Automatically: If you add more nodes, then the DaemonSets Pods will be
      added to new nodes automatically.
   4. Stable Hostnames: DaemonSets provides stable hostnames which means on each
      node, the pod's names remain the same if the pods is rescheduled or restarted which
      makes it easy to reference them across the cluster.

UseCases
   1. Monitoring and Logging: With the help of DaemonSets, we can deploy monitoring
      agents or log collectors to gather the information on the node. Tools like Prometheus,
      beats, ElasticSearch, etc can be deployed using DaemonSets to ensure complete
      coverage across the cluster.
   2. Security Agents: We can deploy Security Agents like intrusion detection systems
      (IDS) or anti-malware software on every node to protect the cluster from threats.
   3. Custom Network Policies: We can deploy the custom network policies or firewall
      rules on each node to control communication and security at the node level.
   4. Operating System Updates: We can deploy the updates or patches at one time
      with the help of DaemonSets.
   5. Storage and Data Management: Ensuring that each node has access to particular
      storage resources, such as local storage or network-attached storage(NAS).
      DaemonSets can manage storage plugins or agents to provide consistent access.

HandsOn
Initially, I created three machines of which one is a Master Node and the rest of two are
Worker Nodes.

If you don’t know how to set up the multi-worker nodes using kubeadm then kindly refer to
my blog Day10- Setting up a Kubernetes Cluster(Master+Worker Node) using kubeadm on
AWS EC2 Instances(Ubuntu 22.04) | by Aman Pathak | DevOps.dev which will take
maximum 15 minutes



                                                                                               159
Let’s see our Object first:

   ●   Currently, I have three machines Only(1 Master + 2 Worker Nodes)
   ●   We will deploy the DaemonSet Pod on two Worker Nodes.
   ●   Once the Pods will be running on both Worker Nodes. We will create a new machine
       as Worker Node 3.
   ●   Worker Node3 will join the Kubernetes cluster.
   ●   The DaemonSet Pod will be running automatically without any intervention from our
       side.

This is the Entire Proof of our Hands-On. You just need to take a look. Further Step by Step,
we will look into the next steps.




As of now, we have only One Master Node(control plane) and Two Worker Nodes.




DaemonSet YAML file


apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: DaemonSet
metadata:
 name: nginx-daemonset
spec:
 selector:
  matchLabels:
   name: nginx


template:
  metadata:
   labels:
     name: nginx
                                                                                                160
  spec:
   containers:
   - name: nginx
     image: nginx:latest

I have deployed my daemonSet YAML file which is deployed to both Worker Nodes.




Here, I have run the command to join the Kubernetes Cluster for Worker Node3.




After joining, you can see the node is getting ready to be part of the cluster.




Here, you can see that Worker Node3 is in ready status.




If you list all the pods, you will see there is one more started in which the container is
creating without running any command.




Here, you can see the Pod is in running status.




                                                                                             161
            Kubernetes Network Policies

What is Network Policy?
By default, a pod can communicate with any other pods whether it’s present in any
namespaces. But if you want to secure your pod by providing access to only known pods or
authorized pods then Kubernetes has the richest feature known as Network Policy. Network
Policy will help you to protect your pod by accessing only authorized pods. So, this way the
pod’s security will be enhanced.

Network Policy allows us to define the rules to communicate between the pods. With the
help of Networking Policy, Kubernetes provides fine-grained controls over what traffic is
allowed or denied which leads to enhancing the security and isolation of your applications.

Key Features:
Policy Rules: Network Policies consist of a set of rules in which you define how the traffic is
allowed or denied. You can specify these rules by pod labels, namespaces, or particular IPs.

Pod Selectors: If you want to apply the Network Policy to the particular pod then you can
use Pod Selector which will select the particular pod and apply the Network Policy on that
pod.

Ingress and Egress: Network Policies allow you to define the Ingress and Egress rules.
Ingress means incoming traffic on the pod from the outside whereas Egress means outgoing
traffic to the internet(anywhere) from the pod itself.

Namespaces: If you want to apply your Network Policy to the group of pod which is present
in the particular namespace then you can namespaceSelector which will help you to invoke
the Network Policy on all pods within the particular namespace.

Priority: Network Policy also provides the priority feature in which you define the priority of
the rules which helps you to get fine-grained control over the traffic rules of your application.



Use cases of Network Policy:
   ●   Isolation: You can invoke the Network Policies to isolate different application
       components inside the Cluster. For example, you have an application with frontend
       and backend so you will create a namespace and apply the network policy on that
       namespace to make the frontend and backend application secure.
   ●   Microservices: Network Policies help to make microservices architecture more
       secure and prevent unauthorized communications between different microservices.
   ●   Compliance: For Compliance reasons, you have to follow the protocol in which only
       authorized pods can communicate with each other. Network policies help you to
       achieve this.




                                                                                                    162
    ●   Multi-tenancy: Network Policies make sure that it will not interfere with different
        tenants. So, the flow of the multi-tenant cluster will be working smoothly if anything
        fails on the particular tenant.
    ●   Application testing: Suppose, if you are testing something of an application then,
        Network Policy helps to control its access to production services, reducing the risks
        of unintended interactions.

Hands-On Demo:
To perform the hands-on Network Policy, Kubernetes must have network plugins like Calico
or Cilium. By default noop network plugin is installed that does not provide advanced or rich
features of Kubernetes Networking.

In the below steps, we will install the Cilum networking plugin to perform our demo. Without
any advanced networking plugin, we can’t able to perform a demo.

minikube start — network-plugin=cni




curl -LO
https://github.com/cilium/cilium-cli/releases/latest/download/cilium-linux-amd64.tar.gz




sudo tar xzvfC cilium-linux-amd64.tar.gz /usr/local/bin

rm cilium-linux-amd64.tar.gz




cilium install




To validate whether your networking pod is running or not, run the below command.

kubectl get pods — namespace=kube-system -l k8s-app=cilium




Create three namespaces and deploy the nginx pod on those namespaces with service
where we have to expose port 80



                                                                                                 163
kubectl create namespace namespace-a
kubectl create deployment nginx - image=nginx - namespace namespace-a
kubectl expose deployment nginx - port=80 - namespace namespace-a
kubectl create namespace namespace-b
kubectl create deployment nginx - image=nginx - namespace namespace-b
kubectl expose deployment nginx - port=80 - namespace namespace-b
kubectl create namespace namespace-c
kubectl create deployment nginx - image=nginx - namespace namespace-c
kubectl expose deployment nginx - port=80 - namespace namespace-c




Check whether the pods are running or not of all three namespaces.
kubectl get pods -A




List the Private IPs of all three pods running from all three namespaces.
kubectl get pods -A -o wide




Now, try to access the pod of namespace-b from the namespace-a pod
kubectl -n namespace-c exec <namespace-c_pod_name> - curl
<namespace-a_pod_private_ip>
kubectl -n namespace-c exec nginx-77b4fdf86c-v4qdd - curl 10.244.0.106




                                                                            164
Now, try to access the pod of namespace-b from the namespace-c pod




As you saw in the above two steps, different namespace pods are able to access the other
namespace’s pods which is not good DevOps practice. Let’s first try to implement where the
namespace-b pod can’t be accessible to any other pod.

Deny All


apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: NetworkPolicy
metadata:
 name: deny-all-traffic
namespace: namespace-b
spec:
 podSelector: {}
 policyTypes:
 - Ingress
 - Egress

Deploy the NetworkPolicy to deny all access for namespace-b

After deploying the network policy, now try to access the namespace-b pod from both
namespace-a and namespace-c pod and you will see in the below snippet that you can’t
access the namespace-b pod which is expected.




                                                                                             165
Once you delete the Network Policy, then try to access the namespace-b pod from the other
pod and you will see that you can access the namespace-b pod.




Now, let’s try to impose accessibility like the one below snippet where the namespace-c pod
can only access the namespace-b pod. If namespace-a tries to access namespace-b pod
then our goal is to prevent the access.




Add the label to all three K8s namespaces
kubectl label namespaces namespace-a ns=namespacea
kubectl label namespaces namespace-b ns=namespaceb



                                                                                              166
kubectl label namespaces namespace-c ns=namespacec




Now, Our motive is that only namespace-a can be able to access the namespace-b pod
whereas the namespace-c can’t be able to access the namespace-b pod. Let’s implement
the Network Policy.

Add the label environment=QA to the namespace-b pod because there can be multiple pods
running inside one namespace. So, if you have to give access to the particular pod instead
of all.
kubectl get pods - namespace namespace-b
kubectl label - namespace namespace-b pod nginx-7854ff8877-m69p4 environment=QA
kubectl get pods - namespace namespace-b - show-labels




Now, try to access namespace-b pod from namespace-a where it should be accessible.
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: NetworkPolicy
metadata:
 name: nginx-ingress
namespace: namespace-b
spec:
 podSelector:
   matchLabels:
     environment: QA
 policyTypes:
 - Ingress
 ingress:
 - from:
   - namespaceSelector:
      matchLabels:
       ns: namespacea
kubectl apply -f Allow-namsepacea.yml
kubectl -n namespace-a exec nginx-7854ff8877-rx8b8 - curl 10.0.0.165




                                                                                             167
Now, Let’s try to access namespace-b pod from namespace-c.
kubectl -n namespace-c exec nginx-7854ff8877-gmz9k — curl 10.0.0.165

As you can see in the below snippet, namespace-c pod could not able to access
namespace-b pod which is expected.




                                                                                168
                      Kubernetes Operators

What are Operators?
Kubernetes Operator is a method for packaging or bundling, deploying, and managing the
application by extending the functionality of the Kubernetes API.

The above definition is One and a half line but if you deep dive into that line you will see
there are a lot of things which is followed to write this definition. Let’s try to understand it.

There are two types of applications Stateless and Stateful Applications.

Stateless applications are those applications where the data or persisting data is not the
priority. So, if the pods get restarted then it will lose the data but it won’t bother us because
we already knew that our application is Stateless.

But Stateful applications are those applications where the data is very important and we
have to keep our data persistent whether its in Persistent Volume or somewhere else. But
whenever the pod is replaced or restarted then the pod will lose the data which is not what
we want. To get rid of the data loss, we will use Stateful Applications.

First of all, this is only one usage of the Operators. There will be more usages of the
Kubernetes Operators which, we will discuss later in this blog.

Kubernetes Operators have rich features that help to deploy stateless, stateful, complex, or
custom applications.

Features of Operators:
    1. Custom Resource Definitions(CRD): With the help of Operators, you can define
       your CRD to extend the capability of your Kubernetes for a particular application. We
       will discuss CRD in a detailed way later.

        Example: Prometheus is one of the finest Operators, in which there is a Custom
        Resource known as Prometheus which allows users to define the monitor
        configuration declaratively. You can specify the details like alerting rules, service
        monitors, etc using the custom resource.

    2. Custom Controllers: There is no use of Custom resource if the Custom Controller is
       not present. Operators implement custom controllers to watch and reconcile(correct)
       the state of the custom resource and ensure that the desired state matches the
       actual state.

        Example: In Native Kubernetes, etcd is one of the components that take care of the
        current and desired state thing and other things like stability of the Kubernetes
        Cluster and node failures, etc.

    3. Automated Operations: Operators automate routine tasks which makes it easier to
       manage the complex applications over their lifecycle.


                                                                                                    169
       Example: In the MongoDB operator, if the users increase the number of replicas in
       the custom resource then, the Operator automatically adjusts the replicas to
       seamless scaling.

   4. Operational Policies: Operators consistently enforce the operational policies to
      keep the environment secure across instances of application.

       Example: The Vault operators enforce the security policies over HashiCorp Vault
       which ensures that the sensitive data will be secured.

   5. Rolling Updates and Upgrades: Operators manage the rolling updates and
      upgrades of the application. So that, there will be no downtime.

       Example: CockroachDB operator handles the rolling updates on the CockroachDB
       cluster one node at a time to follow the no downtime protocol during the upgrading
       hours..

   6. Integrate with Ecosystem tools: Operators integrate with other Kubernetes tools to
      provide better functionality for the application.

       Example: Prometheus Operator can be integrated with Grafana to provide complete
       monitoring.

   7. Stateful Applications: Operators help to manage complex or stateful applications
      by handling tasks like data persistent, disaster recovery, scaling, etc.

       Example: Apache Kafka Operator manages Kafka clusters which automates tasks
       such as topic creation, partition reassignment, etc.

       Kubernetes is one of the best container orchestration tools because of the Operator
       feature. If you observe, to leverage the rich feature you have to install operators like
       to get the benefit of the HPA(Horizontal Pod Autoscaler) feature you need to install
       an operator for it, and the same for Network Policy, etc.

       So, without Operators, the life of a Kubernetes DevOps guy is not very easy.



Now this is enough to get a basic understanding of Kubernetes Operators. But there are
some more things that you need to know.

   1. Custom Resource Definition

CRD is indeed one of the powerful features of Kubernetes, acting like a superpower that lets
you define and use custom resources tailored to your specific needs. Let’s put it in a
scenario:

Imagine you have a fantastic application ready to roll, but Kubernetes, as amazing as it is,
might not have all the necessary tools and features to handle the uniqueness of your
application. Here’s where CRD steps in as your superhero sidekick.

In straightforward terms, CRD allows you to create your very own resource types in
Kubernetes. It’s like getting a custom tool for your specific job. But, of course, there’s a twist
— your CRD needs the Kubernetes seal of approval. Think of it as a passport check; once


                                                                                                     170
your CRD gets the nod from Kubernetes, it becomes a certified member of the Kubernetes
family.

Now, here’s the exciting part. Once you’ve crafted your CRD to match your application’s
needs, you can share it with the world! Just like posting your creation on a hub for others to
benefit. In the Kubernetes world, this hub is known as operatorshub.io. It’s a place where
your CRD can shine, offering its capabilities to others who might have similar challenges.

So, in a nutshell, CRD empowers you to extend Kubernetes by creating your custom
resources, and once validated, you can share your creations on operatorshub.io,
contributing to the Kubernetes ecosystem and helping others tackle their unique challenges.
It’s like giving your application its very own set of superpowers within the Kubernetes
universe!

Custom Resource Definition can be created in YAML

2. Custom Controller

Without a Custom Controller, there is no benefit to using Custom Resource Definition.
Custom Controller is a dedicated created for the CRD. The main work of the Custom
Controller is to meet the desired state of the custom resources with the actual state such as
replicates. Also, Custom Controllers are like a watcher who watches and keep an eye on the
custom resource. So, if there is any misshappening occurs then Custom Controllers fix it or
take the necessary steps as part of the auto healing.

Custom Controller can be created in many languages like Go, Python, etc and there is one
component client-go that is dedicated to Golang which has all the necessary tools for
working with Kubernetes.

3. Custom Resource

Once the Custom Controller is deployed, you have to think or you have already prepared the
roadmap for how many namespaces you have to deploy your Custom Resource. It can be
deployed on multiple worker nodes as per the requirement. Custom Resource is the last
step in the process of creating and deploying the Custom Resources where Custom
Controller is the second and CRD is the first step.

Let’s go through a sample Custom Resource Definition

A scenario could be managing a custom application called “AwesomeApp” that needs to
maintain a specific number of replicas based on a defined metric. Here’s how the CRD might
look:
# File: awesomeapp-crd.yaml

apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
 name: awesomeapps.app.example.com
spec:
 group: app.example.com
 names:
  kind: AwesomeApp
  listKind: AwesomeAppList


                                                                                                 171
 plural: awesomeapps
 singular: awesomeapp
scope: Namespaced
versions:
 - name: v1
   served: true
   storage: true
additionalPrinterColumns:
 - name: Replicas
   type: integer
   JSONPath: .spec.replicas

In this CRD, we define a custom resource named “AwesomeApp” belonging to the group
“app.example.com.” It has a field for the number of replicas.

Let’s go through a sample Custom Controller:

Now, let’s create a simple Custom Controller in Go that watches for changes to our custom
resource and takes action accordingly.
// File: main.go

package main
import (
"context"
"flag"
"fmt"
"time"
"k8s.io/client-go/kubernetes"
"k8s.io/client-go/tools/cache"
"k8s.io/client-go/tools/clientcmd"
"k8s.io/client-go/util/homedir"
"k8s.io/client-go/util/wait"
"k8s.io/client-go/util/workqueue"
)
func main() {
kubeconfig, _ := getKubeconfig()
config, err := clientcmd.BuildConfigFromFlags("", kubeconfig)
if err != nil {
 panic(err.Error())
}
clientset, err := kubernetes.NewForConfig(config)
if err != nil {
 panic(err.Error())
}
informer := cache.NewSharedInformer(
 cache.NewListWatchFromClient(
  clientset.AppsV1().RESTClient(),
  "awesomeapps",
  "namespace-name",
  cache.ResourceEventHandlerFuncs{
   AddFunc: func(obj interface{}) {



                                                                                            172
    fmt.Println("AwesomeApp created:", obj)
    // Logic to handle the creation of AwesomeApp
   },
   UpdateFunc: func(oldObj, newObj interface{}) {
    fmt.Println("AwesomeApp updated:", newObj)
    // Logic to handle the update of AwesomeApp
   },
   DeleteFunc: func(obj interface{}) {
    fmt.Println("AwesomeApp deleted:", obj)
    // Logic to handle the deletion of AwesomeApp
   },
  },
 ),
 &v1.AwesomeApp{},
 0, // no resync
 cache.ResourceEventHandlerFuncs{},
)
stopCh := make(chan struct{})
defer close(stopCh)
go informer.Run(stopCh)
// Run forever
select {}
}
func getKubeconfig() (*string, error) {
home := homedir.HomeDir()
kubeconfig := flag.String("kubeconfig", home+"/.kube/config", "absolute path to the
kubeconfig file")
flag.Parse()
return kubeconfig, nil
}

In this simplified example:

   ●   The controller watches for changes in AwesomeApp resources.
   ●   When an AwesomeApp resource is created, updated, or deleted, the corresponding
       handler functions are invoked.
   ●   You would extend this controller with your custom logic to manage the AwesomeApp
       replicas based on the specified metric.




                                                                                          173
                     Helm & Helm Charts

Helm
Helm is a Kubernetes package manager in which the multiple numbers of YAML files such
as the backend, and frontend come under one roof(helm) and deploy using helm.

Let’s understand with the help of a simple example.
Suppose you have an application where frontend, backend, and database code needs to
deploy on Kubernetes. Now, the task becomes hectic if you have to deploy frontend and
backend codes because your application will be Stateful. For frontend, backend, and
database you will have to create different YAML files and deploy them too but it will be
complicated to manage. So, Helm is an open-source package manager that will help you to
automate the deployment of applications for Kubernetes in the simplest way.




Let’s understand again with the help of the above architecture.
Normal deployment
As you know, to deploy your code you need to write a minimum of two YAML files which is
deployment and service file. Those files will be deployed with the help of the kubectl
command. These files act differently from each other but you know that the files are
dependent on each other.

Helm deployment



                                                                                           174
In the help deployment, all the YAML files related to the application deployment will be in the
helm chart. So, if you want to deploy your application you don’t need to deploy each YAML
file one by one. Instead, you can just write one command helm install <your-chart-name>
and it will deploy your entire application in one go. Helm is the Package manager for the
Kubernetes which helps to make the deployment simple.

Benefits

    ●   Because of the helm, the time will be saved.
    ●   It makes the automation more smoothly
    ●   Reduced complexity of deployments.
    ●   Once files can be implemented in different environments. You just need to change
        the values according to the environmental requirements.
    ●   Better scalability.
    ●   Perform rollback at any time.
    ●   Effective for applying security updates.
    ●   Increase the speed of deployments and many more.



Hands-On
Install Helm
curl -fsSL -o get_helm.sh
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/helm/helm/main/scripts/get-helm-3
chmod 700 get_helm.sh
./get_helm.sh
helm version




To list the all repositories

helm list




Create a stable repository using the helm

helm repo add stable https://charts.helm.sh/stable




List the repo, again



                                                                                                  175
helm repo list




To remove the repo

helm repo remove stable




To create our own repo

helm create my-repo




To see the files inside the created repo




Let’s do a simple demo where we will host the nginx page on Kubernetes using the helm
chart.

Create a chart using the command




                                                                                        176
helm create helloworld




The file structure should look like the below snippet.




Go to the Helm Chart directory helloworld and edit the values.yaml file

cd helloworld

vim values.yaml




Replace the ClusterIP with NodePort




                                                                          177
Now deploy your helm chart

To do that, you have to be present in the directory where the chart is present.

In my case, my helloworld chart is in the Helm directory. So, I have to be in the Helm
directory and run the below command to install the Helm Chart.

helm install thehelloworld hellowolrd

helm install <custom-chart-release-name> <given-chart-name>




Now, check the services whether your application is running or not

kubectl get svc




Now, access your application via browser by copying the port number(in my case 30738)
with minikube private IP in starting.

To get the IP, you can simply run the command on the terminal minikube ip and use it to
view the content.

As you can see in the below snippet, our application is successfully deployed with the help
of Helm Chart.




If you want to see the minikube dashboard GUI then run the below command on the
terminal.

minikube dashboard


                                                                                              178
Once you run the command, a new tab will open in your browser that will look like the below
snippet.




Now, if you want to uninstall your deployment. You can simply run the below command.

helm uninstall thehelloworld



Once you uninstall the deployment you will see nothing on your K8s dashboard because the
deployment has been deleted.




Demo of Helm Cheat Sheets

Create the helm chart

helm create helloworld




                                                                                              179
Create the release and deploy the helm chart

helm install thehelloworld helloworld




Now, if you want 2 replicas instead of 1. So you will make the changes in the values.yaml file
and replace the replica 2 with 1. But you have to redeploy the changes which will be done by
the below command after doing the changes.

helm upgrade thehelloworld helloworld




Now, you think that you did something wrong or unexpected and you want to switch to the
previous deployment. To do that, first of all, you need to know that to which revision number
you have to switch.

To check the current revision use the below command.

helm list -a




Now, I want to switch to the 1 Revision number. So, I will roll back the changes by the below
command.

helm rollback thehelloworld 1




If you want to dry-run the chart before installation use the below command.

helm install thehelloworld — debug — dry-run helloworld




                                                                                                180
If you want to validate your YAML files within the helm chart then, use the below command.

helm template helloworld




If you want to validate your Charts then use the below command.

helm lint helloworld




                                                                                             181
If you want to delete or release the deployment then, use the below command.

helm uninstall thehelloworld




                                                                               182
  Deploy Flask Application using
Helm Chart and many more features

Docker Project of Python Flask Repo-
https://github.com/AmanPathak-DevOps/Docker-Projects/tree/master/Python-Project-for-Hel
m-K8s

Kubernetes Manifest file Repo- https://github.com/AmanPathak-DevOps/Kubernetes-files

In the Previous Chapter, we have covered some theory and basic hands-on. But today, we
will deep dive and do more hands-on.

The topics that we will cover here:

✅ Deploy Python Flask Application using Helm Chart
✅ What is Helmfile?
✅ Demo of Helmfile(Deploy HelmCharts using declarative method)
✅ Test Cases for your Helm Chart
Demonstration
Create a helm chart for the Python application by using the below command
helm create helm-deploy-rest-api
ls -lart Helm-Deploy-Rest-API




Comment Out the appVersion in the Chart.yaml file
vim helm-deploy-rest-api/Chart.yaml




                                                                                          183
Replace the image repository with nginx

vim helm-deploy-rest-api/values.yaml




Replace the service type from ClusterIP to NodePort in the same values.yaml file




vim helm-deploy-rest-api/templates/deployment.yaml

Remove the appversion set and write only the image repository name




In the same deployment.yaml file.

Modify the port to 9001 according to our application




                                                                                   184
Now in the same deployment.yaml file comment out all the liveness probe and readiness
probe function




Now, install your helm chart

helm install pythonhelm helm-deploy-rest-api/




Now, check whether the pod is running or not

kubectl get pods




Check the service to get the port number

kubectl get svc




Now, get the minikube ip using the minikube ip command and paste it on the browser to get
the content of the application

Use the ‘/main’ because this is our path where content is present. Otherwise, you will get
errors on different paths.




                                                                                             185
You can uninstall the release for the helm chart




Helmfile
Earlier, we used to deploy helm charts in an imperative way. But if you want to deploy helm
charts using a declarative way then we will use Helmfile. Helmfile also helps to deploy
multiple charts in one go.

Demo of Helmfile
Install the file

wget https://github.com/roboll/helmfile/releases/download/v0.144.0/helmfile_linux_amd64

Rename the file name to helmfile

mv helmfile_linux_amd64 helmfile



Change the permissions of the helmfile

chmod 777 helmfile




Now, move the helmfile to the bin folder

mv helmfile /usr/local/bin



Validate the version by the command

helmfile — version




Now, We will try to deploy our previous Python application using helmfile.
---



                                                                                              186
releases:
 - name: pythonpr
   chart: ./helm-deploy-rest-api
   installed: true




Once you run the command helmfile sync, your chart will be deployed.




If you want to uninstall the release then, go to the yaml file replace the true with false in the
installed line, and run helm sync.




As we run the command to uninstall the deployment the pod is terminating now.




                                                                                                    187
Helmfile using Git repository
Suppose your charts are present on the Git repository and you want to install them. So,
Helm provides you with a feature in which you don’t need to clone the repo manually to
deploy the chart. Instead of this, you just have to provide the git repository URL in the
helmfile and helm will deploy the charts automatically.

Demo

To leverage this feature, you need to install one plugin for it. To install it just copy and paste
the below command.

helm plugin install https://github.com/aslafy-z/helm-git — version 0.15.1




Now, add your repo accordingly in the yaml file
---
repositories:
  - name: helm-python
    url:
git+https://github.com/AmanPathak-DevOps/Kubernetes-files@Helm?ref=master&sparse=0
releases:
  - name: pythonpr
    chart: ./helm-deploy-rest-api
    installed: false




                                                                                                     188
Now, run the helmfile using the below command

helmfile sync




Install multiple charts using helmfile

You just need to add the charts in the previous helmfile below
---
repositories:
  - name: helm-python
    url:
git+https://github.com/AmanPathak-DevOps/Kubernetes-files@Helm?ref=master&sparse=0
releases:
  - name: pythonpr
    chart: ./helm-deploy-rest-api
    installed: true
  - name: helloworld
    chart: ./helloworld
    installed: true




                                                                                     189
Now, run the command to install the charts

helmfile sync




Test your helm chart
Once I deploy the chart, I want to test the chart whether it’s working or not.

So, you can define your test cases in the test-connection.yaml file which is presented in the
tests folder of the chart itself.




As we have deployed our charts in the previous demo. So, we will test those charts.

To test the particular chart use the below command.

helm test <chart>



                                                                                                190
As you can see in the below snippet. Our helloworld chart test is succeeded.




                                                                               191
                AWS Elastic Kubernetes
                    Service(EKS)

What is AWS EKS?
AWS EKS(Elastic Kubernetes Service) is a managed service that eliminates things like
installation of the Kubernetes and maintaining the Kubernetes cluster.

Some basic benefits like you can focus on deployment for the applications. You don’t need
to think about the availability of your cluster, AWS will take care of those things.

Key features of EKS:
   ●   Manage Control Plane: In EKS, the Control Plane will be managed by AWS itself.
   ●   Configure Node Groups: In EKS, You can add multiple Worker Nodes according to
       the requirements in no time.
   ●   Cluster Scaling: AWS will take care of the Cluster scaling according to your
       requirements whether it’s upscaling or downscaling.
   ●   High Availability: AWS provides high availability of your Kubernetes cluster.
   ●   Security: AWS enhances the security by integrating IAM service with EKS.
   ●   Networking: AWS provides better control to manage the networking stuff for your
       Kubernetes cluster.

If you want to read more features in a detailed way refer to the following link:

Managed Kubernetes Service - Amazon EKS Features

AWS EKS Costing
AWS will cost you 0.10$ per hour for each cluster. If you create EC2 for Node Groups then it
will cost you separately according to the instance type and the same with ECS
Fargate(depends on vCPU and memory resources).

Let’s Dive into the Demo! 🛠
To create EKS, we need to configure VPC and other networking things. If you are not a
beginner in the cloud feel free to skip the network configuration part. But if you are new to
EKS or the AWS Cloud, I would say to follow each step. So, it will help you to get a better
understanding of each service that is related to AWS EKS.

Create VPC and select the desired IPv4 CIDR.




                                                                                                192
We need to create at least two Public Subnets to ensure high availability.

Public-Subnet1




Public Subnet2




                                                                             193
We need an internet connection for our clusters and worker nodes. To do that, create an
Internet Gateway.




Now, attach the above Internet Gateway to the VPC that we created in the earlier step.




We need to create a route table as well for the internet access for each subnet.

Public Route table




                                                                                          194
Select the Internet Gateway in the Target.




Once you add routes, then you have to add subnets for which purpose we are creating a
Public Route table.

Click on Edit subnet associations.




Select both subnets and click on Save associations.




                                                                                        195
Once you associate the subnets. You will see your subnets look like the below snippets.




Now, the EKS Cluster needs some access to the AWS Services like ec2, kms, and load
balancer.

To do that, we will create an IAM Role and Policy for the EKS Cluster

Click on AWS service as a Trusted entity type and select the EKS as Usecase and in the
below options, choose EKS-Cluster.




                                                                                          196
Click on Next.




Provide the Role name




Once we created the roles for the EKS Cluster. Now, we have to create a role for the Worker
Nodes which is also a necessary part.

Click on AWS service as a Trusted entity type and select the EC2 as Usecase and in the
below options, choose EC2.




                                                                                              197
When you will get a popup to add the Policy for the Worker Nodes.

Select the below three policies for our Worker Nodes.

AmazonEC2ContainerRegistryReadOnly, AmazonEKS_CNI_Policy, and
AmazonEKSWorkerNodePolicy




Provide the name of the Role and click on next.




Now, Prerequisites are completed. Let’s create the EKS

Navigate to the AWS EKS and click on Add cluster.

Select Create.




Provide the name of your EKS Cluster then select the Cluster role that we have created for
EKS Cluster and rest of the things will be as they as and click on Next.




                                                                                             198
In the network configuration,

Select the vpc that we created earlier with both subnets. Apart from that, others will be as it
is, and click on Next.




Keep the default things as it is and click on Next.




                                                                                                  199
Keep the default things as it is and click on Next.




Keep the default things as it is and click on Next.




Keep the default things as it is and click on Create.




                                                        200
After clicking on Create, AWS will take around 4 to 5 minutes to create the EKS. Meanwhile,
let’s install Kubectl to work on AWS EKS.

curl -O
https://s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/amazon-eks/1.28.3/2023-11-14/bin/linux/amd64/kubec
tl




sha256sum -c kubectl.sha256




openssl sha1 -sha256 kubectl



chmod +x ./kubectl
mkdir -p $HOME/bin && cp ./kubectl $HOME/bin/kubectl && export
PATH=$HOME/bin:$PATH
echo 'export PATH=$HOME/bin:$PATH' >> ~/.bashrc




kubectl version --client




Install eksctl on the local machine (Optional)



                                                                                              201
ARCH=amd64
PLATFORM=$(uname -s)_$ARCH
curl -sLO
"https://github.com/eksctl-io/eksctl/releases/latest/download/eksctl_$PLATFORM.tar.gz"
curl -sL "https://github.com/eksctl-io/eksctl/releases/latest/download/eksctl_checksums.txt" |
grep $PLATFORM | sha256sum - check
tar -xzf eksctl_$PLATFORM.tar.gz -C /tmp && rm eksctl_$PLATFORM.tar.gz
sudo mv /tmp/eksctl /usr/local/bin




Now, check the status of EKS whether it is Active or Not.




Once the status of EKS is Active, run the below command.
aws eks update-kubeconfig — region us-east-1 — name EKS-Cluster-Demo

If you are getting the error which is showing below in the snippet. Then, don’t worry. Let’s
solve it in the next step.




Replace the ‘alpha’ with ‘beta’ like below snippet




Now, run the command again to update the config
aws eks update-kubeconfig — region us-east-1 — name EKS-Cluster-Demo




It’s working




                                                                                                 202
Trying to deploy the pod but it is in pending status because there is no worker node present
where the pod can be created.




To create a worker node, Select the EKS Cluster and navigate to the Compute section.

Click on Add node group.




Provide the name of your worker node and select the Worker Node role that we created
earlier.




You can modify things according to your requirements. But the instance type t3.medium will
be good because Kubernetes needs at least 2CPU.




                                                                                               203
Select the Subnets of the VPC that we have created above and click on Next.




Once the node is in Active status. Then, you can follow the next step.




Run the below command and you will see that our pending pod is now in running state.

kubectl get pods




                                                                                       204
Now, delete the previous, and let’s try to run the static application on the nginx server with
the AWS load balancer
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: nginx-app-deployment
 labels:
   app: nginx-app
spec:
 replicas: 2
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: nginx-app
 template:
   metadata:
    labels:
      app: nginx-app
   spec:
    containers:
    - name: nginx-container
      image: avian19/nginx-ne:latest-1.0
      ports:
      - containerPort: 80

kubectl apply -f deployment.yml




Now, host the application outside of the Kubernetes Cluster by creating a service for the
nginx application and observing the load balancer dns in the EXTERNAL-IP Column.
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
name: nginx
spec:
selector:
   app: nginx-app
 type: LoadBalancer
 ports:


                                                                                                 205
- protocol: TCP
  port: 80

kubectl apply -f svc.yaml




Now, navigate to AWS Console and go to the Load Balancer section.




Copy the Load balancer DNS then, hit on the browser and see the magic.




                                                                         206
       Azure Kubernetes Service(AKS)

What is AKS?
AKS is a managed Kubernetes Service that helps us to deploy our applications without
worrying about Control Plane and other things like regular updates support, Scaling, and
high availability of your cluster.

Key Features:
   ●   Managed Control Plane: AKS provides a fully managed control plane. So that, you
       don’t need to configure things like the upgradation of Kubernetes cluster, patching,
       and monitoring. This will help us to focus on main things like deployment of the
       application.
   ●   Scalability: AKS provides the scalability feature in which we can scale our worker
       nodes according to our application traffic which will help us to achieve high
       availability. AKS also enables the scale-up option for the AKS Clusters.
   ●   Windows container support: You can run Linux containers on the AKS, But you
       can run Windows containers as well which will help developers to work on Windows
       base applications on the Kubernetes cluster.
   ●   Networking Configurations: To create AKS, networking is required. So, you can
       configure the networking part according to your requirements which helps you to
       provide fine-grained control on the Cluster networking configurations.
   ●   Integration with other services: You can integrate AKS with multiple Azure
       services like Azure AD, Azure Policy, Azure Monitor, etc to provide solutions within
       the cloud for container management.
   ●   Multi-worker nodes: AKS can create multiple node pools according to the
       application’s requirements.

If you want to read more features in a detailed way refer to the below link:

https://spot.io/resources/azure-kubernetes-service/

Azure AKS Costing
   ●   If you are new to AKS and want to explore the AKS service then, AKS comes under
       a free tier account. But the resources like computing, networking, and storage will
       have a cost. So use wisely. Remember, you can’t autoscale the clusters or nodes
       under the free tier.
   ●   Now, If you want to use AKS in your Organization It will cost you 0.10$ per cluster
       per hour similar to AWS EKS Cost but the AKS cluster will be in the Standard tier.
       You can auto-scale your clusters and worker nodes in the Standard tier.
   ●   There is one more tier which Premium and that will cost you 0.60$ per cluster per
       hour with advanced features. You can auto-scale your clusters and worker nodes in
       the Standard tier.

Let’s Dive into the Demo! 🛠


                                                                                              207
To create AKS, we need to configure VNet and other networking things. If you are not a
beginner in the cloud feel free to skip the network configuration part. But if you are new to
AKS or in the Azure Cloud, I would say to follow each step. So, it will help you to get a better
understanding of each service that is related to Azure AKS.

First of all, create a separate Resource Group by clicking on Create new.




Provide the name of your Virtual Network and click on Next.




Now, we have to create two public subnets for the high availability of our Azure Kubernetes.

Delete the default subnet and click on Add a subnet then add two subnets with your desired
IP address range and click on Next.




                                                                                                   208
Click on Review + create to validate the error in the configurations. If there is no error feel
free to click on Create.




Once your deployment is done, in the search field enter Kubernetes services and click on
the first one.




                                                                                                  209
Click on Create and select Create a Kubernetes cluster.




Select the Same Resource Group that we have created while creating the Virtual Network.
After that, provide the name to your AKS keep the things same as shown in the below
snippet, and click on Node Pools.




In the Node pools section, we have to add Worker Node. Remember one thing the default
node(agentpool) is a system node. So you don’t have to do anything with that node.

Click on Add node pool




                                                                                          210
Provide the name to your worker node and keep the things same as shown in the below
snippet such as Node size and Mode, etc.




Now, click on Networking section.




                                                                                      211
Select the kubenet as Network configuration then, keep Calico as Network policy and click
on Review + Create by skipping integrations and Advanced sections.




Once the validation is passed, click on Create.




                                                                                            212
Once your deployment is complete, click on Go to resource.




Click on Connect.




You will have to run two commands that are showing on the right of the snippet to configure
it on local or Cloud Shell.

But, we will configure it on our local. For that, we need to install Azure CLI and kubectl on
our local machine.



                                                                                                213
To install kubectl on your local machine follow the below commands.

curl -O
https://s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/amazon-eks/1.28.3/2023-11-14/bin/linux/amd64/kubec
tl




curl -O
https://s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/amazon-eks/1.28.3/2023-11-14/bin/linux/amd64/kubec
tl.sha256




sha256sum -c kubectl.sha256




openssl sha1 -sha256 kubectl



chmod +x ./kubectl
mkdir -p $HOME/bin && cp ./kubectl $HOME/bin/kubectl && export
PATH=$HOME/bin:$PATH
echo 'export PATH=$HOME/bin:$PATH' >> ~/.bashrc



kubectl version --client




                                                                                        214
Once the kubectl is installed, you can install azurecli on your local by following the below
commands.

Install Azure CLI on the local machine
curl -sL https://aka.ms/InstallAzureCLIDeb | sudo bash




To install AZ CLI on other OS, you can refer to the below link

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli-linux?pivots=apt

Now, login to your Azure Account by below command

az login

Once you run the below command, a new tab will open in your browser which will validate
your account. If you have already logged into that account then, it will be automatically
logged in on the terminal as well and you will see output like below snippet.




Once you log in, you can run the command that was given by Azure to connect with AKS




Now, you can run the command to list the nodes which will help you to validate the
connection as well.

kubectl get nodes




Now, let’s try to deploy the Apache application on AKS

apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:



                                                                                               215
 name: apache-app-deployment
 labels:
   app: apache-app
spec:
 replicas: 2
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: apache-app
 template:
   metadata:
    labels:
      app: apache-app
   spec:
    containers:
    - name: apache-container
      image: avian19/apache-ne:latest
      ports:
      - containerPort: 80

kubectl apply -f deployment.yml




Now, host the application outside of the Kubernetes Cluster by creating a service for the
Apache application and observing the public in the EXTERNAL-IP Column.
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: apache
spec:
 selector:
   app: apache-app
 type: LoadBalancer
 ports:
 - protocol: TCP
   port: 80

kubectl apply -f svc.yaml




As our service type is LoadBalancer, AKS created one Load Balancer which will look like the
below snippet.




                                                                                              216
Now, copy the EXTERNAL-IP that we get by running the list svc command in the previous
step hit on the browser, and see the magic.




                                                                                        217
       Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE)

What is GKE?
GKE stands for Google Kubernetes Engine which is a managed Kubernetes service to deploy
your application easily without worrying about Control Plane, Scaling, or updating to your
Kubernetes Cluster.

One of the main advantages of GKE is that Kubernetes is developed by Google itself.

Key Features:
   ●   Multi-Versions: GKE has the most available versions as Kubernetes developed Google
       itself.
   ●   Auto Upgrades: The Control Plane and nodes will be automatically updated.
   ●   Auto Health Repair: GKE provides automatic health repair for the nodes.
   ●   Security Enhancement: GKE provides Containerized Optimised OS which will help you
       to enhance the security of your nodes.
   ●   Monitoring: GKE provides monitoring support by integrating the monitoring services
       with GKE itself.
   ●   Scalability: GKE provides scalability to your Kubernetes Clusters and Nodes according
       to the requirements.
   ●   Multi-Cloud Support: You can run your applications anywhere without interruption using
       GKE on Google GKE, Azure AKS, or AWS EKS.




                                                                                         218
Let’s Dive into the Demo! 🛠
If you have never created Kubernetes Cluster on Google Cloud before then, you have to enable
it first to use it.

Click on Enable.




                                                                                         219
Click on CREATE




Now, we will create the Standard Kubernetes Cluster. To do that, click on SWITCH TO
STANDARD CLUSTER.




Provide the name to your cluster name and select the location type according to your credits
remaining in the Google Cloud. Also, specify the node locations and click to expand default-pool
which is showing on the left.




                                                                                             220
Select the configuration as given in the below screenshot to reduce some costs.




Provide the Root disk size of 15 GB because it will be sufficient according to our demonstration.




Click on the Networking and provide configurations as given below.




                                                                                              221
We don’t need to modify anything in Security and other things. So you can skip it and click on
CREATE.




After clicking on CREATE. GCP will take some time to create the Kubernetes Cluster.




Once your Kubernetes Cluster is ready, then click on CONNECT.



                                                                                                 222
You will get a command to configure it on your local machine. But there are two prerequisites
that you have to follow which first is to configure gcloud-cli and install kubectl on your local
machine. Let’s do this.




sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install apt-transport-https ca-certificates gnupg curl sudo
curl https://packages.cloud.google.com/apt/doc/apt-key.gpg | sudo gpg - dearmor -o
/usr/share/keyrings/cloud.google.gpg
echo "deb [signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/cloud.google.gpg]
https://packages.cloud.google.com/apt cloud-sdk main" | sudo tee -a
/etc/apt/sources.list.d/google-cloud-sdk.list



Update your local machine and install Google Cloud cli

sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install google-cloud-cli




After installing gcloud cli, now we have to configure it with our account. To do that, run the below
command and it will open your browser and select your main GCP account.



                                                                                                   223
gcloud init




Now, you need one plugin to complete the configuration.

gcloud components install gke-gcloud-auth-plugin




After configuring Google Cloud CLI our first prerequisite is completed.
Now, we have to install kubectl which is mandatory to perform the commands on the Google
Kubernetes Cluster.

To install kubectl on your local machine follow the below commands.

curl -O
https://s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/amazon-eks/1.28.3/2023-11-14/bin/linux/amd64/kubectl




curl -O
https://s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/amazon-eks/1.28.3/2023-11-14/bin/linux/amd64/kubectl.s
ha256




sha256sum -c kubectl.sha256




openssl sha1 -sha256 kubectl



chmod +x ./kubectl



                                                                                           224
mkdir -p $HOME/bin && cp ./kubectl $HOME/bin/kubectl && export PATH=$HOME/bin:$PATH
echo 'export PATH=$HOME/bin:$PATH' >> ~/.bashrc




kubectl version --client




Now, copy the command that is given by GCP to connect to the Kubernetes Cluster and paste it
into your local machine.




To validate whether your cluster is working or not, list the nodes.

kubectl get nodes




Now, let’s try to run the static application on nginx server with a GCP load balancer
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: nginx-app-deployment
 labels:
   app: nginx-app
spec:
 replicas: 2
 selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: nginx-app
 template:
   metadata:
    labels:
      app: nginx-app
   spec:
    containers:
    - name: nginx-container
      image: avian19/nginx-ne:latest-1.0
      ports:
      - containerPort: 80

kubectl apply -f deployment.yml




                                                                                         225
Now, host the application outside of the Kubernetes Cluster by creating a service for the nginx
application and observe the Public IP in the EXTERNAL-IP Column.
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: nginx
spec:
 selector:
   app: nginx-app
 type: LoadBalancer
 ports:
 - protocol: TCP
   port: 80

kubectl apply -f svc.yaml




Copy the Public IP and paste it into your favorite browser and see the magic.




You can also decrease the number of nodes that are running in the below screenshot.


                                                                                              226
After going to the Cluster, click on default-pool which is showing under Node Pools.




Click on edit




Replace 3 with the 1 to reduce the nodes then scroll down and click on Save.




                                                                                       227
Once you Save the configurations, then you will see the VM Instances will be deleted.




Don’t worry your application will still running




                                                                                        228
  End-to-End DevSecOps Kubernetes
               Project




Introduction:
In today’s rapidly evolving tech landscape, deploying applications using Kubernetes has
become a crucial aspect of modern software development. This guide provides a detailed
walkthrough for setting up an end-to-end Kubernetes project, covering everything from
infrastructure provisioning to application deployment and monitoring.

Prerequisites:
Before diving into the implementation, ensure you have the following in place:

   ●   Basic understanding of Kubernetes concepts.
   ●   Access to AWS or any other cloud provider for server instances.
   ●   A TMDB API key for accessing movie databases in your Netflix Clone application.
   ●   DockerHub account for pushing and pulling Docker images.
   ●   Gmail account for email notifications.
   ●   Jenkins, Kubernetes, Docker, and necessary plugins installed.

High-Level Overview:


                                                                                          229
   1. Infrastructure Setup: Provisioned servers for Jenkins, Monitoring, and Kubernetes
      nodes.
   2. Toolchain Integration: Integrated essential tools like Jenkins, SonarQube, Trivy,
      Prometheus, Grafana, and OWASP Dependency-Check.
   3. Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD): Automated workflows
      with Jenkins pipelines for code analysis, building Docker images, and deploying
      applications on Kubernetes.
   4. Security Scanning: Implemented Trivy and OWASP Dependency-Check to scan for
      vulnerabilities in code and Docker images.
   5. Monitoring and Visualization: Set up Prometheus and Grafana for real-time
      monitoring and visualization of both hardware and application metrics.
   6. Email Notifications: Configured Jenkins for email alerts based on pipeline results.

You will get the Jenkinsfile and Kubernetes Manifest files along with the Dockerfile. Feel free
to modify it accordingly

Project GitHub Repo-
https://github.com/AmanPathak-DevOps/Netflix-Clone-K8S-End-to-End-Project



We need four servers for our today’s Project

Jenkins Server- On this Server, Jenkins will be installed with some other tools such as
sonarqube(docker container), trivy, and kubectl.

Monitoring Server- This Server will be used for Monitoring where we will use Prometheus,
Node Exporter, and Grafana.

Kubernetes Master Server- This Server will be used as the Kubernetes Master Cluster
Node which will deploy the applications on worker nodes.

Kubernetes Worker Server- This Server will be used as the Kubernetes Worker Node on
which the application will be deployed by the master node.

Let’s create the following instances.

Jenkins Server
Click on Launch Instances.




Provide the name of your Jenkins instance, and select the Ubuntu OS 22.04 version.




                                                                                                  230
We need to configure multiple things on the Jenkins instance. So, select the t2.large
instance type, provide the key or you can create if you want.

Keep the networking things as it is. But make sure to open all inbound and outbound traffic
in the selected security groups.




Increase the storage capacity for Jenkins Instance from 8GB to 35GB and click on Launch
Instance.




                                                                                              231
Monitoring Server
Provide the name of your Monitoring Instance, and select the Ubuntu 22.04 OS.




We need to configure the monitoring tools on this instance which needs a minimum of 4GB
RAM. So, select the t2.medium instance type, provide the key or you can create if you want.

Keep the networking things as it is. But make sure to open all inbound and outbound traffic
in the selected security groups.




Increase the storage capacity for Jenkins Instance from 8GB to 15GB and click on Launch
Instance.




                                                                                              232
Kubernetes Master & Worker Node
We have to create two Kubernetes Nodes which need at least 2 CPUs.

Provide the name of your Kubernetes Master Instance, and select the Ubuntu 22.04 OS.

In the Number of Instances, replace 1 with 2 because we need two Kubernetes Nodes.




Select the t2.medium instance type, provide the key or you can create if you want.

Keep the networking things as it is. But make sure to open all inbound and outbound traffic
in the selected security groups then keep the rest of the things as it is and click on Launch
Instance.




                                                                                                233
Rename the Kubernetes Servers and all four servers will look like the below snippet.




Log in to the Jenkins Server




Download Open JDK and Jenkins
# Intsalling Java
sudo apt update -y
sudo apt install openjdk-11-jre -y
java --version
# Installing Jenkins
curl -fsSL https://pkg.jenkins.io/debian/jenkins.io-2023.key | sudo tee \


                                                                                       234
 /usr/share/keyrings/jenkins-keyring.asc > /dev/null
echo deb [signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/jenkins-keyring.asc] \
 https://pkg.jenkins.io/debian binary/ | sudo tee \
 /etc/apt/sources.list.d/jenkins.list > /dev/null
sudo apt-get update -y
sudo apt-get install jenkins -y




Check the status of the Jenkins server




Copy your Jenkins Server Public IP and paste it into your favorite browser with port number
8080.




                                                                                              235
Run the command on your Jenkins server

sudo cat /var/lib/jenkins/secrets/initialAdminPassword

Copy the output and paste it into your above snippet text field and click on Continue.



Click on the Install suggested plugins




Click on the Skip and continue as admin



                                                                                         236
Click on Save and Finish




Install Docker and configure on the Jenkins Server
sudo apt update
sudo apt install docker.io -y
sudo usermod -aG docker jenkins
sudo usermod -aG docker ubuntu
sudo systemctl restart docker
sudo chmod 777 /var/run/docker.sock




                                                     237
Install Sonarqube on your Jenkins Server

We will use a docker container for Sonarqube
docker run -d — name sonar -p 9000:9000 sonarqube:lts-community




Now, copy your Public IP of Jenkins Server and add 9000 Port on your browser.

The username and password will be admin




Reset the password and click on Update




You will see your Sonarqube Server in the below snippet.


                                                                                238
Install the Trivy tool on the Jenkins Server
sudo apt-get install wget apt-transport-https gnupg lsb-release
wget -qO - https://aquasecurity.github.io/trivy-repo/deb/public.key | sudo apt-key add -
echo deb https://aquasecurity.github.io/trivy-repo/deb $(lsb_release -sc) main | sudo tee -a
/etc/apt/sources.list.d/trivy.list
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install trivy




Install and Configure the Prometheus, Node Exporter, and Grafana on the Monitoring Server

Login to the Monitoring Server




                                                                                               239
Create Prometheus user
sudo useradd \
- system \
- no-create-home \
- shell /bin/false prometheus




Download the Prometheus file on the Monitoring Server

wget
https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/releases/download/v2.49.0-rc.1/prometheus-2.4
9.0-rc.1.linux-amd64.tar.gz




Untar the Prometheus downloaded package

tar -xvf prometheus-2.49.0-rc.1.linux-amd64.tar.gz




                                                                                         240
Create two directories /data and /etc/prometheus to configure the Prometheus

sudo mkdir -p /data /etc/prometheus

Now, enter into the prometheus package file that you have untar in the earlier step.

cd prometheus-2.49.0-rc.1.linux-amd64/




Move the prometheus and promtool files package in /usr/local/bin

sudo mv prometheus promtool /usr/local/bin/




Move the console and console_libraries and prometheus.yml in the /etc/prometheus

sudo mv consoles console_libraries/ prometheus.yml /etc/prometheus/




Provide the permissions to prometheus user

sudo chown -R prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus/ /data/



Check and validate the Prometheus

prometheus --version




Create a systemd configuration file for prometheus



                                                                                       241
Edit the file /etc/systemd/system/prometheus.service

sudo vim /etc/systemd/system/prometheus.service

and paste the below configurations in your prometheus.service configuration file and save it
[Unit]
Description=Prometheus
Wants=network-online.target
After=network-online.target
StartLimitIntervalSec=500
StartLimitBurst=5
[Service]
User=prometheus
Group=prometheus
Type=simple
Restart=on-failure
RestartSec=5s
ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/prometheus \
- config.file=/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml \
- storage.tsdb.path=/data \
- web.console.templates=/etc/prometheus/consoles \
- web.console.libraries=/etc/prometheus/console_libraries \
- web.listen-address=0.0.0.0:9090 \
- web.enable-lifecycle
[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target




Once you write the systemd configuration file for Prometheus, then enable it and start the
Prometheus service.
sudo systemctl enable prometheus.service
sudo systemctl start prometheus.service
systemctl status prometheus.service




                                                                                               242
Once the Prometheus service is up and running then, copy the public IP of your Monitoring
Server and paste it into your favorite browser with a 9090 port.




Now, we have to install a node exporter to visualize the machine or hardware level data
such as CPU, RAM, etc on our Grafana dashboard.

To do that, we have to create a user for it.
sudo useradd \
- system \
- no-create-home \
- shell /bin/false node_exporter




Download the node exporter package
wget
https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter/releases/download/v1.7.0/node_exporter-1.7.
0.linux-amd64.tar.gz




                                                                                            243
Untar the node exporter package file and move the node_exporter directory to the
/usr/local/bin directory
tar -xvf node_exporter-1.7.0.linux-amd64.tar.gz
sudo mv node_exporter-1.7.0.linux-amd64/node_exporter /usr/local/bin/




Validate the version of the node exporter
node_exporter --version




Create the systemd configuration file for node exporter.

Edit the file
sudo vim /etc/systemd/system/node_exporter.service

Copy the below configurations and paste them into the
/etc/systemd/system/node_exporter.service file.
[Unit]
Description=Node Exporter
Wants=network-online.target
After=network-online.target
StartLimitIntervalSec=500
StartLimitBurst=5
[Service]
User=node_exporter
Group=node_exporter
Type=simple
Restart=on-failure
RestartSec=5s
ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/node_exporter \
- collector.logind
[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target




                                                                                   244
Enable the node exporter systemd configuration file and start it.
sudo systemctl enable node_exporter
sudo systemctl enable node_exporter
systemctl status node_exporter.service




Now, we have to add a node exporter to our Prometheus target section. So, we will be able
to monitor our server.

edit the file
sudo vim /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml

Copy the content in the file
- job_name: "node_exporter"
  static_configs:
   - targets: ["localhost:9100"]




After saving the file, validate the changes that you have made using promtool.



                                                                                            245
promtool check config /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml




If your changes have been validated then, push the changes to the Prometheus server.
curl -X POST http://localhost:9090/-/reload




Now, go to your Prometheus server and this time, you will see one more target section as
node_exporter which should be up and running.




Now, install the Grafana tool to visualize all the data that is coming with the help of
Prometheus.
sudo apt-get install -y apt-transport-https software-properties-common wget
sudo mkdir -p /etc/apt/keyrings/
wget -q -O - https://apt.grafana.com/gpg.key | gpg - dearmor | sudo tee
/etc/apt/keyrings/grafana.gpg > /dev/null
echo "deb [signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/grafana.gpg] https://apt.grafana.com stable main" |
sudo tee -a /etc/apt/sources.list.d/grafana.list
echo "deb [signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/grafana.gpg] https://apt.grafana.com beta main" |
sudo tee -a /etc/apt/sources.list.d/grafana.list
sudo apt-get update




                                                                                             246
Install the Grafana
sudo apt-get install grafana




Enable and start the Grafana Service
sudo systemctl enable grafana-server.service
sudo systemctl start grafana-server.service
sudo systemctl status grafana-server.service




To access the Grafana dashboard, copy the public IP address of the Monitoring Server and
paste it into your favorite browser with port 3000

username and password will be admin




                                                                                           247
Reset the password




Click on Data sources




                        248
Select the Prometheus




Provide the Monitoring Server Public IP with port 9090 to monitor the Monitoring Server.




                                                                                           249
Click on Save and test.




Go to the dashboard section of Grafana and click on the Import dashboard.




                                                                            250
Add 1860 for the node exporter dashboard and click on Load.




Then, select the Prometheus from the drop down menu and click on Import




                                                                          251
The dashboard will look like this




Now, we have to monitor our Jenkins Server as well.

For that, we need to install the Prometheus metric plugin on our Jenkins.

Go to Manage Jenkins -> Plugin search for Prometheus metrics install it and restart your
Jenkins.




                                                                                           252
Edit the /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml file
sudo vim /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
- job_name: "jenkins"
   static_configs:
    - targets: ["<jenkins-server-public-ip>:8080"]




Once you add the Jenkins job, validate the Prometheus config file whether it is correct or not
by running the below command.
promtool check config /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml

Now, push the new changes on the Prometheus server
curl -X POST http://localhost:9090/-/reload




Copy the public IP of your Monitoring Server and paste on your favorite browser with a 9090
port with /target. You will see the targets that you have added in the
/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml file.


                                                                                                 253
To add the Jenkins Dashboard on your Grafana server.

Click on New -> Import.




Provide the 9964 to Load the dashboard.




                                                       254
Select the default Prometheus from the drop-down menu and click on Import.




You will see your Jenkins Monitoring dashboard in the below snippet.




                                                                             255
Now, we have to integrate Email Alert. So, if our Jenkins pipeline will succeed or fail we will
get a notification alert on our email.

To do that, we need to install the Jenkins Plugin, whose name is Email Extension Template.

Manage Jenkins -> Plugins and install the Email Extension Template plugin.




After installing the plugin, go to your email ID and click on Manage account and you will see
what looks like the below snippet.




In the Security section, search for App passwords and click on it.




                                                                                                  256
Gmail will prompt you for the password. Provide the password then you have to provide the
name of your app where you are integrating email service.




You will get your password below. Copy the password and keep it secure somewhere.




                                                                                            257
Add your email ID and the password that you have generated in the previous step.

Go to Manage Jenkins -> Credentials.

Click on (global).




Click on Add credentials




Select the Username with password in Kind.


                                                                                   258
Provide your mail ID and generated password then provide the ID as mail to call both
credentials.




You can see we have added the credentials for the mail.




Now, we have to configure our mail for the alerts.

Go to Jenkins -> Manage Jenkins -> System

Search for Extend E-mail Notification.

Provide the smtp.gmail.com in the SMTP server and 465 in the SMTP port.




                                                                                       259
Then, On the same page Search for Extend E-mail Notification.

Provide the smtp.gmail.com in the SMTP server and 465 in the SMTP port.

Select Use SMTP Authentication and provide the Gmail ID and its password in the
Username and password.

To validate whether Jenkins can send the emails to you or not, check the Test configuration
by sending a test e-mail.




You can see below for the reference.




                                                                                              260
Now, we will set up our Jenkins Pipeline. But there are some plugins required to work with
them.

Download the following plugins
Eclipse Temurin installer
SonarQube Scanner
NodeJS




Now, configure the plugins

Go to Manage Jenkins -> Tools

Click on Add JDK and provide the following things below




Click on Add NodeJS and provide the following things below




                                                                                             261
Now, we will configure Sonarqube

To access the sonarqube, copy the Jenkins Server public IP with port number 9000

Then, click Security and click on Users.




Click on the highlighted blue box on the right to generate the token.




Now provide the name of your token and click on Generate.




Copy the generated token and keep it somewhere.




                                                                                   262
Now, add the token to your Jenkins credentials

Go to Manage Jenkins -> Credentials.

Select the Secret text in Kind.

Provide your token then provide the ID as sonar-token to call the credentials.




Go to Manage Jenkins -> System

Click on Add Sonarqube




Provide the name sonar-server with the Server URL and select the credentials that we have
added.




                                                                                            263
Go to Manage Jenkins -> Tools

Find Sonarqube Scanner and click on Add




Provide the name sonar-server and select the latest version of Sonarqube.




To create a webhook, click on Configuration and select Webhooks.




Click on Create.




Provide the name and Jenkins URL like below and click on Create.




                                                                            264
The Webhook will be showing the below snippet.




To create a project, click on Manually.




Provide the name of your project and click on Set up.




                                                        265
Select the existing token and click on continue.




Select the Other as your build and Linux as OS.




                                                   266
Now, we will create the Jenkins Pipeline

Click on Create item.




Provide the name of your Jenkins Pipeline and select Pipeline.




                                                                 267
Currently, we are just creating a pipeline for Sonarqube analysis of the code, quality gate for
Sonarqube, and installing the dependencies.

In the post-build, we have added email alerts for the success or failure of the pipeline.
pipeline{
  agent any
  tools{
     jdk 'jdk'
     nodejs 'nodejs'
  }
  environment {
     SCANNER_HOME=tool 'sonar-server'
  }
  stages {
     stage('Workspace Cleaning'){
        steps{
            cleanWs()
        }
     }
     stage('Checkout from Git'){
        steps{
            git branch: 'master', url:
'https://github.com/AmanPathak-DevOps/Netflix-Clone-K8S-End-to-End-Project.git'
        }
     }
     stage("Sonarqube Analysis"){
        steps{
            withSonarQubeEnv('sonar-server') {
               sh ''' $SCANNER_HOME/bin/sonar-scanner -Dsonar.projectName=Netflix \
               -Dsonar.projectKey=Netflix \
               '''
            }
        }
     }
     stage("Quality Gate"){
       steps {
            script {
               waitForQualityGate abortPipeline: false, credentialsId: 'sonar-token'
            }
        }
     }
     stage('Install Dependencies') {
        steps {
            sh "npm install"
        }
     }
  }
  post {
   always {
     emailext attachLog: true,
        subject: "'${currentBuild.result}'",


                                                                                                  268
            body: "Project: ${env.JOB_NAME}<br/>" +
               "Build Number: ${env.BUILD_NUMBER}<br/>" +
               "URL: ${env.BUILD_URL}<br/>",
            to: 'aman07pathak@gmail.com',
            attachmentsPattern: 'trivyfs.txt,trivyimage.txt'
        }
    }
}




Click on build pipeline and after getting the success of the pipeline.

You will see the Sonarqube code quality analysis which will look like the below snippet.




Now, we have to add one more tool for our application named OWASP Dependency-check.

Go to Manage Jenkins -> Plugins

Search for OWASP Dependency-Check and install it.




                                                                                           269
After installing, make sure to configure the OWASP.

Provide the name select the latest version of OWASP and click on Save.




Now, add the OWASP dependency check stage in the Jenkins pipeline and click on Save.
stage('OWASP DP SCAN') {
       steps {
          dependencyCheck additionalArguments: '--scan ./ --disableYarnAudit
--disableNodeAudit', odcInstallation: 'owasp-dp-check'
          dependencyCheckPublisher pattern: '**/dependency-check-report.xml'
       }
     }
stage('TRIVY FS SCAN') {
       steps {
          sh "trivy fs . > trivyfs.txt"
       }
     }




Now, click on Build Now.




                                                                                       270
Once your pipeline is successful. Then, scroll down and you will see a dependency check.
Click on it and you will see the output like the below snippet.




Now, we have to build our Docker Image and push it to DockerHub

To do that, we need to configure the following things.

Go to Manage Jenkins -> Credentials

Add Docker Credentials to your Jenkins




                                                                                           271
Add your credentials and click on Create.




Install the following Docker plugins on your Jenkins
Docker
Docker Commons
Docker Pipeline
Docker API
docker-build-step




                                                       272
Restart your Jenkins




Configure the tool in Jenkins

Go to Manage Jenkins -> Tools and provide the below details.




                                                               273
Our application is Netflix Clone. So we need some movie databases on our application.

For that, we have one application that will provide the API. So, we can use the API to get the
movies on our application.

TMDB is one of them

Go to this link https://www.themoviedb.org/

Click on Join TMDB




Enter the details and click on SignUp




                                                                                                 274
Once you sign up, you will get a confirmation email on your account. Confirm it.

Log in to your TMDB account and go to the settings.




Go to the API section.




                                                                                   275
Click on Create to generate API




Select Developer.




Accept the Terms & Conditions.



                                  276
Provide the basic details and click on Submit.




After clicking on Submit. You will get your API. Copy the API and keep it somewhere.




                                                                                       277
Now, we have to configure our Docker images where we will build our image with the help of
new code and then, push it to DockerHub.

After pushing the image, we will scan our DockerHub Image to find the vulnerabilities in the
image.

Make sure to replace the API with your API and if you are pushing Dockerfile on your
Dockerhub account then, replace my username of the Dockerhub with yours.




Click on Build




                                                                                               278
As you can see Our Pipeline is successful.




Now, validate whether the docker image has been pushed to DockerHub or not.

Log in to your Dockerhub account.

As you can see in the below screenshot, Our Docker image is present on Docker Hub.




                                                                                     279
Now, we have to deploy our application using Kubernetes.

To do that, we need to install kubectl on the Jenkins server.
sudo apt update
sudo apt install curl
curl -LO https://dl.k8s.io/release/$(curl -L -s
https://dl.k8s.io/release/stable.txt)/bin/linux/amd64/kubectl
sudo install -o root -g root -m 0755 kubectl /usr/local/bin/kubectl
kubectl version --client




As you know, we have two Kubernetes Nodes of which one is the Master and the other one
is the Worker Node.

Login to your both Kubernetes Master and Worker Nodes


                                                                                         280
Master Node




Worker Node




Add the hostname to your Kubernetes master node
sudo hostnamectl set-hostname K8s-Master


Add the hostname to your Kubernetes worker node
sudo hostnamectl set-hostname K8s-Worker




                                                  281
Run the below commands on the both Master and worker Nodes.
sudo su
swapoff -a; sed -i '/swap/d' /etc/fstab
cat <<EOF | sudo tee /etc/modules-load.d/k8s.conf
overlay
br_netfilter
EOF
sudo modprobe overlay
sudo modprobe br_netfilter
# sysctl params required by setup, params persist across reboots
cat <<EOF | sudo tee /etc/sysctl.d/k8s.conf
net.bridge.bridge-nf-call-iptables = 1
net.bridge.bridge-nf-call-ip6tables = 1
net.ipv4.ip_forward = 1
EOF
# Apply sysctl params without reboot
sudo sysctl - system
apt update
sudo apt-get install -y apt-transport-https ca-certificates curl
curl -fsSL https://packages.cloud.google.com/apt/doc/apt-key.gpg | sudo gpg - dearmor -o
/etc/apt/keyrings/kubernetes-archive-keyring.gpg
echo "deb [signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/kubernetes-archive-keyring.gpg]
https://apt.kubernetes.io/ kubernetes-xenial main" | sudo tee
/etc/apt/sources.list.d/kubernetes.list
apt update
apt-get install -y kubelet kubeadm kubectl kubernetes-cni
apt install docker.io -y
sudo mkdir /etc/containerd
sudo sh -c "containerd config default > /etc/containerd/config.toml"
sudo sed -i 's/ SystemdCgroup = false/ SystemdCgroup = true/' /etc/containerd/config.toml
systemctl restart containerd.service
systemctl restart kubelet.service
systemctl enable kubelet.service
Now, run the following commands Only on the Master Node, and then you will get the
command that is highlighted in the below snippet.
kubeadm config images pull
kubeadm init




                                                                                            282
Exit from the root user and run the below commands
mkdir -p $HOME/.kube
sudo cp -i /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf $HOME/.kube/config
sudo chown $(id -u):$(id -g) $HOME/.kube/config




Run on the Worker Node
Run the below command as a root user
kubeadm join 172.31.59.154:6443 - token deq9nl.y34go2ziii0fu8c1 \
- discovery-token-ca-cert-hash
sha256:e93c56bd59b175b81845a671a82ffd1839e42272d922f9c43ca8d8f6d145ce02




Both nodes are not ready because the network plugin is not installed on the master node




Only on the Master Node
Run the below command to install the network plugin on the Master node



                                                                                          283
kubectl apply -f
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/projectcalico/calico/v3.25.0/manifests/calico.yaml




Both nodes are ready.




Install the following Kubernetes Plugins on your Jenkins
Kubernetes
Kubernetes Credentials
Kubernetes Client API
Kubernetes CLI
Kubernetes Credential Provider




                                                                                       284
Now, we will set Kubernetes Monitoring for both Master and worker Nodes

Run the below command on both Kubernetes Nodes
sudo useradd \
--system \
--no-create-home \
--shell /bin/false prometheus




Download the node exporter package on both Kubernetes Nodes and Untar the node
exporter package file and move the node_exporter directory to the /usr/local/bin directory
wget
https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter/releases/download/v1.7.0/node_exporter-1.7.
0.linux-amd64.tar.gz
tar -xvf node_exporter-1.7.0.linux-amd64.tar.gz
sudo mv node_exporter-1.7.0.linux-amd64/node_exporter /usr/local/bin/




                                                                                             285
Create the systemd configuration file for node exporter.

Edit the file
sudo vim /etc/systemd/system/node_exporter.service

Copy the below configurations and paste them into the
/etc/systemd/system/node_exporter.service file.
[Unit]
Description=Node Exporter
Wants=network-online.target
After=network-online.target
StartLimitIntervalSec=500
StartLimitBurst=5
[Service]
User=node_exporter
Group=node_exporter
Type=simple
Restart=on-failure
RestartSec=5s
ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/node_exporter \
- collector.logind
[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target




Enable the node exporter systemd configuration file and start it.
sudo systemctl enable node_exporter
sudo systemctl enable node_exporter
systemctl status node_exporter.service




Now, we have to add a node exporter to our Prometheus target section. So, we will be able
to monitor both Kubernetes Servers.


                                                                                            286
edit the file
sudo vim /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml

Add both job names(Master & Worker nodes) with their respective public.




After saving the file, validate the changes that you have made using promtool.
promtool check config /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml

If your changes have been validated then, push the changes to the Prometheus server.
curl -X POST http://localhost:9090/-/reload




As you know, Jenkins will deploy our application on the Kubernetes Cluster. To do that,
Jenkins must have the access keys or something to connect with the master node.

To do that copy the content inside .kube/config on Kubernetes Master node.

cat .kube/config




                                                                                          287
Save the file with the .txt extension.




Now, add the Secret file in Jenkins Credentials.

Click on Add credentials.




Select the Secret file and provide the Secret file that you have saved earlier enter the ID k8s
then click on Create.




                                                                                                  288
Now, Add the deploy to the Kubernetes stage in your Jenkins pipeline.


stage('Deploy to Kubernetes'){
       steps{
          script{
            dir('Kubernetes') {
                withKubeConfig(caCertificate: '', clusterName: '', contextName: '',
credentialsId: 'k8s', namespace: '', restrictKubeConfigAccess: false, serverUrl: '') {
                      sh 'kubectl apply -f deployment.yml'
                      sh 'kubectl apply -f service.yml'
                      sh 'kubectl get svc'
                      sh 'kubectl get all'
                }
            }
          }
       }
    }




                                                                                         289
Click on Build Now

You will see that our Application has been deployed successfully on Kubernetes.




You can validate whether your pods are running or not from your Kubernetes master node.




                                                                                          290
Also, you can check the Console logs for the earlier results.




We got the email that our pipeline was successful.




We get the trivyfs.txt file which contains the vulnerabilities.




                                                                  291
Also, we got the vulnerabilities for our Docker Image.




Jenkins sent the console logs by email.




If you want to access your Netflix Clone Application.

Copy the Public IP of Worker Node and paste it on your favorite browser with port 32000
and see the magic.




                                                                                          292
Another Snippet of our Netflix Clone application.




Go to the Grafana Dashboard and select Node Exporter.

You will see the real-time hardware specs of your Kubernetes master node.




                                                                            293
You will see the real-time hardware specs of your Kubernetes worker node.




                                                                            294
292
