           Learning DevSecOps
    Integrating Continuous Security Across Your
                   Organization

With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
advantage of these technologies long before the official release of these
titles.



                        Michelle Ribeiro
Learning DevSecOps
by Michelle Ribeiro
Copyright © 2021 SPIRITSEC. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc. , 1005 Gravenstein Highway North,
Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales
promotional use. Online editions are also available for most titles (
http://oreilly.com ). For more information, contact our
corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938 or
corporate@oreilly.com .

        Editors: Corbin Collins and Mary Preap

        Production Editor: Katherine Tozer

        May 2022: First Edition

Revision History for the Early Release
        2021-06-21: First Release
        2021-09-10: Second Release
        2021-12-09: Third Release

See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781098106942 for release
details.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Learning DevSecOps, the cover image, and related trade dress are
trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
The views expressed in this work are those of the author, and do not
represent the publisher’s views. While the publisher and the author have
used good faith efforts to ensure that the information and instructions
contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and the author disclaim all
responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limitation
responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at
your own risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains
or describes is subject to open source licenses or the intellectual property
rights of others, it is your responsibility to ensure that your use thereof
complies with such licenses and/or rights.
This work is part of a collaboration between O’Reilly and F5 Networks /
NGINX. See our statement of editorial independence.
978-1-098-10694-2
Chapter 1. Introducing
DevSecOps

           A NOTE FOR EARLY RELEASE READERS
  With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
  author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
  advantage of these technologies long before the official release. If there
  is a GitHub repo associated with the book, it will be made active after
  final publication. If you have comments about how we might improve
  the content and/or examples in this book, or if you notice missing or
  inaccurate material within this chapter, please reach out to the editor at
  ccollins@oreilly.com.

DevSecOps is a cultural change aiming to integrate security into the rapid-
release cycles typical of modern software application development and
delivery, known as DevOps. The ultimate goal of DevSecOps is to have
development, security, and operations teams working together to create
business value through the fast delivery of secure software using a process
of continuous security.
This integration is a concept that the IT industry has long wrestled with but
has become possible only today due to the many evolutions the software
engineering industry has undergone in the last 20 years. The Agile and
DevOps movements promoted the necessary culture and tools needed to
bring DevSecOps into life.
This chapter explores what DevSecOps is, what we secure, and the benefits
of DevSecOps adoption. It concludes with common misconceptions about
the term. I hope that by the end of the chapter, you will be able to
understand the difference between DevSecOps, continuous security, and
security as code.
The Three Faces of DevSecOps
During the QCOn 2019, Guy Podjarny, CEO of Snyk, gave a talk titled
“The Three Faces of DevSecOps”, which I find helpful to illustrate and
simplify the meaning of the term DevSecOps. For him, if DevOps has the
following three components:

      1. Culture
      2. Methodologies
      3. Tools

Following on that, in practical terms, DevSecOps simply means the
following:

      1. To introduce security into DevOps culture
      2. To secure DevOps methodologies
      3. To secure DevOps tools

Let’s examine in detail what each of these components implies.

Introducing Security into DevOps Culture
The cultural aspect, especially the idea of shared ownership that brought
Dev and Ops teams to work together, is the keystone of any DevOps
program. So, we just need to get InfoSec to the room and wait for better
results, right? Perhaps, but in reality, creating this collaborative
environment took almost a decade to gain traction.
In my view, it’s important to remember that technical transformation takes
time so we can allow our teams to adapt at their own pace. For example, in
established organizations with separated groups, I’ve found it risky to start a
DevOps journey and simultaneously put security into the mix. It can be
much more costly and time-consuming than it would be in a startup that is
beginning from scratch.
To help understand how the IT industry got into this moment, Figure 1-1
illustrates how we used to create software in the old times of the waterfall
model, composed of a linear workflow. First, during the Concept and
Planning stage, system analysts gathered a list of stakeholders’
requirements. Then developers would spend months working on the
software’s Architecture and Design. Only when the code was fully baked
would the IT operations team get involved to begin to prepare for
Implementation (usually involving late work or weekend journeys).
During the Testing and Bug Fixing phase, the company would conduct
several assessments, including application security audits. Then the security
auditors would provide a list of vulnerabilities along with a remediation
plan, and, you guessed it, the company could take even more valuable time
to implement it. Or to release it anyway.
                      Figure 1-1. Waterfall model’s workflow

In 2001 the Agile movement acknowledged the fact that any software
project is constantly changing and urged retirement of the idea of linear
workflow. Through the fast and continuous release of software, the Agile
development lifecycle allowed developers to receive earlier feedback from
their customers and identify problems before the product reached
implementation, as shown in Figure 1-2.
         Figure 1-2. The Agile development lifecycle indicates the steady flow of feedback

In 2008 Patrick Debois presented the notion of Agile Infrastructure at the
Agile Conference in Toronto. He was looking for means to support the
development team to accelerate the push of new code into production, a
concept also proposed by Andrew Shafer. In 2009, at the O’Reilly Velocity
Conference, John Allspaw and Paul Hammond from Flickr gave their now-
famous talk entitled “10 Deploys a Day,” consolidating the notion that IT
operators could be as agile as developers.
Allspaw and Hammond demonstrated that by stimulating a cultural change
based on communications and cooperation between the two teams, Flickr
automated its infrastructure and reached the process of continuous
integration and deployment, as shown in Figure 1-3. At the end of that year,
Debois organized the first DevOpsDays conference in Ghent, Belgium.
Since then, other DevOpsDays events worldwide have promoted the
culture, methodologies, and tools, mainstreaming the term DevOps.




Figure 1-3. The DevOps infinity loop demonstrates how the collaboration between development and
          operations teams resulted in continuous integration and continuous deployment
As DevOps is an expansion of Agile, so is DevSecOps an evolution of
DevOps. Gene Kim and Paul Love guided InfoSec professionals in
strengthening relationships with IT operations and development groups to
advance IT objectives and business goals with their book Visible Ops
Security (IT Process Institute, 2008). However, the integration of security
into DevOps did not gain traction until 2012, when Shannon Lietz
published the DevSecOps manifesto. At the same time, James Wickett and
Josh Corman advanced the term Rugged DevOps, the combination of
DevOps with the Rugged Manifesto.
Do we need a new term for the integration of security into DevOps culture?
Should we call it DevSecOps or Rugged DevOps? Perhaps we could
continue to call it just plain and simple DevOps. After all, the concept was
never about just development and operations teams working together -- it
was about the conscious effort of breaking down all IT silos to achieve
business goals. While I agree with this definition, DevSecOps helps to
underline the teams’ synthesis and emphasizes the need to build up the
knowledge and skills so DevOps teams can perform security testing and fix
it by themselves.
In Chapter 2, we’ll explore some of the essential capabilities to create a
successful DevSecOps program, but for now, let’s keep in mind that, as the
term implies, DevSecOps is an evolution of DevOps. It will depend highly
on how good your organization’s technical transformation maturity level is.
Simply put: there is no DevSecOps without DevOps and its culture.

Securing DevOps Methodologies
Along with Agile, the DevOps movement transformed software
development and delivery methodologies. It brought to the market a great
set of new concepts such as continuous integration and continuous delivery
(CI/CD) pipelines. Designed to help automate the steps between a
developer’s submission of their code into the repository and the release of
that code into production, the workflow of a typical CI/CD pipeline moves
left to right, as illustrated in Figure 1-4.
           Figure 1-4. The workflow of a typical CI/CD pipeline moves left to right.

Along with the expansion of infrastructure as code (IaC), an approach that
emphasizes consistent, repeatable routines for provisioning and changing
systems and their configuration, CI/CD pipelines enable the implementation
of continuous security. In this technical process, security activities are
performed at every stage of the pipeline, improving its quality and
compliance adherence.
When one of these tests fails, we “shift left” along with the flow of
information, giving fast feedback to the developer or IT operator that
ignited the action, allowing them to fix their code. After the correction is
created, a new push request is submitted, and the process restarts.

Securing DevOps Tools
Elite and high-performance organizations using DevOps are more likely to
take advantage of cloud computing due to benefits such as cost visibility,
fast auto-scaling, and reliability. Since these organizations are also leading
the adoption of DevSecOps, the two ideas travel together in this book.
Cloud-native security was the most challenging part for me to understand,
as the average software stack has gotten way too complex and distributed to
comprehend. If you are coming to DevSecOps from an InfoSec background
like me, in-depth security modeling can make complicated things more
straightforward. Think about cloud-native security as four layers, also
known as the 4Cs:
      1. Code security
      2. Container security
      3. Cluster security
      4. Cloud security
                                           NOTE
    If you decide to adopt DevSecOps in on-premise infrastructures, just exchange the last
    C from cloud to computer -- after all, the cloud is just someone else’s computer. You can
    then apply host security techniques.



In practice, cloud-native tools and environments are way more complex
because they also include microservices, service meshes, and declarative
APIs. Thus, practitioners also model cloud-native security into distinct
phases that constitute the application lifecycle:
Develop:
   In this phase, we secure code development and ensure the integrity of
   the workload delivered through continual automated scanning using
   static application security testing (SAST) and dynamic application
   security testing (DAST) tools at the merge requests. Infrastructure as
   code (IaC) and orchestration manifest controls and integrations are also
   tested at this stage.

Deploy :
   Here, container images are scanned for vulnerabilities, malware, and
   other insecure practices. Upon completion, artifacts are
   cryptographically signed to ensure integrity and enforce non-
   repudiation. Finally, observability and logging are enabled.

Distribute:
   Application containers here are deployed into production. A cluster
   (such as Kubernetes) orchestrates these containers to assure high
   availability and extend the application to hybrid clouds and multi-
   regions.

Runtime:
   Once we’ve secured each component of our application pipeline, we
   must ensure that they remain protected while running. Linux kernel
   technologies such as eBFP allow us to trace both systems and
   applications at runtime to detect and prevent attacks.


Why Adopt DevSecOps?
Here are four good reasons to adopt DevSecOps:

     1. The current wave of digital transformation made every business a
        software-centric company: Therefore application and data security
        have a critical role in avoiding breaches. Additionally, data
        protection laws like the European Union’s General Data Protection
        Regulation (GDPR) and the California Consumer Privacy Act
        (CCPA) increased the pressure upon companies to protect their
        digital assets, which is impossible to guarantee with occasional
        vulnerability assessments.
     2. It can help reduce costs while improving software delivery quality:
        To fix vulnerabilities before an application is placed into
        production costs a hundred times less. The price tag also is
        diminished when your team is steadily improving security controls
        rather than responding to incidents that can presumably impact the
        business brand and ability to make new deals.
     3. DevSecOps reduces cloud-computing complexibility: Along with
        Agile and DevOps, the past ten years have seen the rise of the
        microservice and containers model where monolithic applications
        are broken down into smaller parts that run independently. This
        breakdown has also impacted how software is distributed, leading
        to the increased adoption of public clouds. And cloud-native
        applications and data don’t lend themselves to static perimeters,
        security policies, and checklists, making the job of InfoSec
        professionals even more complex. This is why we need to make
        our applications and infrastructures resilient and integrate security
        at every stage of their life cycle.
      4. DevSecOps is the natural next step: Companies that have reached
         the highest level (stage 5) of the DevOps Evolution Model,
         proposed by Puppet, are also the ones with the greatest rank of
         security integration. As Jason Chan, VP of Security at Netflix, has
         pointed out: “We’re really trying to minimize the situations where
         somebody has to come to ask us to do something. It’s freedom but
         also responsibility. I would say a general management philosophy
         for Netflix -- and you can even see our CEO talking about it
         publicly -- is you really want to distribute decision making as much
         as you can. As leading the security team, I want to be making as
         few decisions as possible, and the best way to facilitate that is to
         make sure that people have context about what’s important to the
         company. However it is a security process, mechanism, or tool
         we’re going to build to support developers.”


Common Misconceptions About DevSecOps
To make what DevSecOps means in this book even clearer, let’s examine
some of the common misunderstandings about the concept:
DevSecOps is just another name for application security:
   The automation of application security tests inside a development
   pipeline is just a part of a DevSecOps strategy. The process of
   continuous security inside a CI/CD pipeline also covers infrastructure
   security, for example.

DevSecOps is just another name for compliance as code:
   Compliance as code seeks to enclose regulatory and security
   compliance requirements into configuration files. It is an extension of
   IaC and, if used standalone, it’s just automation. For example, take an
   InfoSec team that adopts compliance as code for its infrastructure,
   accelerating some processes. They are not using continuous security, the
   automation of protection inside a CI/CD pipeline, nor adopting cultural
   elements such as alignment with business objectives or shared
   responsibilities with developers and operations.

DevSecOps is just another name for cloud-native security:
   Not exactly. You can adopt DevSecOps using on-premise infrastructure,
   but most top-level organizations extensively use the cloud, which
   confuses. I highly recommend you to give cloud-native environments a
   chance not only because of their elasticity but also because multi-region
   distributed infrastructure reduces security risks and improves resilience.
   Chapter 7 further discusses these ideas.

DevSecOps is just another buzzword:
   As we’ve seen, DevSecOps results from a set of improvements on
   software engineering performance. Perhaps there is no need to label
   such advancements as Agile, continuous delivery, or DevOps, but there
   is value in the use of such buzzwords. If we treat software engineering
   as a scientific discipline, these terms can be seen as our field’s scientific
   modeling. Models are simplified theoretical constructions of complex
   concepts and aim to make it easier to define, understand, and visualize
   the essentials of scientific principles. And because all models are
   reduced reflections of reality, by definition, they are wrong. Just as the
   supply and demand economic model can’t forecast every market
   activity, we can’t expect DevOps maturity models to mirror all
   companies’ realities. However, as the British statistician George Box
   once put it, although all models are wrong, some are useful.
   Modeling is also a way to amplify such scientific principles. By making
   it easier to understand and discuss, complex concepts gradually become
   commonly accepted knowledge. Could we think about InfoSec giving
   some security controls to developers without the restless series of
   DevOps events promoting the importance of trust, for example? Such
   talks, videos, books, and even memes pave the way to further
   advancement. Let’s make peace with buzzwords and evolution models.
   They are not intended to be the ultimate truth but simple learning
   mechanisms.


Summary
Agile and DevOps were decisive milestones that paved the way to the
maturity of software engineering, and DevSecOps reflects this evolution.
DevSecOps underscores the importance of a cultural change aiming to
integrate security into the rapid-release cycles typical of modern software
application development and delivery.
Continuous security is the technical methodology where security activities
are performed at every stage of the CI/CD pipeline, improving its quality
and compliance. On the other hand, compliance as code seeks to enclose
regulatory and security compliance requirements into configuration files. It
is an extension of infrastructure as code (IaC).
The companies leading the adoption of DevSecOps are also the ones that
make high use of cloud computing, so the basic tools we need to secure
usually are code, containers, clusters, and cloud, also known as the 4Cs.
Chapter 2. Bridging the InfoSec
and DevOps Cultures

            A NOTE FOR EARLY RELEASE READERS
  With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
  author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
  advantage of these technologies long before the official release. If there
  is a GitHub repo associated with the book, it will be made active after
  final publication. If you have comments about how we might improve
  the content and/or examples in this book, or if you notice missing or
  inaccurate material within this chapter, please reach out to the editor at
  ccollins@oreilly.com.

A common misconception about DevSecOps is that InfoSec and DevOps
have irreconcilable goals due to the absence of conventional security
controls and processes. On the one hand, we have the zero-trust principle of
never trust, always verify, while on the other, trust is by far the most critical
element of DevOps success. InfoSec professionals are commonly divided
into color-coded groups with well-defined responsibilities such as red teams
dedicated to offensive security, finding and exploiting possible points of
attacks, and blue teams, responsible for defensive security, protecting the
systems against real and perceived threats. Yet DevOps culture seeks to
actively break such barriers and silos. And in a DevSecOps setup, security
is everyone’s responsibility.
This doesn’t mean that organizations that use DevOps don’t have adequate
controls and processes. Instead, security activities are performed at every
stage of software development and delivery, improving its quality and
compliance adherence, in a process of continuous security.
This chapter explores how DevSecOps can bridge the gap between InfoSec
and DevOps cultures and processes, shifting from a reactive approach to a
proactive one. It examines key capabilities that are essential to creating a
successful DevSecOps program and to scale security as digital
transformation becomes a reality for every business.


Accelerate: Capabilities to Drive Continuous
Security
Since late 2013, Dr Nicole Forsgren, Jez Humble, and Gene Kim have been
conducting research on measuring and improving software delivery. Their
book Accelerate: The Science of DevOps (IT Revolution Press, 2018)
presents the findings and the science behind their work: 24 key capabilities
that influence the outcome of DevOps adoption and that leaders should
invest in to seek higher performance. This section explores ten such
capabilities that I believe every IT leader needs to promote continuous
security.

Leadership
The first step for leaders heading the creation of a DevSecOps program is to
understand that its success depends highly on your organization’s technical
transformation maturity level, as we saw in Chapter 1. The DevOps culture
in place will merely be introduced to the InfoSec team.
Next, be comfortable with the fact that it’s your role to lead the efforts to
integrate security into DevOps and generate a culture of high trust between
the teams. Your leadership skills can have powerful results, so invest the
time to review lean management practices on software delivery
performance. IT leaders usually create a dedicated transformation team,
selecting some champions to accelerate change and then scaling up their
ideas and techniques for the entire team. Still, the challenge is ultimately up
to you.
As a leader, your message should be clear: security teams alone cannot
avoid incidents. Instead, their effort must be concentrated on improving the
organization’s ability to respond to these events. I understand that this is the
most challenging part for InfoSec professionals since our craft was built
upon zero-trust and reduced surface attack. Yet, a distributed and software-
defined infrastructure that makes it easy for anyone inside the team to
recreate entire IT environments in multiple regions turned our assets into
ephemeral objects. At the same time, the number of security attacks
published daily announces that this is a war we are clearly losing. We need
more soldiers. As James Wickett once pointed out, there are 100 developers
available for every 10 operators, and only one security professional. Once
we do the math, we can see that only by genuinely engaging development
and operations will we take our defenses back.

Value Stream
In high-performance organizations, teams have a superior understanding of
the flow of work value, from the business all the way through to customers.
This visibility creates a sense of awareness about which products and
features really matter to the company. If you already have a DevOps
program running, you can recognise the primary object that we secure:
products, platforms, and data that create value to the company goals.
Does it mean that other assets will be managed traditionally and
organizations will have a dual-path strategy for IT? Perhaps for some time,
for medium and low IT performing organizations. Software-defined
networking and its security are becoming popular technologies, augmented
by the use of artificial intelligence. Cloud-computing and distributed offices
are also breaking the perimeter concept, and for high-performance
companies, there are no more clearly defined lines between what is inside
of the network or somewhere in the cloud.
A good example for InfoSec professionals is endpoint security. Once upon a
time, the number of antivirus updates was one of the key metrics in our
SOC dashboards. The Covid-19 crisis and the sudden necessity of home
office work globally reduced the level of concerns high-performance
organizations had with notebooks and who are using them. Instead, the core
of a DevSecOps strategy became how to make our products and data
resilient to any attack, be it by an internal or external device.

Collaboration
A successful DevSecOps program is all about better collaboration between
teams. Leaders must promote trust between the people involved, and a
starting point is to work on the InfoSec communication style. As a craft that
in the mind of many is associated with the military, InfoSec sees its share of
manipulative and coercive language that sometimes induces fear and blame.
On the other hand, DevOps embraces a more blameless culture, where
everyone feels safe to make mistakes. In a psychologically secure
environment, professionals feel confident enough to express their ideas and
take risks, resulting in innovative changes.
Another DevOps best practice revolves around the idea of shared ownership
and common goals. Once it is established that security is now everyone’s
responsibility, the teams must work together to achieve such a goal. They
can create and share mechanisms or tools that help ensure the security of
applications and platforms, such as libraries and authentication and
encryption services. With everything available and easily searchable, it is
easier for developers and operators to reuse secure code.
Post-mortem analysis, conducted after a security event happens, must also
involve developers and operators. After identifying the source of the attack,
together they can think about the necessary training and consider actions to
prevent it from happening again in the future, including the action plan on
the team’s roadmap.

Shift Left
Shift left means more than making development and operations teams
responsible for securing what they built. It also means moving secure
thinking to the earliest possible point in the development and delivery
process.
Security can be included in the product design phases, which can reduce
later security costs. Likewise, scans for insecure code and configuration
mistakes can begin inside the integrated development environment (IDE)
software -- an application that provides comprehensive facilities to
computer programmers -- providing fast feedback and improving code’s
quality.
When a security issue is found, it should be centralized and tracked inside a
unique software issue platform. Some issues that may not need an InfoSec
specialist to be fixed can often be quickly solved by a senior DevOps
professional, for example. This lightweight change process accelerates and
improves vulnerability fixes.
CI/CD platforms, such as Gitlab and GitHub, designed to help automate the
steps between a developer submitting their code and the release of that code
into production, run vulnerabilities assessments in the merge request so
developers can fix them immediately, as shown in Figure 2-1.




       Figure 2-1. A vulnerability found prompts a notification inside the CI/CD platform.


Empowered Teams
To give Dev and Ops ownership for security and thereby achieve better
results, we need to train them to make informed decisions and also make
clear that the security professionals are there to support them to make such
choices effectively. Developers and operations teams already are
responsible for many tasks and may need to be inspired to contribute to
security. Otherwise, they may be tempted to merely plug a scanner inside
the CI/CD pipeline and wait for better results.


                                               TIP
     Are developers aware of secure development practices such as input validation and data
     cryptography? Are they able to make a threat assessment by themselves? The Open Web
     Application Security Project (OWASP) is an online community that produces freely
     available content and tools for web application security. It can be a valuable resource for
     internal training materials, and I highly recommend that everyone on the team become
     familiar with their "Secure Coding Practices" material and the Top 10 Web Application
     Security Risks list.



To show that security is there for DevOps, you can start by promoting an
informal chat between the two teams. While working at Etsy, Zane Lackey
made t-shirts and other swag and gave them to anyone who approached his
team to ask a security question. “Whether that was they reported a phishing
email or a lead architect asking, Hey, can you have a quick look at the
service that we’re actually starting to think about doing?” says Lackey. In
the following weeks, the swag was seen inside the office, and people kept
asking security questions. This practice would basically do 90% of the
branding and cultural awareness work for a security team internally.

Test Automation
It is possible to bring more security to a DevOps pipeline by automating
vulnerability scanners. For code security, in the pre-build phase, we can use
static application security testing (SAST) tools: this is a test we perform in a
non-production environment that inspects an application’s code for coding
flaws, back doors, and malware. Open source tools such as Brakeman and
SonarQube are good examples.
We can also scan dependencies at this stage. It is a matter of inventorying
all dependencies of binaries and executables and ensuring that these
dependencies, over which we often have no control, are free from
vulnerabilities or malicious binaries. The OWASP dependency check and
the Snyk open source tool are the industry standard for this test.
After deployment, we resort to dynamic application security testing
(DAST) tools: unlike static tests, DAST consists of assessments performed
during execution, monitoring items such as system memory, functional
behavior, response time, and overall system performance. This test is
similar to tests that an attacker would do to gain improper access to the
application. Examples include OWASP ZAP, Arachini, and AppScan. Some
penetration tests can also be performed in an automated way using tools
like Metasploit, Burp Suite, and Nikto.
Infrastructure security tests can also be automated: from container to cloud
security, a tool can be included within the software delivery pipeline, as
demonstrated in Figure 2-2 and explored in more detail in Part 2 of this
book.
   Figure 2-2. A security dashboard provides a list of vulnerabilities found inside the code and
                                  infrastructure of the branch.


Working in Small Batches
In the same way that development and operations slice their work into small
pieces, security tasks should be completed in a week or less. For example,
instead of extensive vulnerability assessments, teams must aim for rapid
and effective security fixes. This is precisely the idea behind the “start little
and do often” principle of the Agile threat modelling: a continuous,
timeboxed process to help teams talk about risk and build security within.
You can then create a user story in the team backlog. The report should be
short and include a description of the possible threats identified. Start small,
identifying the easiest attacker paths, such as the lack of two-factor
authentication (2FA), to reinforce small victories and allow your team to
continue to add new security stories at the beginning of each new sprint.


                                             TIP
    The company ThoughtWorks created a set of Agile threat modelling resources that
    includes a workshop slide deck for the facilitator and printable STRIDE cue cards. The
    Threagile open-source toolkit allows the modelling of an architecture with its assets in
    an agile declarative fashion as a YAML file directly inside the IDE or any YAML editor.
    Upon executing the Threagile toolkit, a set of risk rules execute security checks against
    the architecture model and create a report with potential risks and mitigation advice.



Once the team has the muscle memory of threat modelling, you can move
to find the highest value security tasks, the ones that will improve the
resilience of your systems. In this way, we decentralize and automate such
vulnerability assessments, giving our Dev and Ops teams fast feedback and
the power to take the necessary measures in their daily routine.

Team Experimentation
Another important guiding principle while adopting DevSecOps is to move
from a culture of fear to one of readiness. Teams must accept two facts:
first, their software is likely to be used in ways they don’t expect and will
be exploited by unrelenting bad actors or automated threats. Second, the
security controls they put in place will eventually fail. Accepting that,
DevSecOps teams can actively test their resilience against attacks to
ruggedize their practices and be prepared to respond promptly to any
security incident, improving their systems’ resilience.
This readiness is the main idea behind chaos engineering, a strategy made
popular several years ago by Netflix. It designed the Chaos Monkey tool to
test the company’s infrastructure by continually – and randomly –
terminating instances in production to check how the shutdown would
impact business. Chaos engineering has now evolved into security chaos
engineering, and the tools to automate such resilience tests are in growing
development, including commercial products such as Verica and Gremlin.
Chapter 8 discusses this subject in more detail and you can also check out
Aaron Rinehart and Kelly Shortridge’s book, Security Chaos Engineering
(O’Reilly, 2020).
Other fun activities to promote team experimentation include game days,
with development and operations teams playing capture the flag (CTF)-
style competitions. These can be important learning opportunities,
especially if scenarios involving the actual business are outlined.
Finally, teams can experiment with automating incident response activities
to reduce time to mitigate a critical incident, preventing further damage.
Instead of using manual and procedural checklists, there are plenty of open-
source tools available such as TheHive and Cyphon, and commercial tools
like Darktrace Autonomous AI Antigena and Deep Instinct.

Visualizing Work and Proactive Notifications
Here, once again I recommend the use of an unique platform to manage
tasks and make all the work visible. Many organizations create a single chat
room for the IT team, rather than splitting chats into development,
operation, and security. This strategy works against the creation of silos,
enabling fast communication and collaboration while also reinforcing a
culture of transparency. Notifications from your CI/CD pipeline can also be
delivered to this same channel, becoming another tool to decentralize
remediation, as shown in Figure 2-3.
    Figure 2-3. Vulnerability scan’s results notifications are shown inside a chat room.


Monitoring
InfoSec loves a metric. That is why some vendors used to gauge how
advanced a security tool was by the number of graphics and dashboards it
displayed in security operations centers (SOCs), strategically placed on
video walls. (Do a web search for “security operation centers” and you’ll
see how much money was invested in this.)
There is a reasoning behind this behavior that can excuse us. Until recently,
security was rarely a priority for organizations, and unless you worked in a
financial institution, you could struggle with a lack of security resources. To
show our work’s value, we displayed all possible metrics on that wall:
number of vulnerabilities, outdated operating systems, threats by the level
of risk, and so on. And it worked! Our SOCs used to be the first room the
Board of Directors showed to visiting customers and partners, rising the
InfoSec status quo.
However, if your organization is a high-performer evolving to DevSecOps,
you are already managing your infrastructure using code, which makes it
easier to automatically update operating systems and regularly scan and fix
vulnerabilities. Added to other continuous security practices, the end result
is that your team is increasingly reducing the number of successful attacks
and also accepting that some will happen anyway.
Now It’s time to let go of our video walls and focus on the metric that really
matters for our business: mean time to recovery (MTTR) from a failure. The
2020 State of DevOps Report argued that the level of security integration of
an organization is strongly correlated with the ability to quickly remediate
critical vulnerabilities. It concluded that those companies with full security
integration could recover within one day, whereas those with no integration
can take up to one week. In other words, the stronger your DevOps strategy
is, the easier it will be to integrate security into the process. The more
integrated security is, the easier it will be to recover from failures and
contribute to business continuity and growth.


Summary
The adoption of DevSecOps culture through continuous security at every
stage of the software development and delivery seeks to replace manual
approvals and reduce the need for conventional controls, bridging the gap
between InfoSec and DevOps culture.
Security teams alone can not avoid incidents. Any security controls they put
in place will eventually fail. Instead, the core of a DevSecOps strategy
becomes how to make our organization’s most valuable products and data
truly resilient to attacks. In this manner, we move from a culture of fear to
one of readiness.
The shift left notion is about moving secure thinking to the earliest possible
point in the development and delivery process, making security a shared
responsibility for Development, Operations, and Security. The more
integrated security is, the easier it will be to recover from failures and
contribute to business continuity and growth, so the key metric for our
monitoring systems must be mean time to recover (MTTR).
To empower developers and operators to also take on security, we need to
train them to make informed decisions. At the same time, security
vulnerability scanners such as SAST and DAST can be automated inside a
CI/CD platform. Likewise, infrastructure security tests can also be
automated: from container to cloud security, a tool can be included within
the software delivery pipeline, as we’ll see in the next section.
Chapter 3. Methodologies for
Continuous Security

           A NOTE FOR EARLY RELEASE READERS
  With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
  author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
  advantage of these technologies long before the official release. If there
  is a GitHub repo associated with the book, it will be made active after
  final publication. If you have comments about how we might improve
  the content and/or examples in this book, or if you notice missing or
  inaccurate material within this chapter, please reach out to the editor at
  ccollins@oreilly.com.

This chapter looks deeper at core DevOps methodologies and explores how
companies can use them to implement continuous security: the technical
process which includes security activities at every stage of the CI/CD
pipeline, improving its quality and compliance adherence.


Version Control
Version control is the practice of tracking and managing source code
changes. From a centralized repository, distributed professionals can work
in different features, sometimes changing the same piece of code without
blocking each other’s work. The version control software will identify and
solve these issues.
Version control systems (VCS) track every modification sent to the
repository and also promote collaborative review -- which can serve as an
additional layer of checks if you instruct reviewers to look for insecure
code. You can roll back the code to an earlier version in case of mistakes,
speeding up fixes. Git is a free and open-source VCS tool developed by
Linus Torvalds to manage the Linux kernel source and is, currently, the
most popular implementation.
You can set up your Git server or opt for a software as a service (SaaS)
alternative such as GitHub, GitLab, and BitBucket. Whatever your choice,
remember to protect the VCS as it is the heart of the software supply chain.


                                              TIP
     GitHub and GitLab each as a Security Center, a portal describing the best practices to
     safeguard your organization’s instance. Check whether your provider has similar
     documentation and follow their advice.



On-premise servers may seem like the most secure option, but consider that
your team will be in charge of safeguarding the entire setup, from password
storage to users’ file uploads and email configuration. The work can be an
unnecessary security burden, increasing costs and decreasing agility. It is a
strategic decision that needs to take into account the business risk tolerance
level.
If you’re already embracing SaaS, keep in mind that you are still
responsible for essential security management such as access and
permission control and the definition of safer methods to connect to Git,
preferably using 2FA authentication mechanisms. Your team is also in
charge of data backup, and some services may require the hiring of third-
party tools.
Although they started as a Git-managed service, providers such as GitHub
and GitLab extended their offer and became complete software
development and delivery platforms, with CI/CD pipelines and artifacts
registries. These tools also may offer advanced security features such as
code scanning, license compliance, dependency review, and secrets
detection.
 Once source code is committed into a git repository, it can organically
 spread into multiple machines, so you should avoid hardcoded secrets:
 passwords, certificates, OAuth tokens, API keys, and so on. The
 SolarWinds hack illustrates the negative impacts of such a practice. In
 March 2021, the company’s top executives blamed an intern for
 copying their private repository into a public GitHub repository,
 including the hardcoded password solarwind123. Attackers used the
 leaked information to cause global breaches, including data from
 Microsoft and Fireeye, and the US government, including the
 Department of Homeland Security and the Treasury Department.
 Chapter X discusses secret management in more detail.

DevOps teams commonly adopt a Git workflow known as Gitflow, which
defines a strict branching model designed around project releases and
continuous delivery. Instead of a single main branch, a complementary
branch named develop is created. Each new feature is developed in its own
branch, using develop as its parent branch. When a feature is complete, it
gets merged back into develop. Figure 3-1 exemplifies a merge request
being analyzed by a reviewer.
  Figure 3-1. A request to merge a feature branch into the main one, inside the GitLab platform.

If you are new to Git, I recommend two books: Version Control with Git, by
Raju Gandhi (O’Reilly, 2021), and Head First Git, by Prem Kumar
Ponuthorai and Jon Loeliger (O’Reilly, 2021).


Infrastructure as Code ( IaC )
To achieve continuous security, we also need a Git repository to keep our
infrastructure as code definitions. There, we’ll store or update the
declarative descriptions that deploy the necessary resources -- like
containers, Kubernetes cluster, or AWS instances, for example. Changes are
made and reviewed inside the VCS, and when approved, an automated
process deploys everything, ensuring that your infrastructure reflects the
desired state defined inside the deployment manifest, as demonstrated in
Figure 3-2.
Figure 3-2. Two repositories, one for application code and another for infrastructure definitions are
 used. The build pipeline updates the environment repository, triggering the deployment pipeline.

There is no need to direct access servers, meaning no more ssh keys
management and individual permissions. With Git’s complete history of
changes, we can quickly establish authorship and present the traceability
and compliance required by security frameworks such as the ISO270001
and NIST.
To include testimonial
Declarative description means that only the desired state is defined, without
the need to inform the steps to achieve it, as we would do in a shell script.
The user declares how many machines will be deployed, in which cloud
provider and zones to use, for example. The tool behind the automation task
knows how to execute all necessary operations.
Popular tools include Ansible and Terraform, and public cloud providers
also have their own flavor: AWS CloudFormation, Azure Resource
Manager, and Google Cloud Deployment Manager, to name a few. You can
see below the example of an AWS resource declarative definition using
Terraform:
$ cat main.tf
terraform {
  required_providers {
    aws = {
      source = "hashicorp/aws"
      version = "~> 3.27"
    }
  }
  required_version = ">= 0.14.9"
}
provider "aws" {
  profile = "default"
  region = "us-west-2"
}
resource "aws_instance" "app_server" {
  ami            = "ami-830c94e3"
  instance_type = "t2.micro"
  tags = {
    Name = "ExampleAppServerInstance"
  }
}

Diff tools detect any divergence caused by configuration made directly in a
Kubernetes cluster, for example, and notify the team. They can identify and
reconcile the state. If a security breach does occur, IaC’s immutable nature
makes it easier and more reliable to fix the vulnerability. We can build a
new environment from scratch, independent of the compromised one. With
a shorter downtime, much faster incident response, and a complete set of
artifacts to audit in a post-mortem.
The books Infrastructure as Code, by Kief Morris (O’Reilly, 2020) and
Cloud-Native Infrastructure, by Justin Garrison and Kris Nova (O’Reilly,
2017) are seminal pieces that I can strongly recommend.

Security as Code
These efforts to automate the software development and delivery pipeline
gave rise to a new possibility: security as code. Here, the same declarative
approach is used. Users describe what kind of infrastructure policies they
want, and the tools behind the automation figure out how to prevent access
to resources such as cloud instances provision or how to enforce cost
policies. With security as code, we can improve compliance, make efficient
deployments, and have fine-grained control over the infrastructure.


  A note on fine-grained control: InfoSec professionals can be tempted to
  be gatekeepers again once they learn how to create tighter controls in
  DevOps methodologies and tools. Remember that DevSecOps is more
  than safeguarding technology! It is a cultural change whose ultimate
  goal is to have development, security, and operations teams working
  together to create business value through the fast delivery of secure
  software. Do not spoil the party!

The sizeable cloud bill due that almost every CIO has received once their
life could be avoided through a policy to find and terminate unused
resources or to control costs based on pricing, as shown below:
$ cat limit-proposed-monthly-cost.sentinel
# This policy uses the Sentinel tfrun import to restrict the
# proposed monthly cost that would be incurred if the current
# plan were applied
# Import common-functions/tfrun-functions/tfrun-functions.sentinel
# with alias "run"
import "tfrun-functions" as run
# The standard decimal import
import "decimal"
# Monthly Limit
limit = decimal.new(1000)
# Call the validation function
# Warnings will be printed for violations
cost_validated = run.limit_proposed_monthly_cost(limit)
# Main rule
main = rule {
  cost_validated
}

Examples of security as code or policy as code tools include the Open
Policy Agent (OPA), Aqua’s Apolicy, and HashiCorp’s Sentinel. Cloud
providers also offer their way to create policies, but one of the shortcomings
of using these GUIs is vendor lock-in. As your application and
infrastructure resources are agnostic, so should be your security as code
tooling.
I’ll show you how to implement security as code in Chapter X.


Continuous Integration and Continuous
Deployment (CI/CD)
As mentioned before, to achieve a continuous security strategy, Git will be
our centralized source of truth, both for application and infrastructure code.
Once new code is pushed into the repository, the CI/CD pipeline
automatically reacts, initiating a series of pre-configured tasks or actions.
Continuous integration is when software developers merge their code
changes, often into a central code repository. After the merge happens,
automated builds are tested and run to ensure the code changes are valid.
The GitHub workflow below installs Python dependencies, run tests in a
Ubuntu container, and lint the application with a variety of Python versions:
$ cat pythonapp-build.yml
name: Python package
on:
  push:
    branches: [ main ]
  pull_request:
    branches: [ main ]
jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    strategy:
      fail-fast: false
      matrix:
        python-version: [3.7, 3.8, 3.9]
    steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v2
    - name: Set up Python ${{ matrix.python-version }}
      uses: actions/setup-python@v2
      with:
        python-version: ${{ matrix.python-version }}
    - name: Install dependencies
      run: |
        python -m pip install --upgrade pip
        python -m pip install flake8 pytest
        if [ -f requirements.txt ]; then pip install -r
requirements.txt; fi
    - name: Lint with flake8
      run: |
    flake8 . --count --select=E9,F63,F7,F82 --show-source --
statistics
    - name: Test with pytest
      run: |
        pytest

Continuous delivery describes a similar process where code changes are
released to the develop environment, using automation to prepare the code
for release. If the CD pipeline is successful, a pull request is created and the
code is then deployed into production.
The code example below shows a GitHub action created to run a Snyk
vulnerability scanner upon a Docker image. We will learn more about this
in Chapter 5.
$ cat snyk-action.yaml
name: Example workflow for Docker using Snyk
on: push
jobs:
  security:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
    - name: Run Snyk to check Docker image for vulnerabilities
      uses: snyk/actions/docker@master
      env:
         SNYK_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.SNYK_TOKEN }}
      with:
         image: your/image-to-test
Using the CI/CD pipeline, we’ll create security tests to be performed every
time new code is committed into the repository. These tests can happen at
different stages of our development: when someone pushes new code into a
feature branch or when a merge to the main branch is requested, for
example.
I’ll discuss some of the industry-standard practices, but when to add tests
into your pipeline is an important engineer decision to make with your
Quality Assurance (QA) team, to certify that your CI/CD pipeline is
streamlined with minimal delays. You’ll take into consideration variables
such as application architecture (monolith or microservices), source code
size, number of developers involved, and product maturity.
Keep in mind, however, that we want to “shift left” security as soon as
possible, giving the fast feedback that your DevOps team needs.


                                            TIP
     The Infrastructure & Ops Superstream Series: CI/CD will help you understand how
     CI/CD works.




Observability
As mentioned in Chapter 2, InfoSec has an especial relationship with
security monitoring tools. Triggers are set up inside these softwares to alert
the security staff when an event occurs or when a certain threshold is
reached. When they represent a valid security threat, the team works to
identify the incident root cause and remediate it.
Nevertheless, traditional security monitoring tools take a large amount of
time to set up, hunt down and solve incidents. The problem is magnified by
the amount of monitoring data provided by layers upon layers of network,
virtualization, containerization, making it difficult for security teams to
suitably visualize their environment, identify threats and fix vulnerabilities
in a reasonable amount of time.
The principle behind observability tools is to provide us with more than
individual metrics, but intelligence: visibility of the whole stack security
state, with a correlation of facts and remediation measures. We want to
enable our team to hunt a moment in time and have all the related data
points explored, as demonstrated by the figure below:




Extensibility
To keep our software supply chain pipeline stream we can integrate security
observability into the development workflow, with a minimum of fuss.
Some security solutions provide extensibility through APIs and monitoring
is established with the application deployment itself, saving configuration
time and promoting safer environments.
The code below demonstrates part of a configuration to monitor container
security, using Prometheus.
$ cat prometheus-container-monitoring.yaml
global:
  scrape_interval: 15s
  scrape_configs:
    - job_name: "prometheus"
      Static_configs:

         - targets: ["localhost:9090"]
         - targets: ["localhost:9532"]



                                           TIP
    The book Observability Engineering, by Charity Majors, Liz Fong-Jones, George
    Miranda (O’Reilly, 2022) explains what constitutes good observability, shows you how
    to make improvements from what you’re doing today, and provides practical dos and
    don’ts.



We will deep dive into security observability and extensibility in Chapter X.


Summary
In this chapter, we explored the core methodologies that support DevOps
practices: version control systems (VCS) and its most famous
implementation, Git, infrastructure as code and its extension, security as
code. Finally, we discussed observability and how extensibility through
code and APIs promotes safer environments.
In the next chapter, the book adopts a more hands-on approach, bringing
these methodologies together to show how to include code security into our
software development and delivery pipeline.
                                         TIP
Cloud providers such as AWS and Google Cloud offer a whole range of fully managed
services, from version control systems to CI/CD pipelines, including security as code
products and observability tools. Check out this blog post to have a preview of how you
could build an end-to-end DevSecOps CI/CD pipeline using AWS products.
Chapter 4. Code Security

           A NOTE FOR EARLY RELEASE READERS
  With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
  author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
  advantage of these technologies long before the official release. If there
  is a GitHub repo associated with the book, it will be made active after
  final publication. If you have comments about how we might improve
  the content and/or examples in this book, or if you notice missing or
  inaccurate material within this chapter, please reach out to the editor at
  ccollins@oreilly.com.

To support application delivery at DevOps speed, security checks need to be
continuous, automated, and baked into the CI/CD so developers can get and
act on notifications as earlier as possible. With at least 80% of attacks now
being leveraged at the application layer, continuous security becomes a
strategic effort to find and remediate issues in unsafe code. For Eugene
Dzihanau, senior director of security at EPAM Systems “attackers try to
find the path of least resistance, and currently, the application security
vector allows for efficient attacks with minimal cost”.
Most of these security vulnerabilities are introduced by simple
programming mistakes, typically caused by understaffed development
teams, too busy to double-check their code. The automated security check
can identify These errors early in the process before the unsecured code is
even pushed into the repository. And the more bugs the automated
processes can find, the more time experts have to use their knowledge to
focus on more complex attack vectors and ensure in-depth application
security testing.
DevSecOps teams can enforce upfront manual code review, a common
process for many agile and open-source projects. When peer code reviews
become part of the engineering culture, you can take advantage and include
checking for potentially dangerous coding. As a backstop, security scanners
are integrated into the CI/CD pipeline to automatically find security flaws,
vulnerabilities, and coding bad practices.
There are different points in your software development and delivery
pipeline where you can add these code reviews: before code is pushed into
feature branches before commits get merged into the main branch and
before code changes are deployed.


Secure Software Development Lifecycle (S-
SDL)
Before we deep dive into automated security reviews, keep in mind that
they can empower developers and scale up vulnerability detection, but code
security must be viewed as more than an automation challenge. A
complementary approach to DevSecOps is the S-SDL, a collection of best
practices focused on adding security to the standard SDLC, from its design
to deployment. You can find a large body of literature dedicated to
application security, but at the bare minimum, make sure your development
team has learned about secure coding principles described in the OWASP
Secure Coding Guidelines:

      1. Input validation
      2. Output encoding
      3. Authentication and password management
      4. Session management
      5. Access control
      6. Cryptographic practices
      7. Error handling and logging
      8. Data protection
      9. Communication security
     10. System configuration
     11. Database security
     12. File management
     13. Memory management
     14. General coding practices

The Carnegie Mellon University’s Software Engineering Institute (SEI)
Secure Coding Standards and Mozilla’s Secure Coding Guidelines are also
seminal references.

Software Developer Kit (SDK) or DevKits
One of the practices of S-SDLC that I like to lay emphasis on is DevKits
since they are cheap, effective, and the fastest way to start your continuous
security process. Organizations make software development kits (SDK) or
DevKits available to help developers easily create their development
environments. DevKits are collections of software development tools and
programs provided in one installable package. You can leverage these kits
to help developers easily integrate security into their daily lives. For
example, if your organization uses a default IDE and language, it’s easy to
look out for security extensions to bundle them together, instructing
developers to use from their first day working in the company.
DevKits can also include documentation, code samples, and safe libraries
that developers can use to check and build and maintain applications
without security flaws. Lintian extensions to go inside the IDE is a simple
but effective way to prevent coding mistakes that can lead to security flaws.
Figure 4-1 shows the plugin SonarLint inside the Intellij IDE:
Figure 4-1. Lintian tools help developers to find programming language violations and improve their
                                                 code.


Manual Security Reviews
Second, asking team members to review each other’s code is probably the
most effective approach for DevSecOps environments. You can enforce
code reviews before merge requests and define how many users should
approve it before the code can be accepted, as shown in Figure 4-2:
Figure 4-2. Each repository can have its own merge requests policies, and be configured to a certain
    level of enforced review, according to the risks associated with the application in question.

This kind of review can be done often, in small bites, without adding
significant delays or costs and can incorporate security checking, as
required by compliance policies established in regulations such as the PCI
DSS, HIPPA, central bank regulations, and other auditing frameworks.
Some organizations create dedicated Application Security Teams and
instruct developers to ask for their assistance with security scans or
comments. While these domain experts can have a deeper understanding of
secure coding practices and be a starting strategy for an emerging program,
the central point behind DevSecOps is to spread the security skills
necessary to create an application that is resistant to compromise across the
workforce.
Thus, I particularly prefer security champions programs. This practice
enlists security-minded employees of all different disciplines from across
the company for security training and guidance. Once trained, these security
champions become the voice for safer methods within their various teams.
While senior-level employees make great security champions, it’s essential
that junior and mid-level professionals are also invited to join these
programs. By teaching newbies, tech leaders can advance the sense of
transparency and shared responsibility while those just starting out
encourage other newcomers to think differently, creating the DevSecOps
culture we aim for.


                                               TIP
     In this talk, Simon Maple, field CTO at Snyk, examines how organizations can build an
     effective security champions program to scale security skills.



Another interesting practice is to formulate code review guidelines, to
advise developers and managers on the expected manner to include security
checks along with code reviews. The GitLab Code Review Guideline is an
excellent baseline, including guidance on the language to be used (ask
questions; don’t make demands, for example) and the reviewer roulette
idea, that randomly picks a reviewer and a maintainer to make the peer
review. For security guidelines, check the OWASP Code Review Guide. Its
topics include risk-based intelligence to security code reviews, through
threat modeling.


Automated Security Tests
Automated security tests leverage the fact that it’s fast and scales well to
numerous applications. If you are starting your continuous security process,
my recommendation is to perform an application bootcamp, running the
tests described below, to establish a common security roadmap for your
team. Try to eliminate as many as possible of the simpler vulnerabilities to
create a sense of victory within the team. Then, progressively customize the
automated tests for each application and increase their frequency of
execution to detect more bugs and regressions earlier, as close as possible to
their inception.
If you are interested in learning more about continuous security but do not
have an application at hand to test, the OWASP Benchmark is a fully
runnable open source web application, written in Java Maven that contains
thousands of exploitable test cases, which can be analyzed by any type of
Application Security Testing (AST) tool, including SAST, dependency
scanners, DAST and so on. While it does not include all vulnerabilities
types from the OWASP Top 10, the intent is that all the vulnerabilities
deliberately included in and scored by the Benchmark are actually
exploitable.
Enterprises can also benefit from the OWASP Benchmark as a decision
tool. You can run your selected security tool against the OWASP
Benchmark source code and check if it discovers and properly diagnoses
the same results reported in the BenchmarkScore tool.

Static Application Security Test (SAST)
Static Application Security Testing (SAST) tools, also known as source
code analysis tools, are designed to scan source code or compiled binaries,
detecting vulnerabilities, from the inside. Its biggest advantage is speed: a
lightweight tool that can run within the developer’s IDE, shifting left to the
earliest point of the feedback cycle, at the beginning of the CI pipeline,
before a code commit, and also along with all the other phases, performing
different types of analysis.
Figure 4-3 shows a SAST scanner output example, inside the Visual Code
IDE, which usually identifies the source file and line containing the security
flaw, along with its category such as cross-site scripting, weak encryption,
and so on:
  Figure 4-3. The Snyk vulnerability scanner suggests multiple examples of fixes, found in similar
                                             projects.

Despite its considerable benefits, SAST presents weaknesses such as a high
number of false positives, which can be overlooked if not properly address.
These tools also can not find misconfiguration issues, which consolidates
the need to combine the multiple tests described here into our CI/CD
pipelines.
As mentioned before, my preferred strategy is to conduct an application
security bootcamp at the beginning of each project, to address the most
critical vulnerabilities and then fix each new issue as it appears, during
small chunks of code reviews.
Finally, SAST is a language-dependent tool. While you can find plenty of
options for languages such as Java and C#, more niche programming
languages like Nim and ReScript have limited options. OWASP and NIST
maintain indexes of SAST analyzers, classified along with the language
supported and the license under which the software is available. OWASP
also gathered a second list containing only commercial automated
vulnerability detection tools that are free for open source projects, to
encourage the improvement of code security and quality. In this GitHub
repository, the community compiles a catalog of SAST tools. As usual, be
careful with software provenance as it can be leveraged for unauthorized
access into your environment.

Secret Detection
A common but unsafe application development practice is the unintentional
commit of secrets and credentials such as encryption keys, API tokens, and
other sensitive data like U.S social security numbers, to remote repositories.
If third parties have access to the source, or if the project is public, the
sensitive information is then exposed and can be leveraged by malicious
users to gain access to resources.
The industry of tools to detect hardcoded secrets is nascent and we are
witnessing the surface of effective software, that can prevent secrets from
being committed or monitoring public and private repositories to detect
secrets. Mature solutions can check for more than 200 types of secrets and
include filenames such as id_rsa, .env, filetypes like .key, .cert, and so on.
While the Solarwinds attack, mentioned in Chapter 3, can demonstrate the
full potential and the damage extension of a secret leakage, authors have
shown the prevalence of secret exposure on platforms such as GitHub on a
daily basis, demonstrating the importance of secrets management.
GitGuardian, the company behind one of the leading secret detection
solutions, has been scanning every single public commit made on GitHub
for secrets since 2017 and disclosed more than two million corporate
secrets, as demonstrated in the 2021 State of Secrets Sprawl.
The solution is free for public repositories and you can add a new job to
your GitHub workflow using the GitGuardian/gg-shield-action:
name: GitGuardian scan
on: [push, pull_request]
jobs:
  scanning:
    name: GitGuardian scan
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: Checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v2
        with:
           fetch-depth: 0 # fetch all history so multiple commits
can be scanned
      - name: GitGuardian scan
        uses: GitGuardian/gg-shield-action@master
        env:
           GITHUB_PUSH_BEFORE_SHA: ${{ github.event.before }}
           GITHUB_PUSH_BASE_SHA: ${{ github.event.base }}
           GITHUB_PULL_BASE_SHA: ${{
github.event.pull_request.base.sha }}
           GITHUB_DEFAULT_BRANCH: ${{
github.event.repository.default_branch }}
           GITGUARDIAN_API_KEY: ${{ secrets.GITGUARDIAN_API_KEY }}

Figure 4-4 demonstrates an example of GitGuardian scan:
             Figure 4-4. GitGuardian scan alerts that three secrets were found.

Alternative tools such as Git-Secrets, Gitleaks, and Spectral can be added as
a pre-commit job in your CI/CD pipeline but can also scan directories or
config files.
Some tools such as Yelp’s Detect Secrets, allow you to create a separation
of concern: accepting that there may currently be secrets hiding in your
repository, that will be your baseline of secrets, but preventing this issue
from getting any larger, without dealing with the potentially massive effort
of removing existing secrets. It does this by running periodic diff outputs
against heuristically crafted regex statements, to identify whether any new
secret has been committed. This feature should be used with caution,
considering the latent risks involved.

Dependency Scanning
Open-source components can scale up development, enabling teams to
deliver value more rapidly and frequently. Yet, they also bring in security
flaws that can lead to significant business and financial losses if not
addressed properly. The CVE-2017-5638 vulnerability, in a very popular
open-source Java library named Apache Struts, was known since February
14, 2017. A fix was released three weeks after that by Apache and the
following day, exploits started to circulate on the Internet. Weeks later
hundreds of millions of customer records from the credit reporting agency
Equifax were exfiltrated, a breach enabled by a widely known vulnerability
that could be patched. The company WhiteSource estimates that as many as
97% of all open source vulnerabilities have a fix, so developers simply need
to patch or download the latest version.


                                             TIP
    You can learn more about the Equifax data breach in this article by Josh Fruhlinger,
    which details the attack’s causes, timeline, and financial impacts. Here, John Oliver,
    from the Last Week Tonight discusses the company’s attempts to mitigate the damage.



To prevent such scenarios, dependency scanning, also referred as software
composition analysis (SCA) tools, track, analyze and identify publicly
disclosed vulnerabilities within your application’s open-source components.
Like SAST, SCA tools also address vulnerabilities management but cover
different sets of vulnerabilities. It does this by determining if there is a
Common Platform Enumeration (CPE) identifier for a given dependency
which, if found, will be linked to an associated CVE entry.
While many SAST providers offer SCA solutions, they are not as
comprehensive and effective as a dedicated SCA solution is. SCA tools can
also detect software licenses, deprecated dependencies, as well as
vulnerabilities, and potential exploits. The scanning process generates a bill
of materials (BOM), providing a complete inventory of a project’s software
assets.
SCA tools can be integrated within IDEs, CI/CD pipelines, and also in post-
deployment recurring checks, for vulnerabilities discovered years after
release. Sonatype, Black Duck, and Snyk (demonstrated in Figure 4-5) are
acclaimed software composition analysis tools. For open-source
alternatives, check the OWASP Dependency-Check tool.
  Figure 4-5. The Snyk SCA solution flags a recently disclosed vulnerability in a dependency and
                                suggests a remediation strategy.


Dynamic Application Security Test (DAST)
DAST, also known as web application vulnerability scanners, are automated
tools that scan web applications from the outside, in deployed
environments. As such, these tools do not require code visibility and you
can test even applications developed using the most niche programming
languages. In a sense, they are in the opposite spectrum of SAST tools, with
these applied in the early stages of the CI pipeline and DAST testing
running in a stage or testing environment, before the official release of new
versions.
DAST can perform two types of analysis:

          Passive scan: in its default behavior, DAST tools execute the
          baseline scan and don’t actively attack the application.
          Passive and active scan: DAST can be set up to execute an active
          scan to attack your application and provide a more comprehensive
          security report.
DAST offers the benefit of being language agnostic and also fewer false
positives since it tests your running application so there is a higher
possibility that the number of vulnerabilities found to be real. Yet, they have
a slower testing process due to the elevated number of input permutations
tried, in an attempt to brute force signup credentials, for example.
It’s a recommended practice to run DAST tools on test or staging
environments as the scanner can slow down your application performance
and impact your business performance. On feature branches, DAST scans
the review app, a temporary application environment based on the branch’s
code so developers, designers, QA, product managers, and other reviewers
can actually see and interact with code changes as part of the review
process. The app gains a unique URL and is deleted after DAST has run.
From my experience, once you are performing all the other automated
security tests, from IDE-integrated security checks, enforced safe code
reviews to SAST, the number of vulnerabilities issues will dramatically
reduce so, in time, you can execute DAST checks on a biweekly basis or
upon the imminence of major releases.
The DAST industry is quite mature and there is a large number of tools
available. The OWASP project brought together a list of both commercial
and open-source options and you can use the OWASP Benchmark to assess
the scanner’s accuracy. The OWASP Zed Attack Proxy is the most used
open-source alternative and you can easily set up a job on your pipeline.
Check the following example use to add a passive scan as a GitHub action,
remembering to substitute the target URL to your test environment:
steps:
  - name: ZAP Scan
    uses: zaproxy/action-baseline@v0.4.0
    with:
       target: 'https://www.zaproxy.org'

To add a passive and active scan, including attempts to attack your review
app, use:
on: [push]
jobs:
  zap_scan:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    name: Scan the webapplication
    steps:
      - name: Checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v2
        with:
           ref: master
      - name: ZAP Scan
        uses: zaproxy/action-baseline@v0.4.0
        with:
           token: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
           docker_name: 'owasp/zap2docker-stable'
           target: 'https://www.zaproxy.org'
           rules_file_name: '.zap/rules.tsv'
           cmd_options: '-a'
Figure 4-6 shows the report created by the GitHub Action after a scan,
notifying the users via an opened issue in the code repository, allowing the
team to add comments and follow up actions to fix the security flaw:




     Figure 4-6. A GitHub action bot automatically opens an issue with the ZAP scan report


Web API Fuzz Testing
Application programming interfaces (APIs) are the hear of today’s
innovation, used from banks and fintech companies to transportation and
governmental institutions, exposing sensitive information. APIs are a
critical part of modern environments that are progressively becoming
opening paths to vulnerabilities, leading Gartner to predict that APIs will
soon surpass web applications and will become the most frequent target
point of attack within organizations.
Reactive security testing and firewalls are especially insufficient and
inefficient approaches to safeguard them, lacking the API’s implementation
context.
To discover bugs and potential security vulnerabilities in web API, fuzz
testings baked into the pipeline sets operation parameters to unpredicted
values, in an attempt to promote unexpected behavior and security flaws in
the API backend. As the fuzz testing can perform modifying actions such as
changing and deleting data, it should never run in a production
environment, but only in a test server.
Likewise, the API under analysis must be excluded from changes beyond
those made from the fuzzing scanner, for the duration of the test, as any
modifications made can cause imprecise reports. A pipeline properly
configured makes the deployment of new environments effortless, and it
must be easy to set up a new server to run the API fuzz testing. You can
create a new stage in your pipeline configuration file, called fuzz, to run
after the test or staging phases.
Web API fuzzing scanner differs according to the API types in execution
(REST API, SOAP, GraphQL, and so on). For example, Microsoft RESTler
is a stateful REST API fuzzing tool, checking for a specific class of
reliability bugs, an intelligence that allows the tool to explore service states
reachable only through specific request sequences.
The open-source SoapUI framework offers integration with CI/CD
pipelines and performs a wide range of security testing besides fuzzing
scan, including boundary-scan: the tool sends data at the boundary of
allowed values or in direct opposition, seeking to cause erratic behavior or
the display of sensitive data.


Summary
In this chapter we deep dive into the automated security tests that can be
incorporated inside the CI/CD pipeline to scale up vulnerabilities detection,
to create the process of continuous security. Such tools must be viewed as
complementary efforts to secure software development life cycle (S-SDLC)
practices, that emphasize security by design and secure coding skills.
Chapter 5. Container Security

           A NOTE FOR EARLY RELEASE READERS
  With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
  author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
  advantage of these technologies long before the official release. If there
  is a GitHub repo associated with the book, it will be made active after
  final publication. If you have comments about how we might improve
  the content and/or examples in this book, or if you notice missing or
  inaccurate material within this chapter, please reach out to the editor at
  ccollins@oreilly.com.

Application containers are immutable mechanisms that enable us to
separate our applications from our infrastructure so we can build them once
and deploy them anywhere. They allow us to multiply and scale out
quickly, or move our systems as needed, as many times as necessary.
A container creates a layer with your application and all the dependencies
needed to run as a stand-alone object. Different from system container
environments, where you run an entire Linux operating system, in an
application container you are encouraged to build them with as little code as
is necessary to run the application.
They are defined through code and you can manage your infrastructure in
an automated way, inside of a CI/CD pipeline. By default, a container is
relatively well isolated from other containers and its host machine but
misconfigurations and the use of vulnerable components can lead to
security threats to your environments.
If you are new to application containers, the Docker toolset is the easiest to
give your first steps, but keep in mind that there is a whole set of container
tools out there and Docker is just one of them. Once you learn the security
principles below, you can replicate them in other engines such as Podman,
which distinguishes itself because of its isolation and user privilege
features.


                                            TIP
    Check out Peter McKee’s talk on how to get started with Docker, if you are new to the
    container world. Then, you can get a detailed overview of the technology from the
    Docker official documentation.



Containers can run as standalone or be managed under a cluster orchestrator
such as Kubernetes, Rancher, Nomad, OpenShift, among others. The cluster
provides tools for scaling, networking, securing, and maintaining your
containerized applications, automating the process of running workloads in
different machines, in multiple zones, for example.


                                            TIP
    If the container ecosystem confuses you as it does to many of us, in this article, Tom
    Donohue explains the difference between Docker, the container runtime interface (CRI)
    and the Open Container Initiative (OCI).



This chapter covers security best practices for the development and
distribution phase of our CI/CD pipelines, covering threats to the container
image itself and the software inside of it as well as the container image
storage concerns.
During deployment, we’ll be concerned with the container networking and
storage and them, during runtime, we’ll look into the interaction between
containers, the orchestrator, the host operating system, and other containers
on the same host.


5.1 Container Image
A container image is a template with instructions to create a runnable
container. Within it, you’ll find multiple layers of files and components that
will encapsulate and execute an application in isolation from the host’s
operational system. As a container is defined by its image as well as
configuration options, the vulnerabilities found in each layer can bring
security risks.

Container image provenance
As people get into the world of containers, It’s tempting to source images
on the Internet, especially on DockerHub or GitHub. They usually have the
components your application needs and a simple “docker pull
image-latest” can save hours of product development. Yet, public
containers may contain outdated components or configuration mistakes that
could lead to a breach.
On Docker Hub, you can refine your search results to show only official
images or images maintained by verified publishers, a seal of approval
provided to entities that follow a set of good practices defined by the
company Docker Inc. However, your organization may have stronger
security requirements and, in this case, not even official images might be
the best fit.


                                                TIP
     The concept of provenance comes from museums and the art trade. These industries
     often need to establish the authorship, the authenticity as well as legal validity of a chain
     of custody of an object. Digital artifacts provenance has gained interest in the security
     community particularly to build innovative intrusion detection techniques to counter
     Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs). These types of attacks are complex to detect due to
     their “low-and-slow” patterns and the recurrent use of zero-day exploits.




Container Image Vulnerability Scanner
Once you have found an image from a trusted source, the next step is to
identify if it has known security flaws. Vulnerability scanners analyze the
contents of a container and compare them against Common Vulnerabilities
and Exposures (CVE) databases and good practices, such as the Docker
Benchmark established by the Center for Internet Security (CIS).
Many companies establish their own software developer kits (SDKs),
including a container vulnerability scanner, making it easier for the team to
scan container images built in their desktops, giving them the chance to fix
them before they push to a source code repository. Many SaaS private
container registries also already have a security scanner integrated into their
offer and you can also set up this tool into your own registry, as we’ll see
later in this chapter.
There are a number of container image vulnerability scanners, both open-
source and commercially available. From May 2020, Docker Inc. partnered
with Snyk to offer native vulnerability detection for images. To scan an
image, you can use its name or ID:
$ docker scan myimage
Testing myimage...
Organization:      docker-desktop-test
Package manager:   deb
Project name:      docker-image|myimage
Docker image:      myimage
Licenses:          enabled
✓ Tested 92 dependencies for known issues, found 63 issues.

Sometimes an image is based on another image, with some additional
customization. This is defined in a Dockerfile, a text document with all
instructions to assemble an image. The variable FROM points that this image
is based on the golang parent image:
$ cat Dockerfile
FROM golang
COPY /src/myapp /myapp
RUN go myapp

Add the tag --file to inform the path to a Dockerfile. You’ll get a
detailed scan report and remediation guidelines such as alternative parent
images with lower levels of vulnerabilities. If you trust the underlying
image from which your container was constructed, you can use the flag --
exclude-base to instruct the scanner to ignore vulnerabilities in this
layer. The tag --severity only reports vulnerabilities of a determined
level or higher (from the options low, medium, or high):
$ docker scan debian --file=./Dockerfile --severity-threshold=high
Testing debian...
â High severity vulnerability found in systemd/libsystemd0
  Description: Privilege Chaining
  Info: https://snyk.io/vuln/SNYK-DEBIAN10-SYSTEMD-345386
  Introduced through: systemd/libsystemd0@241-7~deb10u8, util-
linux/bsdutils@1:2.33.1-0.1, apt@1.8.2.3, util-linux/mount@2.33.1-
0.1, systemd/libudev1@241-7~deb10u8
  From: systemd/libsystemd0@241-7~deb10u8
  From: util-linux/bsdutils@1:2.33.1-0.1 > systemd/libsystemd0@241-
7~deb10u8
  From: apt@1.8.2.3 > apt/libapt-pkg5.0@1.8.2.3 >
systemd/libsystemd0@241-7~deb10u8
  and 4 more...
  Image layer: Introduced by your base image (scratch)

…
Tested 92 dependencies for known issues, found 9 issues

To see all the flags supported, run the command docker scan --options.


                                             TIP
    If you want to download the Dockerfile of an image previously pulled from Docker
    Hub, go to the website and search for the image name. On the image page, locate the
    supported tags and respective Dockerfile links. I strongly recommend you to check the
    Dockerfile if you decide to use a public image, searching for security misconfigurations.
    Nonetheless, the maintainer may have decided not to share, which can be a red flag.



Two scanners using different databases can produce different results, so it’s
a good idea to include multiple options in your pipeline. Trivy, powered by
Aqua Security, can execute static analysis of vulnerabilities not only in
container images but also in other artifacts such as filesystems and git
repositories. Let’s walk through the installation steps in a Debian host:
$ sudo apt-get install wget apt-transport-https gnupg lsb-release
$ wget -qO - https://aquasecurity.github.io/trivy-
repo/deb/public.key | sudo apt-key add -
$ echo deb https://aquasecurity.github.io/trivy-repo/deb
$(lsb_release -sc) main | sudo tee -a
/etc/apt/sources.list.d/trivy.list
$ sudo apt-get update
$ sudo apt-get install trivy

Now, let’s scan an Nginx container image. If the docker-cli does not find
the image locally, Trivy will automatically search and scan it in the remote
Docker repository.
$ trivy image --severity=HIGH nginx
2021-08-02T16:37:09.924-0300    INFO         Detected OS: debian
2021-08-02T16:37:09.924-0300    INFO         Detecting Debian
vulnerabilities...
2021-08-02T16:37:09.939-0300    INFO         Number of PL dependency
files: 1
nginx (debian 10.10)
====================
Total: 26 (HIGH: 26)
...

The first scan will finish within seconds and, in this case, reported 162
vulnerabilities, from which 2 were critical and 16 medium. The full report
also lists the CVE attributed to the vulnerability and a brief description,
with a link for more information, as shown in the example below:
LIBRARY         VULNERABILITY SEVERITY          INSTALLED VER FIXED VERS
                ID                              SION
gcc-8-base      CVE-2018-1288 HIGH              8.3.0-6
                6




libc6           CVE-2020-1751                   2.28-10




Alternatives to container scanners include Clair, which supports Docker and
other Open Container Initiative (OCI) image formats, and the Docker
Bench for Security, a script based on the above mentioned CIS Docker
Benchmark. As your project complexity increases, giving the use of many
open source tools and libraries, you can benefit from Grype. This scan
works along with Syft, a CLI tool to build a detailed software bill of
materials (SBOM) of your project and can be used to track and disclose
unknown dependencies.
We can introduce container image scanning tools in multiple points of your
CI/CD pipeline, depending on when you need to access the vulnerability
results. To shift left security as close as possible to your developers,
consider incorporating scanning steps, using different tools, immediately
after application code is committed to a feature branch and a new container
image is built in your pipeline. You may add a new step before deployment,
to act as a second layer of defense.
Let’s see how to use Grype inside of a GitHub Action:
      1. Go to GitHub, create a new repository and then commit a simple
         Dockerfile, with just one line: FROM debian-slim;

           Now, click in the tab Actions and create a new workflow,
           with the following content:
           name: Grype
           on: push
           jobs:
               grype:
                   runs-on: ubuntu-latest
                   steps:
                   - uses: actions/checkout@v2
                   - name: Build a Docker image
                    run: docker build -t myimage .
                   - name: Scan image
                    uses: anchore/scan-action@v2
                    with:
                      image: "myimage"


      2. Commit it with the name grype.yaml and look for the new
         workflow called Grype. When you click upon it, you will see the
         job details and the results of each step, as shown in Figure 5-4.1:
 Figure 5-1. The steps of a GitHub Action, created to check for vulnerabilities in container images,
                                         right after build.

We can optimize this action, configuring it to break the pipeline if the
scanner locates a vulnerability higher than medium, for example.


                                               TIP
     Now that you know how to scan container images for vulnerabilities, run some of them
     over a container image based on Debian and on another based on Alpine. You’ll see that
     the second usually report fewer vulnerabilities. Is it because Debian is more insecure or
     because it has a larger attack surface?




Minimal or Slim images
Some images are simpler to use as they come with a reasonable amount of
pre-installed packages and operating system libraries. But they also add a
long list of vulnerabilities to track down as we saw above. To reduce your
security risk, go a step further and choose a minimal or slim image.
At the time of writing, the latest Nginx’s official image is constructed upon
a Debian Linux container, in its buster-slim version.
FROM debian:buster-slim

This means that any runnable Nginx container-based in this image has also
the common tools available in a Debian distribution such as the apt package
manager and some shells. Use the following command to pull the image
and open an interactive shell inside of it:
$ docker run -it nginx /bin/sh
Unable to find image 'nginx:latest' locally
latest: Pulling from library/nginx
...

Once inside the container, check if the apt package is installed:
# apt
apt 1.8.2.3 (amd64)
Usage: apt [options] command
...

To use lightweight images based on Alpine Linux is a very common
technique amongst the developers that also improve build time and loading
performance. Most of the official images available on Docker Hub also
offer a version based on Alpine. Add the tag to your docker pull command:
$ docker pull nginx:alpine
alpine: Pulling from library/nginx
...

Now let’s list the two Nginx container images and compare the size of the
one based in Debian against the Alpine one:
$ docker image ls -a | grep nginx
REPOSITORY              TAG                   IMAGE ID
CREATED SIZE
nginx                   latest                08b152afcfae               3
days ago        133MB
nginx                   alpine           b9e2356ea1be                    2
weeks ago       22.8MB
Even though we reduced the amount of pre-installed packages and
operating system libraries, there is always a risk of open vulnerabilities
caused by libraries underneath. From a security perspective and to keep the
immutability of your runner container, once you have installed the
packages, you do not want someone else installing new things and Alpine
Linux-based images still have apk and shells, for example. They are
required for the build stage but are not necessary for the application to run.
Google solved this problem by introducing distroless images.

Distroless base images
Google and other tech giants restrict the content of their runtime container
to what’s really necessary. In distroless base images you’ll not find the
programs expected in a standard Linux distribution such as package
managers nor even interactive shells. Without a shell, you can execute your
application conventionally, but you can not attach to the container while it
is running. That is a significant security improvement, as you have now
closed the most obvious door for attackers to gain entry within your
container, if they find a door on your source code, for example.
$ docker pull gcr.io/distroless/base-debian10
Using default tag: latest
latest: Pulling from distroless/base-debian10
0d7d70899875: Pull complete
e31777b27d40: Pull complete
Digest:
sha256:97f9cbf81590c7dd878d7e10c20116fa7488c2fb91b3c839df1ebdcb61ab
13ca
Status: Downloaded newer image for gcr.io/distroless/base-
debian10:latest
gcr.io/distroless/base-debian10:latest

When we try to open an interactive Bourne shell on a distroless image, the
container daemon returns the following error:
$ docker run -it gcr.io/distroless/base-debian10 /bin/sh
docker: Error response from daemon: OCI runtime create failed:
container_linux.go:349: starting container process caused "exec:
\"/bin/sh\": stat /bin/sh: no such file or directory": unknown.
ERRO[0000] error waiting for container: context cancelled
If we try to use /bin/bash, the system exhibits the same message. As
distroless images by default do not contain a shell, the Dockerfile
ENTRYPOINT command, when defined, must be specified in vector form,
to avoid the container runtime prefixing with a shell:
ENTRYPOINT ["myapp"]



                                               TIP
     To know more about distroless images, watch this talk from Matthew Moore where he
     explains how distroless containers work and how to build them.



All distroless images are signed by cosign and I recommend verifying them
before building your image. Install cosign and use the distroless public key
to verify distroless image with the following command inside of your
pipeline:
cosign verify -key cosign.pub $IMAGE_NAME


Scratch Containers
If your security policies require, prefer to create your organization’s parent
images. Docker offers an empty image called scratch as a starting point for
building containers. You’ll see later in this chapter that a well-written
Dockerfile can prevent an attack, so invest some time in learning how to do
it in the original documentation.
Note that, while you can refer to it in your Dockerfile, it is impossible to
pull or run the scratch image from DockerHub. As there are no files, the
only commands you can run are system calls, and your executables need to
be self-contained or statically compiled. Finally, without binaries, you’ll not
be able to attach to a scratch container unless you add one shell.


                                               TIP
     In this talk, Riz Rice demonstrates how to build a container from scratch.
Rootless Containers
Before the Docker engine v19.03, unless you explicitly specify, Docker
containers ran automatically under the user root. And as a container in
execution shares the same kernel with the host machine, a user with root
privileges inside a container is also a root user on the parent operational
system. Attackers could then exploit a vulnerability in a package, library, or
in your application to break the container isolation and gain access to other
services or resources.
Following the principle of least privilege, we can change the ownership of
the application files to an unprivileged user:
$ cat Dockerfile
FROM alpine
COPY ./src/myapp /app/
WORKDIR /app
RUN chown 1000:1000 /app
USER 1000
ENTRYPOINT /app/

Build it and then set the image to run the container under the same user ID:
$ docker build --tag my-image:latest .
$ docker run -ti --user 1000 my-image:latest /bin/sh
$ apk add curl
ERROR: Unable to lock database: Permission denied
ERROR: Failed to open apk database: Permission denied

In the last command, I tried to install the package curl within the running
container, unsuccessfully. Non-root container images add an extra layer of
security but can limit the work of developers, so they are recommended for
production environments.

Middle Layers
Whatever you decide to use as your base image, chances are you will need
to add your code and various tools and libraries to make things work. These
middle layers also need to be monitored for vulnerabilities and
configuration mistakes that may lead to breaches. Be aware of everything
that comes after the FROM variable, like the commands COPY, ADD, and
more specifically, RUN commands.
The following code is an extract of the Dockerfile of an official image. You
won’t consider giving full permission to everyone to write, read and execute
on a web server’s directory and this is a practice to strongly avoid, even if
you are using a container,
RUN set -eux;   \
        mkdir   myapp; \
        chown   -R www-data:www-data myapp; \
        chmod   -R 777 my-app


Multistage Buildings
It was a widespread practice to have one Dockerfile for development, which
contained everything needed to build your application, and another for
production. With multi-stage builds, you can create multiple stages and only
copy the result to your final production images.
Inside the Dockerfile, we can define multiple FROM statements, using
different bases, for example, and selectively copy the final artifacts from
one stage to another, leaving behind everything you don’t want in the final
product.
$ cat Dockerfile
# Builder stage
FROM golang as builder
WORKDIR /myapp
COPY src .
RUN go build .
# Final stage, copying artifacts from the builder stage
FROM gcr.io/distroless/base-debian10
COPY --from=builder /myapp/compiled_app /bin/compiled_app
ENTRYPOINT ["/bin/compiled_app"]


Prevent data leaks
Your Dockerfile will be available to everyone who has access to the
repository so avoid storing hardcoded passwords or API tokens inside of it.
Many developers resort to passing these variables during the build process
but a simple skopeo or docker history command can recover the
commands used to create the image, exposing your credentials.
Use secrets to store sensitive application data used by services. Depending
on your environment size and complexity and also security requirements,
consider using a secrets management software such as Vault or the AWS
Secrets Manager, that offers advanced features such as audit logs for every
interaction with a secret as well as replication policies. Figure 5-4.2
exemplifies a secret stored inside of the Google Cloud Secrets Manager:




Figure 5-2. With Google Cloud Secrets Manager you can manage permissions and audit access, for
                                          example.


Use a Dockerfile linter
A well-configured Dockerfile can keep a security threat away from your
environment. Tools such as hadolint, will validate if your Dockerfile
follows the recommendations of the Docker “Best practices for writing
Dockerfiles” guide. You can run it locally on your computer and add it as an
extension in your IDE, to lint your file as you write it.
$ docker run --rm -i hadolint/hadolint < Dockerfile



                                          WARNING
     Here you can find the hadolint extension for the Visual Studio (VS) Code. The
     extension uses the hadolint binary installed in the system. If the binary does not exist in
     $PATH, the extension will not work as expected.



Your organization can also integrate the linter parsing as a step inside a
CI/CD pipeline and configure it to check if the projects use only parent
images from your desired container registry (we’ll discuss container
registries in more detail later in this chapter):
$ hadolint --trusted-registry my-company.com:500 <Dockerfile>
# Warn when using untrusted FROM images


Protect your Dockerfile
As to any code that enters your CI/CD pipeline, reviewers must check for
changes in your container image’s Dockerfiles, and builds must be tested
before any changes are approved. If a vulnerability enters your pipeline, it
will be replicated to the entire software supply chain. A private container
registry can be used as an additional layer of protection.


5.2 Container Registry
When you execute docker pull <imagename>, the docker
command-line interface (CLI) looks for locally stored images. If it doesn’t
find it, it will download the official image from the widely known container
repository Docker Hub. The command is a shortcut for docker pull
docker.com/<imaginename>:latest. The URL
docker.com/<imagename> is the link for the image and latest is
the tag that identifies the version that you want to use.
A container registry is a repository or collection of repositories, used to
upload (push) and download (pull) container images and their different
tagged versions. Public registries are great for open source and commercial
publishers that want to distribute their product or for individuals and small
teams that want to get up and running as quickly as possible.
However, as teams grow, regulations and policies can arise, bringing greater
security issues like patching, privacy, and access control. Highly regulated
industries such as banking and governments may have air-gapped data
centers. Organizations then can decide to set up their own private container
registry, either remotely hosted or on-premises, to push images previously
approved by the security team and also store your own base images.


                                              TIP
     In this light walk, Haining Zhang, creator, and architect of Project Harbor, an open-
     source container registry walks us through what a container registry is and how it works.



Harbor and Project Quay are open-source alternatives and SaaS options
include Amazon Elastic Container Registry (ECR), Azure Container
Registry, Google Container Registry (GCR), and Red Hat Quay. The
company Docker Inc has commercial plans for private registries and,
finally, as mentioned in the previous chapter, GitLab and GitHub also
include a private registry in their offers.
Again, it is a strategic decision which choice to make, but remember to
include your private container registry in your list of assets to safeguard and
control access. Is the authentication mechanism compatible with your
organization’s requirements? Will every member of the team have access to
push images into the repositories or some may only pull images? Can you
fine-grain permission by project/repository? Another good practice is to
have multiple private registries, one for development and run the security
tests you may need and another for the production-ready images.

Registry Vulnerability Scan and Management
In a regular workflow, a commit to your VCS would trigger the build of a
new container image. If the build is successful and passed your
vulnerability scanning requirements, the image would then be pushed to
your registry. Your organization can run its own open-source Harbor server,
for example, and set up a vulnerability scanner inside of it, as demonstrated
in the official documentation.
Nonetheless, private container registries are now usually part of a larger
ecosystem and your CI/CD platform may also offer one so knowing what
security features you want from a private registry is important. Some
registries, like Harbor, offer not only registry vulnerability scanners but also
have what is called deployment security, which can prevent artifacts from
being pulled if vulnerabilities are discovered.
It also enables the creation of CVEs allowlists, to ignore during
vulnerability scanning, as shown in Figure 5-4.3:
 Figure 5-3. The creation of CVEs allowlist inside the Harbor registry administration dashboard.

You can take your requirements even further and configure your private
registry to accept only images signed by your development, testing, and
security teams to sign images. Then, you can add an admission control to
prevent unsigned images to be deployed into production, as we’ll see in
Chapter X. Content trust
If your registry does not have these security features, it may be easy to
bypass the vulnerability scanner. To prevent a vulnerable image from
running we can resort to supply chain security policies to allow only
approved images to enter into our cluster orchestrator, for example, what
I’ll talk about in Chapter X. Security as code.
Finally, it’s a good idea to regularly scan images in case a new vulnerability
has been found in a package that’s used by an image that hasn’t been rebuilt
in a while, as demonstrated in Figure 5-4.4:




  Figure 5-4. Container images already accepted into your private container registry may include
vulnerabilities discovered after their push so it’s a good practice to scan them from time to time and
                       also before deployment into a production environment.


Tags Governance
When building images, developers usually identify them with proper tags
which codify the version information such as latest or 1.2. While
convenient, mutable tags can lead to a “Time-of-check vs Time-of-use
(TOCTOU)” problem. Imagine that developer A created a secure base
image for your organization and tagged it as latest, pushing it into your
private registry. Now developer B creates a new and insecure base image,
also identifying it as latest. Every new image that refers to the parent image
latest will be rebuilt using the last version pushed to the repository by
developer B.
There are different ways to mitigate tag mutability issues you can:
      1. Pull images using the image digest instead of named tags. You can
         use docker images --digests to obtain it.
      2. Enable tag immutability in your container registry to prevent that
         someone pushes a tag that already exists.
      3. Use an admission controller in your container orchestrator to
         prevent specific images to be deployed. We’ll consider this strategy
         in Chapter X, when we see runtime security policies.


5.3 Container Network Security
In this chapter, we’ll cover network security principles for standalone
containers as networking in orchestrated environments using Swarm or
Kubernetes operates in a different manner, as we’ll see in Chapter 5. Cluster
Security.
Due to its distributed nature, for most of the cases, we do not want
containers to have a fixed IP address. The Docker daemon then handles all
the network configuration inside of a container, including IP designation.
Run a new Docker and inspect the container to check which IP is designed
for it at the moment:
$ docker run -dit --name containerA -p 80:80 nginx
$ docker inspect containerA | grep IPAddress
            "IPAddress": "172.17.0.2",

If you already have any other service running on port 80 of your host, select
a different port, for example, 8080. Now, open a web browser pointing to it.
Remember that if you change the port, you will have to add it, using
http://127.0.0.1:8083, for example.
Unless you have a firewall in your perimeter, you’ll see that the Nginx
service is up and running and exposed to any connected network (including
the Internet if that is the case), through the host IP address and not the
container IP. This is possible because Docker uses a network driver called
bridge, which forwards traffic between the layers.
Now execute a second container, based on Alpine and again, find its IP
address:
$ docker run -dit --name containerB alpine
$ docker inspect containerB
"IPAddress": "172.17.0.3",

Open a shell inside of containerA and ping ContainerB’s IP address:
$ docker attach containerA
# ping 172.17.0.3
PING 172.17.0.3 (172.17.0.3): 56 data bytes
64 bytes from 172.17.0.3: seq=0 ttl=64 time=0.200 ms
64 bytes from 172.17.0.3: seq=1 ttl=64 time=0.097 ms
64 bytes from 172.17.0.3: seq=2 ttl=64 time=0.097 ms
        ...

ContainerA and containerB are both connected to the bridge network and
can talk to each other. To check all containers connected to the network
bridge, execute the following command. First, you’ll see the network setup:
$ docker inspect network bridge
...
        "Name": "bridge",
  "Id": "8c828b23e630ba...d76d927a29d818abbf1c20cefe",
        "Created": "2021-07-13T16:48:05.82879136-03:00",
        "Scope": "local",
        "Driver": "bridge",
        "EnableIPv6": false,
        "IPAM": {
            "Driver": "default",
            "Options": null,
            "Config": [
                {
                    "Subnet": "172.17.0.0/16",
                    "Gateway": "172.17.0.1"
                }
            ]
         },
...

Next, you can see all the containers attached to this network:
"Containers": {
"929a09e22912c877e0dfa70978c26d161f04f0c1250563a26f1367e899242902":
{
"Name": "containerA",
"EndpointID": "f6c1f44b2392796143...31ceb964271cffc97c8c6a311984b",
                "MacAddress": "02:42:ac:11:00:02",
                "IPv4Address": "172.17.0.2/16",
                "IPv6Address": ""
            },
"c6eb64edeecf72df2aae05a69a3023845a7eaa781740f5497be53b7b755584fc":
{
"Name": "containerB",
"EndpointID": "3947da01399938f18...247f8fb199694827bb15fc5e558f9c",
                "MacAddress": "02:42:ac:11:00:03",
                "IPv4Address": "172.17.0.3/16",
                "IPv6Address": ""
            }
        }

It’s worth explicitly pointing out that two components can communicate
with each other only if they are connected to the same network. Docker has
some reserved networks and you can list them using:
$ docker network ls
NETWORK ID          NAME                      DRIVER                 SCOPE
8c828b23e630        bridge                    bridge                 local
ba6a17f9d70e        docker_gwbridge           bridge                 local
6b5819411c4b        host                      host                   local
d169a4871cdf        none                      null                   local

Users can create their own network, to isolate containers. Let’s create a new
network called LearningDevSecOps and use the same bridge driver. If you
inspect the newly created network, you’ll see no containers attached to it.
$ docker network create --driver bridge LearningDevSecOps

Now, run a new containerC and attach it to the network created above.
Then, open a shell inside of it and try to ping the container B again:
$ docker run -dit --name containerC --network LearningDevSecOps
nginx ash
$ docker container exec -ti containerC /bin/sh
# ping 172.17.0.3
PING 172.17.0.3 (172.17.0.3): 56 data bytes

There is no response from containerB because they are in different
networks. Although containerC is isolated from the other containers, the
services run inside of it still can be exposed, as we are using the network
driver bridge. To stop any network traffic we can resort to the driver
none.
Or you can use this little trick that I really like to use in my test
environments, to limit the response only to localhost ;):
$ docker run -it --name containerA -p 127.0.0.1:80:80 nginx

As we can see, a well-configured container network can be an additional
layer of protection. Take a deep dive into docker networks and be especially
aware of the host network. Remember that we had to map and expose port
80 to make the Nginx service available to other hosts and networks? The
driver host removes the network isolation between the container and the
Docker host, and uses the host’s networking directly, exposing all ports
connected to a container. This is the easiest way to test containers and so is
especially risky.
If you’re running Docker on a host that is exposed to the Internet, you will
probably want to have iptables policies in place to prevent unauthorized
access so it’s a good idea to learn how to work with Docker and IPtables.
Nonetheless, most container security is made using Layer 7 tools, through
policies and runtime protection, as we’ll see in chapter X.
At least, you have to know that Docker installs two custom iptables chains
named DOCKER-USER and DOCKER to ensure that incoming packets are
always checked first by these two chains and so you have to double-check
your policies. Ports opened by containers have become one of the more
common vulnerabilities found during pentests and it can be easily avoided.


Summary
In this chapter, we examined the starting security principles to adopt in a
containerized environment. We’ll continue to examine best practices to
protect our containers in the next chapters, especially in chapter 5. Cluster
Security, as we explore orchestrated container deployments. In chapter X,
we’ll see how to improve container security during runtime, so in case our
containers are compromised, the range of activities available to an attacker
is limited.
For those interested in furthering their skills about the combination of Linux
kernel features that make containerization possible, such as namespaces,
control groups, and capabilities, I highly recommend the book Container
Security, by Liz Rice (O’Reilly, 2020). She explains many of the building
block technologies and mechanisms that are commonly used in container-
based systems, and how to use them to achieve safer environments.
Chapter 6. Case Studies

           A NOTE FOR EARLY RELEASE READERS
  With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
  author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
  advantage of these technologies long before the official release. If there
  is a GitHub repo associated with the book, it will be made active after
  final publication. If you have comments about how we might improve
  the content and/or examples in this book, or if you notice missing or
  inaccurate material within this chapter, please reach out to the editor at
  ccollins@oreilly.com.

The concept behind DevSecOps is not new to the IT industry and many
companies are already far in their transformation journey to shift from a
reactive approach to security to a proactive one.
As we’ll see in the following cases studies, leadership and culture
management are central to promoting an environment of high trust between
teams that will result in a setting of security shared ownership. As security
teams alone cannot avoid incidents and their effort must be concentrated on
improving the organization’s ability to respond to these events, only after
this first step is complete that the discussion must turn into tools to
implement continuous security
And as one of these cases studies show, even a mature DevSecOps program
will not prevent incidents. Any security controls we put in place will
eventually fail. Instead, the goal of any DevSecOps strategy must be how to
make our organization’s most valuable products and data resilient to attacks
and how to a culture of fear to one of readiness.


Netflix: Secure Paved Roads
Netflix cultural values of ‘context not control’ and ‘freedom and
responsibility’ highly influence how the company manages its security. The
streaming service, which relies heavily on the judgment of its engineers,
relationship building, and automation, is currently one of the leading
enterprises in the use of security and resilience engineering. With multiple
tools and documentation published, and many organizations look for Netflix
to learn from their state of art methodologies.
At Netflix, the security team’s goal is to enable developers to move quickly.
To reach this objective, members are distributed into three categories:
        Operational Appsec: conducts traditional appsec activities like bug
        bounty triage, pen-testing, threat modeling, vulnerability
        management, and product security incident response.
        Appsec Automation—aims to build an extensive app inventory and
        implement self-service security advice.
        Security Partnerships—aims to drive comprehensive security
        improvements to mitigate risk.

While operational appsec activities are valuable, they are highly interrupt-
driven. This doesn’t align well with the focused engineering work needed to
scale Netflix services and that is the reason behind the app sec automation
team. The security partnership work is to provide the engineers with the
appropriate security context that will enable them to make decisions. “By
focusing on relationships with other teams, they build trust and ensure that
everyone understands the company’s security priorities”, says Brian D.
Payne, Engineering Director, Product & Application Security at Netflix.
Context, not control: A member of the product security team may file a bug
report, but the fixing pull request is more likely to be created by each
individual team. Ultimately, they are the ones responsible for using the
resources and securing what they create. Netflix looks to hire great
employees and then trust them to do their job well. They are light on policy,
and instead, just ask people to work in the best interest of the company.
There is a very high bar for members of the security team as well.
Freedom and responsibility: At Netflix, people can feel comfortable starting
and leading large initiatives without approval from a central authority. Jason
Chan, former VP of Security explains: “you really want to distribute
decision-making as much as you can. [As a leader], I want to be making as
few decisions as possible, and the best way to facilitate that is to make sure
that people have context about what’s important to the company, what’s
important to the team.”
One of Netflix’s current technology challenges lies in the construction of an
app ecosystem to allow the Studio to scale. As the number of their
engineering grows, the value of automation to scale also increases. “In the
past, we have primarily invested in automation for vulnerability
identification (static code scanning, dynamic testing, grep for anti-patterns,
etc) in line with the common “DevSecOps” approach. Lately, we have
shifted focus towards driving adoption of the Security Paved Road practices
across our application inventory”, says Astha Singhal, Engineering
Director, Application Security.
Instead of trying to transform software engineers into security experts,
Netflix wants them to focus on build features and products. Thus, the
company decided on a productized approach, to make participating in
security as easy as possible. As engineers adopt a variety of different tech
stacks (different programming languages, libraries, micro-service
dependencies, etc), they build an authentication solution that works across
any tech stack. For Chan, “If we can solve those problems elegantly and
performantly and efficiently for them, then what we’d like them to do is opt
into our systems versus trying to solve on their own. If we have this nice
smooth paved road that gets you to your destination, you’re likely to opt-in
there.”
This is the concept behind the “Secure Paved Roads”: instead of a number
of processes and tools to secure multiple apps, engineers have paved road
products that handle security issues. Netflix security teams are constructing
products to kill the security checklists and also establish, for example, the
architectural property of guaranteed authentication.
“For a typical paved road application with no unusual security
complications, a team could go from “git init” to a production-ready, fully
authenticated, internet accessible application in a little less than 10 minutes.
The automation of the infrastructure setup, combined with reducing risk
enough to streamline security review saves developers days, if not weeks,
on each application”, declared one of Netflix Technology Blog posts.
A productized approach also meant that more users make the amortized
platform investment more valuable, they also bring more ideas and clarity
for new features, which in turn attract more internal users. This scale and
standardization also show compelling annualized savings in risk and
incident response costs.


HSBC: DevSecOps transformational change
driven by behavioral change
For HSBC, a large and highly regulated enterprise, DevSecOps adoption
started with behavioral change at the C-level, to transform the fabric of the
organizational culture. With the challenge of fintechs and their faster time
to market, the global bank faced distributed teams and cultural complexities
to deliver robust and dynamic solutions.
The bank, which operates across 64 countries, serves over 40 million
customers and the DevOps teams support more than 7000+ services. HSBC
wanted to remain a sustainable and strong organization, but emerge as a
data-driven, agile enterprise. Customers not only expect faster responses but
also expect banks to predict what they want, highlighting the need for a
robust technology model in place. The bank was regularly beaten by
challenger startups, with a smaller time to market.
“Once we understand where the challenges and opportunities were, we had
a number of boot camps to identify where we, as leaders, could improve to
lead that kind of change. From there, we had regular meetings to check
progress. We created self-contained teams focusing on creating new, shiny,
market-driven functionalities and products. They had all the tools and
information to make decisions and spent less time delivering”, said Donald
Patra, EVP & CIO, HSBC Americas.
Nonetheless, these classical transformation projects usually have the
audacious goal of delivering a minimal viable product (MVP) in 12 weeks.
This represents a unique set of security challenges, especially when the
organization decides to use IaaS and PaaS for faster provision and scale-up.
HSBC operates in a regulated environment, with mandatory activities such
as security architecture design, risk acceptance processes, secret
management review, data storage standards, and penetration tests, for
example.
For Chris Rutter, Principal Security Consultant, if these security activities
and reviews are left for the last week, it will not be enough time. “On week
16, the security design review will find high impact architectural issues, an
app penetration test will report severe vulnerabilities and secret
management will not comply with company standards. Reviews, fixes, and
verifications will be thrown over the wall and take weeks. The business
executives will finally sign off on risk acceptance and with the project four
weeks late, it’s no surprise that everyone hates security.”
To solve the problem and promote organizational change, leaders saw
engagement and cross-functional teams as key. They paired a software
developer with security skills at every step of the architectural design
process. Security controls became part of the user stories and part of the
products’ acceptance criteria. These engineers would threat model every
design, every week with a subject matter specialist.
As the bank regulations require evidence of reviews and implemented
controls, they established automated security acceptance tests in pipelines
and build standardized libraries and patterns. Every time someone uses
encryption, for example, it is a pre-approved library. HSBC security team’s
mission now is to reduce compliance lead time. They are seen as a group of
experts, feeding into the project, rather than blockers.
For Patra, it’s critical to start with small victories to demonstrate the
business value of DevSecOps, but cultural re-organization and mindset shift
is critical for the sustenance of the change as new normal. Without it, the
transformation is not sustainable. “It will take time, but big businesses need
to be more agile to compete with startups. We fireproof our model with the
release of critical and secure solutions during the peak of the pandemic”,
concluded the VP.


VTEX: We Are Trusted
VTEX, a Brazilian-born enterprise digital commerce platform, enables
global brands and retailers such as Whirlpool, Electrolux, Sony, L´Oréal,
Coca-Cola, and Nestlé to achieve faster time-to-market, reach their
customers across any channel, and uncover new growth areas to accelerate
and transform their commerce business.
In 2019, the platform closed a USD 140 million investment round deal with
SoftBank’s LATAM fund and purchased UniteU, an American e-commerce
company, in order to accelerate its global expansion and innovation rate.
VTEX products include a patent-pending passwordless checkout called
SmartCheckout, an architectural network of microservices to deliver
continuous updates, and the company’s VTEX IO serverless development
framework that enables clients to develop scalable, production-ready web
applications for global commerce without infrastructure complexity.
Founded in 2000, the company now operates in more than 32 countries in
North and South America, Asia, Europe, and the UK, where VTEX’s new
headquarters is located. In 2021, VTEX became a New York Stock
Exchange-listed company and raised US$361 million in an initial public
offering (IPO).
One of the VTEX intends to use the net proceeds is to achieve their 2024
product milestone, “We are trusted”. As a global platform, VTEX shares
with its clients the responsibility to keep their customer’s data secure and
private, according to each countries’ data and privacy regulations. The
company risk tolerance is quite low and compliance lead time has become a
competitive advantage. So there is a considerable business gain in
automating security analysis and controls.
In order to achieve this vision, one of the first decisions was to centralize
operations and security under the same leadership. VTEX invited Gustavo
Franco, an IT executive with more than 20 years of experience scaling SRE
teams in Google and VMware, and me, to work together. Together, we
achieved our first victory: shared ownership and common goals.
The SRE and security teams no longer see themselves as siloed groups,
with different objectives. We all share the same objective: be trusted and
deliver a reliable and secure environment. SRE is as responsible as security
to implement secured services and products and the same goes for security -
our definitions of secure also include reliability. In other words, we are all
working together to achieve better software delivery performance and
hence, our efforts are oriented towards DORA’s four key metrics: delivery
lead time, deployment frequency, change fail rate, and more importantly,
mean time to restore service.
The company is also working to improve its software engineer experience,
working to productize infrastructure and security. The platform comprises
70+ services, each of them with its own environment and lifecycle. “The
era of siloed software has ended and our challenge is to scale up our
delivery in a secure manner. VTEX is at the center of this revolution,
helping enterprises drive digital commerce transformation and build
customized experiences for their consumers,” said Geraldo Thomaz, VTEX
co-CEO.


Capital One: Start, Fail Fast and Restart
Capital One, a Virginia-based bank with a popular credit card business
embraced the cloud and automate software quality and security controls to
reduce human errors. Their DevOps group supports a developer community
of close to 7,000 engineers. On a platform running more than half a million
automation pipelines and some 50,000 build, test and deploy activities
daily, the organization needed to simplify audit and compliance.
“We build our pipelines to be centered around a batch of software delivery
principles so things like static analysis, unit testing, performance testing run
automatically. We are on a point where Capital One is comfortable with you
releasing your code and knowing that when it goes to production it’s going
to be solid, it’s going to work and you’ve covered all your bases with what
could go wrong”, said John Casanova, former Senior Cloud Engineer at
Capital One.
Yet, those mechanisms are only part of a DevSecOps strategy that needs
continuous improvement, and years later, Capital One was ensnared in one
of the largest-ever hacks to hit a financial services firm.
The breach took place in July 2019 when vast amounts of personal data
about Capital One credit card customers and individuals were accessed.
140,000 Social Security numbers, about 80,000 linked bank account
numbers, credit scores, payment history, and other financial information
were stolen. Paige A. Thompson bragged about her hack on Slack and on a
public GitHub post. Another user privately emailed the company and
informed the financial giant.
The FBI then arrested Thompson, a software engineer formerly employed
by AWS, the company that provided data storage to Capital One, on a
charge of computer fraud and abuse. She created a scanning software that
allowed the identification of customers of the cloud computing company
who had misconfigured their Web Application Firewall (WAF), allowing
her to bypass it and obtain administrative credentials. The account had
enough privileges to decrypt, view and copy data. Thompson used this
access not only to steal information but also to mine crypto coins.
“It’s easy to blame Capital One’s engineers for the loss of data, but the truth
is that IAM role misconfigurations are very common in AWS accounts.
Unfortunately, very few developers take the time to carefully list each
permission, and oftentimes a wildcard is used in many more places than it
should be, resulting in unintended access”, according to CloudSploit.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), which is part of the
US Department of the Treasury, has imposed a civil money penalty of $ 80
million on Capital One Financial Corp for “failing to establish effective risk
assessment processes and to prevent the massive data breach that
compromised the personal information of about 100 million US citizens”.
The regulator observed that the bank failed to appropriately design and
implement certain network security controls, adequate data loss prevention
controls, and effective dispositioning of alerts. The bank’s internal audit
also failed to identify numerous control weaknesses and gaps in the cloud
infrastructure.
“While the OCC encourages responsible innovation in all banks it
supervises, sound risk management and internal controls are critical to
ensuring bank operations remain safe and sound and adequately protect
their customers.”
After a slew of companies was featured for bucket leaks in the news, AWS
also took steps to help their customers to configure their buckets as
intended. Nonetheless, the responsibility for preventing data leaks remains
solely with cloud customers. Thompson was charged by a federal grand jury
in the US District Court in Seattle on two counts of unauthorized intrusion
into stored data of more than 30 different companies, including Capital
One.


U.S. Air Force: The DoD Enterprise
DevSecOps R eference D esign
While most organisations start their DevSecOps journey within a small
environment, to demonstrate value, Nicolas M. Chaillan, former Chief
Software Officer of the U.S. Air Force, decided to take a singular path: get
Kubernetes to securely run on an F-16 jet.
“I tackled the weapon systems so General Officer and Senior Executives
will pay attention, and that’s where you usually end up getting the funding.
So if you get people excited and show you can do it, then you can
demonstrate there is something there,” says Chaillan.
The jet’s legacy hardware increased the challenge. “We had to be able to
boot Kubernetes with Istio on the jet within two minutes, because that’s a
requirement for the jet if something goes wrong, and it has to be able to
spin back up within two minutes,” adds the CSO. Within 45 days, the
SoniKube team based at Hill Air Force Base accomplished that goal.
“We got the cluster on Istio running and then we launched five or six
microservices,” Chaillan says. “A lot of the jet runs in older programming
languages, and so being able to run Go, Python, and Java was pretty
exciting.” The former CSO wanted to “learn fast, fail fast, and don’t fail
twice for the same reason.
Software delivery could take anywhere from three to ten years for big
weapons systems before the US Department of Defense started its
DevSecOps initiative. “It was mostly teams using waterfall, no minimum
viable product, no incremental delivery, and no feedback loop from end-
users… and cybersecurity was mostly an afterthought,” he says.
The CSO and Peter Ranks, Deputy Chief Information Officer for
Information Enterprise, DoD CIO, created then the DoD Enterprise
DevSecOps reference design, with a mandate to use CNCF-compliant
Kubernetes clusters and other open source technologies. “The DoD
Enterprise DevSecOps reference design defines the gates on the DevSecOps
pipeline,” says Chaillan.
Currently, 37 teams are building applications on top of Kubernetes: “We
have teams doing this at every side of the weapons systems, from the space
systems to the nuclear systems to the jets,” he says. “As long as teams are
compliant with that reference design, they can get a DoD-wide continuous
ATO (authority to operate)…and anytime software is going to pass the
gates, it is automatically accredited. So you can push software multiple
times a day.”
Given their nature, most of these programs are classified, but some results
can be shared, such as the Navy’s Compile to Combat in 24 Hours program:
“Kubernetes is enabling them to do a push to production on the ship while
being disconnected [at sea],” Chaillan says.
“All the classification levels can be run where the data is, which is where
you need it. So having that turnkey where you can go and have the
environment ready... if a team like F-16 comes and says, ‘I need cloud
computing, storage, a Kubernetes distribution, a source code repo, a bunch
of different tools for the CI/CD pipeline, and five DevSecOps engineers,’
they can get all that within 30 days.”
For Chaillan, DevSecOps has been a big enabler for the U.S Air Force. He
estimates that the 37 programs in operation have saved off more than 100
years of years saved off planned program time.


Summary
The case studies included in this chapter are meant to show you that the
efforts towards the creation of a DevSecOps program have a proven success
return rate, but at the same time, are not bulletproof. No security initiative
or tool can guarantee a 100% safe environment and it’s time for this
industry to acknowledge such fact.
If you are ready to give the next steps in this direction, I highly recommend
the book series Epic Failures in DevSecOps (DevSecOps Days Press,
2018). Through short stories from expert practitioners, authors show you
where they went wrong so you can learn and avoid their mistakes. I agree
with Mike Miller, editor of the book when he says: “We learn more from
failures than we do from successes. When something goes as expected, we
use that process as a mental template for future projects.”
I intend to keep studying DevSecOps cases. I’ll be happy to learn about
your history and share it with the world through the website
www.learningdevsecops.com. Please, feel free to contact me and chat about
it!
About the Author
Michelle Ribeiro is the CEO of SPIRITSEC. An InfoSec professional with
over 20 years in the field, she has contributed to publications and
conferences worldwide and was involved in open source initiatives such as
the DevOpsDays, the Debian Project, and LinuxChix.
