About This eBook
    ePUB is an open, industry-standard format for eBooks. However, support
of ePUB and its many features varies across reading devices and
applications. Use your device or app settings to customize the presentation to
your liking. Settings that you can customize often include font, font size,
single or double column, landscape or portrait mode, and figures that you can
click or tap to enlarge. For additional information about the settings and
features on your reading device or app, visit the device manufacturer’s Web
site.
    Many titles include programming code or configuration examples. To
optimize the presentation of these elements, view the eBook in single-
column, landscape mode and adjust the font size to the smallest setting. In
addition to presenting code and configurations in the reflowable text format,
we have included images of the code that mimic the presentation found in the
print book; therefore, where the reflowable format may compromise the
presentation of the code listing, you will see a “Click here to view code
image” link. Click the link to view the print-fidelity code image. To return to
the previous page viewed, click the Back button on your device or app.
Praise for Strategic Monoliths and
Microservices

“Most books address either the business of software or the technical details
of building software. Strategic Monoliths and Microservices provides a
comprehensive approach to blending the needs of business and technology in
an approachable way. It also dispels many of today’s myths while offering
practical guidance that any team or organization can apply immediately and
with confidence.”
 —James Higginbotham, Executive API Consultant, Founder of LaunchAny,
                                 and author of Principles of Web API Design

“Digital Transformation cannot succeed as a ‘grass roots’ effort. Vaughn and
Tomasz offer C-level execs a roadmap to software excellence that includes
establishing the culture necessary to foster and sustain software innovation.
Written with real-world understanding, Vaughn and Tomasz help the reader to
appreciate that moving software development from a cost center to a profit
center involves tradeoffs that need not sacrifice innovation. A must-read for
decision makers.”
                             —Tom Stockton, Principal Architect, MAXIMUS

“In this book, Vaughn Vernon and Tomasz Jaskuła use their extensive
experience with DDD to present a comprehensive guide to using the many
different aspects of DDD for modern systems development and
modernization. It will be a valuable guide for many technical leaders who
need to understand how to use DDD to its full potential.”
                                —Eoin Woods, software architect and author
“There are common misconceptions and roots of failure around software
engineering. One notable example is neglecting the rugged trek towards
digital transformation. Such an endeavor comprises breakthrough
innovations, failure culture, emphasis on the role of software architecture, as
well as on the importance of efficient and effective inter-human
communication. Fortunately, the authors offer the necessary help for
mastering all hurdles and challenges. What I like most about this book is the
holistic view it provides to all stakeholders involved in digital
transformation and innovation. Vaughn Vernon and Tomasz Jaskuła introduce
a clear path to successful innovation projects. They provide insights, tools,
proven best practices, and architecture styles both from the business and
engineering viewpoint. Their book sheds light on the implications of digital
transformation and how to deal with them successfully. This book deserves
to become a must-read for practicing software engineers, executives, as well
as senior managers. It will always serve me as a precious source of guidance
and as a navigator whenever I am entering unchartered territories.”
   —Michael Stal, Certified Senior Software Architect, Siemens Technology

“Digital transformation is a much used but little understood concept. This
book provides valuable insight into this topic and how to leverage your
existing assets on the journey. Modern technical and social techniques are
combined in the context of a single case study. Compelling reading for both
business and technology practitioners.”
—Murat Erder, co-author of Continuous Architecture in Practice (2021) and
                                               Continuous Architecture (2015)

“Packed with insightful recommendations for every executive leader seeking
clarity on the distinction between when to strategically apply a monolith vs.
microservice architectural approach for success. Highly encourage every
CEO, CIO, CTO, and (S)VP of Software Development to start here with
immersing themselves in Vaughn and Tomasz’s succinct distillation of the
advantages, disadvantages, and allowance for a hybrid combination, and then
go become a visionary thought leader in their respective business domain.”
                        —Scott P. Murphy, Principal Architect, Maximus, Inc.

“A ‘must-read’ for Enterprise leaders and architects who are planning for or
executing a digital transformation! The book is a true guide for ensuring your
enterprise software innovation program is successful.”
 —Chris Verlaine, DHL Express Global Aviation IT DevOps Director, Head
      of DHL Express Global Aviation IT Software Modernization Program

“Strategic Monoliths and Microservices is a great resource to connect
business value to an evolvable enterprise architecture. I am impressed with
how the authors use their deep understanding and experience to guide
informed decisions on the modularization journey. Along the way every
valuable tool and concept is explained and properly brought into context.
Definitely a must-read for IT decision makers and architects. For me this
book will be an inspiring reference and a constant reminder to seek the
purpose in architecture. The Microservices discussion has reached a
completely new maturity level.”
         —Christian Deger, Head of Architecture and Platform at RIO | The
                Logistics Flow, organizer of over 60 Microservices Meetups

“The choice of microservices or monoliths architecture goes far beyond
technology. The culture, organization, and communication that exist within a
company are all important factors that a CTO must consider carefully in
order to successfully build digital systems. The authors explain this
extremely well from various perspectives and based on very interesting
examples.”
                                 —Olivier Ulmer, CTO, Groupe La Française

“Building a technology engine to move quickly, experiment, and learn is a
competitive advantage in today’s digital world. Will ‘de-jour architecture’
help with this endeavor? This amazing book by Vaughn and Tomasz fills a
void in the market and re-focuses on the core objectives of software
architecture: move fast, experiment, focus on the outcomes that bring value.
A reader will come away better suited to decide whether microservices
architecture and all the complexity with it is right for them.”
                               —Christian Posta, Global Field CTO, Solo.io
Strategic Monoliths and
     Microservices
           Strategic Monoliths and
                Microservices
Driving Innovation Using Purposeful Architecture



                           Vaughn Vernon
                           Tomasz Jaskuła




 Boston • Columbus • New York • San Francisco • Amsterdam • Cape
                                 Town
Dubai • London • Madrid • Milan • Munich • Paris • Montreal • Toronto •
                         Delhi • Mexico City
 São Paulo • Sydney • Hong Kong • Seoul • Singapore • Taipei • Tokyo
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as
trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and the publisher was aware of a trademark
claim, the designations have been printed with initial capital letters or in all capitals.

The authors and publisher have taken care in the preparation of this book, but make no expressed or
implied warranty of any kind and assume no responsibility for errors or omissions. No liability is
assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of the use of the
information or programs contained herein.

For information about buying this title in bulk quantities, or for special sales opportunities (which may
include electronic versions; custom cover designs; and content particular to your business, training goals,
marketing focus, or branding interests), please contact our corporate sales department at
corpsales@pearsoned.com or (800) 382-3419.

For government sales inquiries, please contact governmentsales@pearsoned.com.

For questions about sales outside the U.S., please contact intlcs@pearson.com.

Visit us on the Web: informit.com/aw

Library of Congress Control Number: 2021943427

Copyright © 2022 Pearson Education, Inc.

Cover image: John I Catlett/Shutterstock

Figures 1.5, 1.6, 1.7: illustration by grop/Shutterstock

Pages 109 and 152: Dictionary definitions from Merriam-Webster. Used with Permission.

All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright, and permission must be obtained from the
publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise. For information regarding
permissions, request forms and the appropriate contacts within the Pearson Education Global Rights &
Permissions Department, please visit www.pearson.com/permissions/.

ISBN-13: 978-0-13-735546-4
ISBN-10: 0-13-735546-7

ScoutAutomatedPrintCode
Contents

Foreword
Preface
Acknowledgments
About the Authors


Part I: Transformational Strategic Learning through
        Experimentation
Executive Summary

Chapter 1: Business Goals and Digital Transformation
          Digital Transformation: What Is the Goal?
                  Software Architecture Quick Glance
          Why Software Goes Wrong
                  Debt Metaphor
                  Software Entropy
                  Big Ball of Mud
                  Running Example
          Your Enterprise and Conway’s Law
                  Communication Is about Knowledge
                  The Telephone Game
                  Reaching Agreement Is Hard
                  But Not Impossible
          (Re)Thinking Software Strategy
                  Thinking
               Rethinking
        Are Monoliths Bad?
        Are Microservices Good?
        Don’t Blame Agile
        Getting Unstuck
        Summary
        References

Chapter 2: Essential Strategic Learning Tools
        Making Decisions Early and Late, Right and Wrong
        Culture and Teams
                Failure Is Not Fatal
                Failure Culture Is Not Blame Culture
                Getting Conway’s Law Right
                Enabling Safe Experimentations
        Modules First
        Deployment Last
        Everything in Between
                Business Capabilities, Business Processes, and Strategic
                Goals
                Strategic Delivery on Purpose
                Using Cynefin to Make Decisions
        Where Is Your Spaghetti and How Fast Does It Cook?
        Strategic Architecture
        Applying the Tools
        Summary
        References

Chapter 3: Events-First Experimentation and Discovery
        Commands and Events
             Using Software Models
       Rapid Learning with EventStorming
              When Remote Sessions Are Demanded
              Facilitating Sessions
              Big-Picture Modeling
       Applying the Tools
       Summary
       References


Part II: Driving Business Innovation
Executive Summary

Chapter 4: Reaching Domain-Driven Results
       Domains and Subdomains
       Summary
       References

Chapter 5: Contextual Expertise
       Bounded Context and Ubiquitous Language
       Core Domain
       Supporting Subdomains, Generic Subdomains, and Technical
       Mechanisms
              Supporting Subdomains
              Generic Subdomains
              Technical Mechanisms
       Business Capabilities and Contexts
       Not Too Big, Not Too Small
       Summary
       References

Chapter 6: Mapping, Failing, and Succeeding—Choose Two
       Context Mapping
              Partnership
              Shared Kernel
              Customer–Supplier Development
              Conformist
              Anticorruption Layer
              Open-Host Service
              Published Language
              Separate Ways
       Topography Modeling
       Ways to Fail and Succeed
       Applying the Tools
       Summary
       References

Chapter 7: Modeling Domain Concepts
       Entities
       Value Objects
       Aggregates
       Domain Services
       Functional Behavior
       Applying the Tools
       Summary
       References


Part III: Events-First Architecture
Executive Summary

Chapter 8: Foundation Architecture
       Architectural Styles, Patterns, and Decision Drivers
              Ports and Adapters (Hexagonal)
              Modularization
              REST Request–Response
       Quality Attributes
              Security
              Privacy
              Performance
              Scalability
              Resilience: Reliability and Fault Tolerance
              Complexity
       Applying the Tools
       Summary
       References

Chapter 9: Message- and Event-Driven Architectures
       Message- and Event-Based REST
              Event Logs
              Subscriber Polling
              Server-Sent Events
       Event-Driven and Process Management
       Event Sourcing
       CQRS
       Serverless and Function as a Service
       Applying the Tools
       Summary
       References


Part IV: The Two Paths for Purposeful Architecture
Executive Summary

Chapter 10: Building Monoliths Like You Mean It
        Historical Perspective
        Right from the Start
                Business Capabilities
                Architecture Decisions
        Right from Wrong
                Change within Change
                Break the Coupling
        Keeping It Right
        Summary
        References

Chapter 11: Monolith to Microservices Like a Boss
        Mental Preparation with Resolve
        Modular Monolith to Microservices
        Big Ball of Mud Monolith to Microservices
               User Interactions
               Harmonizing Data Changes
               Deciding What to Strangle
        Unplugging the Legacy Monolith
        Summary
        References

Chapter 12: Require Balance, Demand Strategy
        Balance and Quality Attributes
        Strategy and Purpose
               Business Goals Inform Digital Transformation
               Use Strategic Learning Tools
               Event-Driven Lightweight Modeling
               Driving Business Innovation
               Events-First Architecture
               Monoliths as a First-Order Concern
               Purposeful Microservices from a Monolith
               Balance Is Unbiased, Innovation Is Essential
        Conclusion
        References

Index
Foreword

We met the founders of Iterate in April 2007. Three of them had attended our
first workshop in Oslo and invited us out to dinner. There, we learned they
had just quit their jobs at a consulting firm and founded their own, so they
could work in a place they loved using techniques they believed in. I thought
to myself, “Good luck with that.” After all, they were just a few years out of
college and had no experience running a business. But I kept my skepticism
to myself as we talked about how to find good customers and negotiate agile
contracts.
    We visited Iterate many times over the next decade and watched it grow
into a successful consulting firm that was routinely listed as one of Norway’s
best places to work. They had a few dozen consultants and evolved from
writing software to coaching companies in Test-Driven Development to
helping companies innovate with design sprints. So I should have seen it
coming, but when they decided to transform the company in 2016, I was
surprised.
    We decided to change course, they told us. We want to be a great place to
work, where people can reach their full potential, but our best people are
limited as consultants. They are always pursuing someone else’s dream. We
want to create a company where people can follow their own passion and
create new companies. We want to nurture startups and fund this with our
consulting revenue.
    Once again I thought to myself, “Good luck with that.” This time I did not
keep my skepticism to myself. We talked about the base failure rate of new
ventures and the mantra from my 3M days: “Try lots of stuff and keep what
works.” That’s a great motto if you have a lot of time and money, but they had
neither. One of the founders was not comfortable with the new approach and
left the company. The others did what they had always done—move forward
step-by-step and iterate toward their goal.
    It was not easy and there were no models to follow. Wary of outside
funding, they decided to merge the diametrically opposed business models of
consulting and venture funding by limiting to 3% the amount of profit they
could make from consulting, pouring the rest back into funding ventures.
They had to make sure that consultants did not feel like second-class citizens
and those working on new ventures were committed to the success of the
consulting business. And they had to learn how to successfully start up new
businesses when all they’d ever started was a consulting business.
    It’s been five years. Every year we visited to brainstorm ideas as the
company struggled to make their unique approach work. When the pandemic
hit, not only did their consulting business grind to a halt, but the farm-to-
restaurant business they had nurtured for three years had no restaurants left to
buy local farm goods. But think about it: Iterate had top talent with nothing to
do and a venture that was poised to collect and deliver perishable goods. It
took two weeks to pivot—they offered the food to consumers for curbside
pickup—and the venture took off. While most Oslo consulting firms suffered
in 2020, Iterate saw one venture (last-mile delivery) exit through a
successful acquisition and three others spin off as separate entities, including
a ship-locating system and a three-sided platform for knitters, yarn suppliers,
and consumers. As a bonus, Iterate was number 50 on Fast Company’s 2020
list of Best Workplaces for Innovators, ahead of Slack and Square and
Shopify.
    So how did Iterate succeed against all odds? They started by realizing
that a consulting approach to software development did not give them the
freedom to take a lead role. With software becoming a strategic innovation
lever, they felt it was time to claim a seat at the decision-making table. This
was scary, because it involved taking responsibility for results—something
consultants generally avoid. But they were confident that their experimental
approach to solving challenging problems would work for business
problems as well as technical problems, so they forged ahead.
    You might wonder what Iterate’s transformation has to do with the
enterprise transformations that are the subject of this book. There is nothing
in Iterate’s story about Monoliths or Microservices or agile practices—but
these are not the essence of a transformation. As this book points out, a
transformation begins with the articulation of a new and innovative business
strategy, one that provides real, differentiated value to a market. The pursuit
of that strategy will be a long and challenging journey, requiring excellent
people, deep thinking, and plenty of learning along the way. For those who
are starting out on such a transformation, this book provides a lot of thinking
tools for your journey.
    For example, as you head in a new direction, you probably do not want to
blow up the structures that brought your current success, however outmoded
they might be. You need that old Big Ball of Mud Monolith (or consulting
services) to fund your transition.
    Another example: The first thing you want to consider is the right
architecture for your new business model, and it probably won’t be the same
as the old one. Just as Iterate moved from having a pool of consultants to
having clearly distinct venture teams, you will probably want to structure
your new architecture to fit the domain it operates in. This usually means
clarifying the business capabilities that fit the new strategy and structuring
complete teams around these capabilities. So instead of having a layered
architecture, you are likely to want one based on the natural components and
subcomponents of your product (also known as Bounded Contexts).
    Think of SpaceX: The architecture of a launch vehicle is determined by
its components—first stage (which contains nine Merlin engines, a long
fuselage, and some landing legs), interstage, second stage, and payload.
Teams are not formed around engineering disciplines (e.g., materials
engineering, structural engineering, software engineering), but rather around
components and subcomponents. This gives each team a clear responsibility
and set of constraints: Teams are expected to understand and accomplish the
job their component must do to ensure the next launch is successful.
    As you clarify the product architecture in your new strategy, you will
probably want to create an organization that matches this architecture
because, as the authors point out, you can’t violate Conway’s Law any more
than you can violate the law of gravity. The heart of this book is a large set of
thinking tools that will help you design a new architecture (quite possibly a
modular Monolith to begin with) and the organization needed to support that
architecture. The book then offers ways to gradually move from your existing
architecture toward the new one, as well as presents ideas about when and
how you might want to spin off appropriate services.
    Over time, Iterate learned that successful ventures have three things in
common:

     Good market timing
     Team cohesion
     Technical excellence

    Market timing requires patience; organizations that think transformations
are about new processes or data structures tend to be impatient and generally
get this wrong. Transformations are about creating an environment in which
innovation can flourish to create new, differentiated offerings and bring them
to market at the right time.
    The second element of success, team cohesion, comes from allowing the
capabilities being developed (the Bounded Contexts) and the relevant team
members to evolve over time, until the right combination of people and
offering emerges.
    The third element, technical excellence, is rooted in a deep respect for
the technical complexity of software. This book will help you appreciate the
complexity of your existing system and future versions of that system, as well
as the challenge of evolving from one to the other.
    The Iterate story contains a final caution: Your transition will not be easy.
Iterate had to figure out how to meld a consulting pool with venture teams in
such a way that everyone felt valuable and was committed to the
organization’s overall success. This is something that every organization will
struggle with as it goes through a transition. There is no formula for success
other than the one offered in this book: highly skilled people, deep thinking,
and constant experimentation.
    There is no silver bullet.
             —Mary Poppendieck, co-author of Lean Software Development
Preface

Chances are good that your organization doesn’t make money by selling
software in the “traditional sense,” and perhaps it never will. That doesn’t
mean that software can’t play a significant role in making money for your
organization. Software is at the heart of the wealthiest companies.
    Take, for example, the companies represented by the acronym FAANG:
Facebook, Apple, Amazon, Netflix, and Google (now held by Alphabet).
Few of those companies sell any software at all, or at least they do not count
on software sales to generate the greater part of their revenues.
    Approximately 98% of Facebook’s money is made by selling ads to
companies that want access to the members of its social networking site. The
ad space has such high value because Facebook’s platform provides for
enormous engagement between members. Certain members care about what
is happening with other members and overall trends, and that keeps them
engaged with people, situations, and the social platform. Capturing the
attention of Facebook members is worth a lot of money to advertisers.
    Apple is for the most part a hardware company, selling smartphones,
tablets, wearables, and computers. Software brings out the value of said
smartphones and other devices.
    Amazon uses a multipronged approach to revenue generation, selling
goods as an online retailer; selling subscriptions to unlimited e-books, audio,
music, and other services; and selling cloud computing infrastructure as a
service.
    Netflix earns its revenues by selling multilevel subscriptions to movie
and other video streaming services. The company still earns money through
DVD subscriptions, but this part of the business has—as expected—fallen
off sharply with the rising popularity of on-demand streaming. The video
streaming is enhanced for, and controlled by, the experience with user-facing
software that runs on TVs and mobile devices. Yet, the real heavy lifting is
done by the cloud-based system that serves the videos from Amazon’s AWS.
These services provide video encoding in more than 50 different formats,
serving up content through content delivery networks (CDN) and dealing
with chaotic failures in the face of cloud and network outages.
    Google also makes its money through ad sales; these ads are served along
with query results from its search engine software. In 2020, Google earned
approximately $4 billion from direct software usage, such as via Google
Workspace. But the Google Workspace software does not have to be
installed on user computers, because it is provided in the cloud using the
Software as a Service (SaaS) model. According to recent reports, Google
owns nearly 60% of the online office suite market, surpassing even the share
claimed by Microsoft.
    As you can see from these industry leaders’ experiences, your
organization doesn’t need to sell software to earn market-leading revenues. It
will, however, need to use software to excel in business both now and over
the years to follow.
    What is more, to innovate using software, an organization must recognize
that a contingent of software architects and engineers—the best—matter.
They matter so much that the demand for the best makes them ridiculously
difficult to hire. Think of the significance of landing any one of the top 20
picks in the WNBA or NFL draft. Of course, this description does not apply
to every software developer. Many or even most are content to “punch a
clock,” pay their mortgage, and watch as much of the WNBA and NFL on TV
as they possibly can. If those are the prospects you want to recruit, we
strongly suggest that you stop reading this book right now. Conversely, if
that’s where you’ve been but now you want to make a meaningful change,
read on.
    For those organizations seeking to excel and accelerate their pace of
innovation, it’s important to realize that software development achievers are
more than just “valuable.” If a business is to innovate by means of software
to the extent of ruling its industry, it must recognize that software architects
and engineers of that ilk are “The New Kingmakers,” a term coined by
Stephen O’Grady in his 2013 book The New Kingmakers: How Developers
Conquered the World [New-Kingmakers]. To truly succeed with software,
all businesses with audacious goals must understand what drives this ilk of
developer to transcend common software creation. The kinds of software
that they yearn to create are in no way ordinary or obvious. The most
valuable software developers want to make the kind of software that
determines the future of the industry, and that’s the recruiting message your
organization must sound to attract (1) the best and (2) those who care enough
to become the best.
    This book is meant for C-level and other business executives, as well as
every role and level involved in leading software development roles.
Everyone responsible for delivering software that either directly results in
strategic differentiation, or supports it, must understand how to drive
innovation with software.
    The authors have found that today’s C-level and other executives are a
different breed than their predecessors from decades past. Many are tech
savvy and might even be considered experts in their business domain. They
have a vision for making things better in a specific place, and they attract
other executives and deeply technical professionals who grok what the
founder or founders are driving to accomplish:

     CEOs who are close to the technology vision, such as startup CEOs,
     and those who want to be informed about the role of software in their
     future
     CIOs who are responsible for facilitating and enabling software
     development as a differentiator
     CTOs who are leading software vision through innovation
     Senior vice presidents, vice presidents, directors, project managers,
     and others who are charged with carrying the vision to realization
     Chief architects, who will find this book inspiring and a forceful guide
     to motivate teams of software architects and senior developers to drive
     change with a business mindset and purposeful architecture
     Software architects and developers of all levels, who are trying to
     firmly fix a business mentality in themselves—that is, a recognition that
     software development is not merely a means to a good paycheck, but to
     prospering beyond the ordinary and obvious through software
     innovation

    This is a vital message that all software professionals must learn from by
consuming, ruminating on, and practicing the expert techniques explored in
this book.
    Strategic Monoliths and Microservices: Driving Innovation Using
Purposeful Architecture is not a book on implementation details. We’ll
provide that kind of information in our next book, Implementing Strategic
Monoliths and Microservices (Vernon & Jaskuła, Addison-Wesley,
forthcoming). This volume is very much a book on software as part of
business strategy.
    This book is definitely of interest to leaders who lack deep knowledge or
experience in the software industry. It informs by showing how every
software initiative must discover big ideas, architect with purpose, design
strategically, and implement to defeat complexity. At the same time, we
vigorously warn readers to resist dragging accidental or intentional
complexity into the software. The point of driving change is to deliver
software that works even better than users/customers expect. Thus, this book
is meant to shake up the thinking of those stuck in a rut of the status quo,
defending their jobs rather than pushing forward relentlessly as champions of
the next generation of ideas, methods, and devices—and perhaps becoming
the creators of the future of industry as a result.
    The authors of this book have worked with many different clients and
have seen firsthand the negative side of software development, where
holding on to job security and defending turf is the aim rather than making the
business thrive by driving prosperity. Many of the wealthiest companies are
so large, and are engaged in so many initiatives under many layers of
management and reporting structure, that their vision-to-implementation-to-
acceptance pathway is far from a demonstration of continuity. With that in
mind, we’re attempting to wake the masses up to the fact that the adage
“software is eating the world” is true. Our lessons are served up with a
dollop of realism, demonstrating that innovation can be achieved by means
of progressive practical steps rather than requiring instantaneous gigantic
leaps.
    There is always risk in attempting innovation. That said, not taking any
risk at all will likely be even more risky and damaging in the long run. The
following simple graph makes this point very clear.
Figure P.1 There is a risk in taking a risk, but likely even a greater risk
in playing it safe.


    As Natalie Fratto [Natalie-Fratto-Risk] suggests, it is generally the case
that the risk of taking risks diminishes over time, but the risk of playing it
safe increases over time. The venture investor side of Natalie can be seen in
her TED Talk [Natalie-Fratto-TED], which explains the kinds of founders in
whose businesses she invests. As she explains, many investors seek business
founders with a high intelligence quotient (IQ), whereas others look for
entrepreneurs with a high emotional quotient (EQ). She looks primarily for
those with a high adaptability quotient (AQ). In fact, innovation calls for a
great amount of adaptability. You’ll find that message repeated in this book
in several forms. Everything from experimentation to discovery to
architecture, design, and implementation requires adaptability. Risk takers
are unlikely to succeed unless they are very adaptable.
    As we discuss our primary topic of innovation with software, it’s
impossible to entirely avoid the highly controversial topic of iterative and
incremental development. Indeed, some form of the “A-word”—yes,
agile/Agile—cannot be sidestepped. This book stays far away from
promoting a specific and ceremonial way to use Agile or to be a lean
business. Sadly, the authors have found that most companies and teams
creating software claim to use Agile, yet don’t understand how to be agile.
The desire is to emphasize the latter rather than reinforce the former. The
original message of agile is quite simple: It’s focused on collaborative
delivery. If kept simple, this approach can be highly useful. That said, this is
nowhere near our primary message. We attempt only to draw attention to
where “un-simple” use causes damage and how being agile helps. For our
brief discussion on how we think being agile can help, see the section
“Don’t Blame Agile,” in Chapter 1, “Business Goals and Digital
Transformation.”
    Given our background, it might surprise some readers to learn that we do
not view Strategic Monoliths and Microservices as a Domain-Driven
Design (DDD) book. To be sure, we introduce and explain the domain-
driven approach and why and how it is helpful—but we haven’t limited our
range. We also offer ideas above and beyond DDD. This is a “software is
eating the world, so be smart and get on board, innovate, and make smart
architectural decisions based on real purpose, before you are left behind”
book. We are addressing the real needs of the kinds of companies with which
we have been engaged for decades, and especially based on our
observations over the past five to ten years.
    We have been slightly concerned that our drumbeat might sound too loud.
Still, when considering the other drums beating all around technology-driven
industries, we think a different kind of drumming is in order. When many
others are on high mountains, constantly beating the “next over-hyped
products as silver bullets” drum, there must be at least an equalizing attempt
at promoting our brains as the best tooling. Our goal is to show that thinking
and rethinking is the way to innovate, and that generic product acquisition
and throwing more technology at hard problems is not a strategic plan. So,
think of us as the people on an adjacent mountain beating the other drum to
“be scientists and engineers” by advancing beyond the ordinary and obvious,
by being innovative and just plain different. And, yes, we definitely broke a
sweat doing that. If our intense drumbeat leaves readers with a lasting
impression that our drums made that specific brain-stimulating rhythm, then
we think we’ve achieved our goal. That’s especially so if the stimulation
leads to greater success for our readers.



Legend/Key for Diagrams
Figure P.2 (on page xxii) shows the modeling elements used in most of the
architecture diagrams in this book. The elements used range from large- to
small-scale, and those in between, depending on the topic of the diagram.
Some are taken from EventStorming described on page 87.
Figure P.2 Modeling elements used in architecture diagrams
throughout this book.


    In Figure P.2, the top half, from the upper left, are strategic and
architectural elements: Business/Bounded Context is a software subsystem
and model boundary of a business capability and a sphere of knowledge; Big
Ball of Mud is the “unarchitecture” in which most enterprises languish; Ports
and Adapters Architecture is both a foundational and versatile style; and
Modules are named packages that contain software components.
    The bottom half of Figure P.2 depicts eight tactical component types,
occurring within a subsystem and that sometimes flow to other subsystems:
Commands cause state transitions; Events capture and carry record of state
transitions across subsystem boundaries; Policy describes business rules;
Aggregate/Entity holds state and offers software behavior; User Role
interacts with the system and often represents a persona; View/Query
collects and retrieves data that can be rendered on user interfaces; Process
manages a multi-step operation through to an eventual completion; and
Domain Service provides cross-cutting software behavior.
    Refer to Figure P.2 for the legend/key of element types, especially when
reading the black-and-white print book, which uses patterns in lieu of colors.



References
[Natalie-Fratto-Risk]
https://twitter.com/NatalieFratto/status/1413123064896921602
[Natalie-Fratto-TED]
https://www.ted.com/talks/natalie_fratto_3_ways_to_measure_your_adaptab
ility_and_how_to_improve_it
[New-Kingmakers] https://www.amazon.com/New-Kingmakers-
Developers-Conquered-World-ebook/dp/B0097E4MEU
Register your copy of Strategic Monoliths and Microservices on the
InformIT site for convenient access to updates and/or corrections as they
become available. To start the registration process, go to
informit.com/register and log in or create an account. Enter the product
ISBN (9780137355464) and click Submit. Look on the Registered
Products tab for an Access Bonus Content link next to this product, and
follow that link to access any available bonus materials. If you would like
to be notified of exclusive offers on new editions and updates, please
check the box to receive email from us.
Chapter 3

Events-First Experimentation and
Discovery


Extroverts thrive on communication, and many business executives, sales and
marketing people, and personnel with other customer-facing roles match that
description. They tend to be energized and reinvigorated by social
interactions. Many extroverts find that their best insights are the result of
unreserved expression and active listening. Software developers and
programmers are often the extreme opposites—introverts with a strong
impulse for silence and solitude, while also welcoming of the opportunity to
work through challenging puzzles. For these professionals, large numbers of
people, noisy conversations, and social requirements to participate can be
draining.
    Yet contrary to popular opinion, neither of these stereotypes is
necessarily accurate. In fact, a few decades ago, it was estimated that among
450 CEOs, 70% of those top executives were introverts. That didn’t often
help those leaders in articulating their business visions and models in
environments where “communicating is the staff of life” [Fortune-Campbell].
Whatever personality characteristics are considered strengths or
weaknesses, individuals are what they are, and most are capable of rising
above to meet complex tasks head-on. The ability to overcome weaknesses,
even those that are born from strengths—extroversion that leads to
impatience and overbearing dominance while engaged in knowledge sharing
—lies within nearly everyone [Inverted-U]. It is imperative to do so because
collaborative communication among distinctively intelligent and respectful
people is an undeniable agency in strategic innovation and differentiation,
which distinguishes one business from all others.
    The question is, how can the broad range of personality types overcome
communication challenges to achieve deep dives into collaborative
communication, learning, and improved software construction? That’s the
topic tackled in this chapter.
    In software development, some fundamental concepts underlie the way
that components work well together. We introduce these concepts first, so
that we can quickly build up to the full use of tools that assist in active
learning, and that can open the way to accelerated knowledge acquisition.



Commands and Events
Much of what we as humans do each day is in response to commands and
events. We tend to capture human thinking in terms of intent of action
(command) and the result of that action (event). Consider work-related
human-to-human communication.
    Sometimes what we do is in reaction to a command, such as “deliver a
vision statement to the board of directors by the close of business.” This
statement might not be thought of as a command, but when boiled down,
that’s exactly what it is. It is an imperative that requires follow-through to
do something.
    A second kind of communication in which we engage daily is reacting to
events. When the vision statement is completed and delivered to the board of
directors, the members of the board might react to the fact that the vision
document is available. Part of their reaction will be to read the vision
statement and prepare comments to be made about it when the board next
meets. In this case, the event is the vision document was delivered to the
board of directors.
    Perhaps one or more members of the board won’t be able to read the
document immediately, or even at all, due to other priorities or personal
circumstances. This means that the event might have three outcomes:

     Accept the event-carried fact. Then, by human thought, the board
     member receiver translates this fact into a few self-commands: read the
     vision document and prepare comments to be made on the vision
     document.
     Postpone the handling of the event-carried fact until later, at which
     point it might be possible to, in the future, deal with the fact that the
     event happened.
     Ignore the handling of the event-carried fact altogether, knowing that
     someone else is in a better position to comment on it.

With this understanding, consider how these communication concepts apply
to software: first with commands, and then with events.
    In discussing “events first,” why lead off with commands? This is a
horse-and-cart dilemma. An event is primarily the result of a command. But
wait—we don’t yet have definitions. In software, what is a command and
what is an event?
    In software, a command is an imperative record—that is, a set of data
named as an explicit request to do something. Looking back to when
graphical user interfaces arrived on the scene en masse some 30 years ago,
consider the typical OK button and Cancel buttons that populated their
windows. Users clicked these buttons to cause the software to perform some
action. These buttons are known as command buttons, because when the
button is clicked, it causes a command to occur. The button labeled OK,
when clicked, causes an action that generally means complete this dialog
box window by applying it. Clicking the Cancel button means cancel this
dialog box window from being applied. Hence, often a software command
action is carried out as the result of a user clicking a specific button that
causes the command to be executed, and the set of data entered in the dialog
window is included as part of the command.
    From a software perspective, an event captures a record of the fact that
a command was executed. It’s a set of data that is named in such a way that it
expresses an action that occurred in the past. To clarify, an event is typically
caused by a command. To the business, the occurrence is important enough to
make a record of the incident. Now couple this understanding with the dialog
window OK command: Once it is executed, an event is recorded, and that
event might contain some or all of the data from the command.
    Consider an example of using the command and event combination. An
applicant wants to apply for an insurance policy. To do so, the applicant fills
out an online policy application form with the required data. To cause the
data to be submitted, the user interface has a command button named Apply
Now. Clicking the Apply Now button submits the form to a service as part of
the Apply Now command data. Upon receiving the form data, the service
validates it, and assuming that the data is complete and correct, the service
starts the policy approval process by recording an event named Policy
Application Submitted, which holds pertinent data from the command.
Figure 3.1 illustrates this process.




Figure 3.1 The Apply Now command causes the Policy Application
Submitted event.


    Note how the Apply Now command is stated in the imperative, as in do
this now. A command may be rejected, and in this case it’s possible that the
rejection will occur due to the application being invalid.
    Assuming that the Apply Now command is carried out to completion, the
fact is recorded in an event that is named as a noun–verb expression in past
tense, Policy Application Submitted. As a rule, the event is persisted into a
database to fully preserve the recorded fact for guaranteed subsequent use.
    In some cases, an event occurs without a command to cause it. For
example, an event might occur when the clock reaches a specific time, such
as 23:59:59 on 31 August. To a specific business, it might be important that
the month has ended. If this is an important occasion to NuCoverage, our
fictional example company, it can be captured as a factual event. A name
such as Month Ended might work well if it is captured within the context of
sales. Yet, in a financial context such as accounting, a month’s end means
something different. For example, Ledger Period Closed could work well as
an event for a book of record. Figure 3.2 depicts this model of time-based
events.
Figure 3.2 Events caused by a date–time change; no command
involved.


   This speaks further to a thought that was introduced in Chapter 2,
“Essential Strategic Learning Tools.” It’s vital to honor the context of
communication when naming concepts. Chapter 2 focused on contexts named
Claims, Underwriting, and Insurance Products. This chapter introduces Sales
and Accounting as two additional contexts, each housed in a unique module.
This example underscores that many different contexts might exist within a
given business, and that to have effective communication, these contexts must
be clear and in the forefront of team members’ minds during software design
conversations.


Using Software Models
What might not be apparent is that the preceding examples are expressions of
software models. Software modeling is a big part of making sense of
businesses’ complexities. Furthermore, the models produced are used to
relate everyday business procedures and processes to software components.
The names used for software models make sense when they are not
arbitrarily chosen, but rather thoughtfully selected and in harmony with the
context of team communications.
    From here forward, this book draws heavily on software modeling as a
practice that leads to deep learning and breakthrough insights resulting in
differentiating innovation. Events are at the heart of a tool used by teams to
help them make constructive and rapid strides toward deep learning. In
addition, both commands and several software modeling concepts play
important roles.



Rapid Learning with EventStorming
Thomas Edison, a known inventor and innovator, commented on his many
attempts to succeed. In the wake of a large number of what would normally
be called “failures,” Edison said, “I have not failed. I’ve just found 10,000
ways that won’t work.”
    Edison didn’t actually invent the lightbulb. By the time he was working
on this problem, lightbulbs had already become common in street lamps,
factories, and shops. But they had limitations. What Edison invented was the
first practical and affordable lightbulb [Time-Edison]. He also didn’t invent
this device on his own. To accomplish this feat, Edison’s team tested 6,000
different filaments before finding the one that met with the goal [Edison-
Museum].
    Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone—sort of. It was argued by
several others that they had created the original invention. In any case, Bell
arrived at his patented telephone in 1876 after centuries of experimentation
and discoveries by others, including the acoustic string phone in 1667,
attributed to British physicist and polymath Robert Hooke. Edison also
contributed to the success of the telephone by inventing the carbon
microphone, which produced a strong telephone signal. Yet telephone use
was originally underwhelming because it ran over telegraph exchanges, to
the benefit of very few consumers. Without the ultimate invention of
telephone exchanges, the widespread use of the telephone would never have
been possible [Phone-History].
    The point being made here is that it is often shortsighted vision or lack of
knowledge that brings about lesser innovations, and then others envision
improvements on those predecessor inventions. The key point: Teams will
often start out to solve one set of problems, but discover greater
opportunities to innovate through experimentation and collaboration. Don’t
prevent this from happening because it might be pointing out that the initial
aim was only obvious and ordinary, or at best an interim step. This process
is led by communication, and that’s what leads to innovation.
    Experimentation within a failure-tolerant culture is key to creating an
environment of innovation. Yet what stands in the way of such an
environment is the following question: How many times must failure be
faced before innovation is reached, and how long, and how much funding
will that require?
    Admittedly, having 6,000 to 10,000 failures is rarely part of the business
plan, timeline, and budget. Then again, neither was the early lightbulb or the
early telephone.

   In short, exceptional organizations are those that go beyond detecting
   and analyzing failures and try to generate intelligent ones for the
   express purpose of learning and innovating. It’s not that managers in
   these organizations enjoy failure. But they recognize it as a necessary
   by-product of experimentation. They also realize that they don’t have
   to do dramatic experiments with large budgets. Often a small pilot, a
   dry run of a new technique, or a simulation will suffice. [HBR-
   Failure]

    In actuality, these sorts of great inventions, such as the broad availability
of true quantum computing, are sorely needed to truly advance technological
progression. In turn, those who seek invention must be prepared to invest
heavily in experimentation and to learn at least 10,000 ways that won’t
work. For everyone else, building incremental innovations as a means to
generate revenues, which are then reinvested in building more incremental
innovations, is the key. Learning rapidly and inexpensively is a necessity.
    As a best-in-class approach to communication, collaboration, and
discovery-based learning, the modeling tool and set of techniques known as
EventStorming [EventStorming], conceptualized and developed by Alberto
Brandolini, offers these benefits with low overhead. The cost of this
approach derives from the inclusion of all the knowledge workers necessary
to participate in creative sessions, with these sessions being constrained
only by their collective imagination. Sessions exclude neither business
experts nor software development experts. To the contrary, EventStorming
requires the participation of everyone with vision, a vital stake, questions,
answers, a willingness to discuss the known knowns and the known
unknowns, and the tenacity to unearth the unknown unknowns. It calls on all
of them to leverage this knowledge to achieve something beyond the
ordinary.

  Note
  Vaughn Vernon, one of the authors, highlighted EventStorming in his
  2016 book, Domain-Driven Design Distilled [DDD-Distilled]. It was
  during one of Vaughn’s 2013 IDDD Workshop events in Europe, in
  which Alberto Brandolini was invited to participate as an instructor,
  that EventStorming was first introduced. That’s also where domain-
  driven design (DDD) was introduced to large numbers of professionals
  and gained a strong foothold, and where the authors of this book first
  met in person. That workshop was a bright moment in software
  development history. Vaughn and several students in that workshop
  have used and championed EventStorming ever since.


    Achieving beyond-ordinary software delivery demands that all business
silos that are generally uncommunicative (the cause of unpleasant
communication), or that even make cross-divisional cooperation prohibitive,
must be overcome. Both non-communication and various competitive and
adversarial behaviors stand in the way of innovation. The business
ultimately suffers even more than the people blocked from making progress.
Everyone has a choice, and two choices should be provided: collaborate or
step out of the way.
    The basic idea behind EventStorming is to model a time-ordered series
of descriptive happenings in a system. The fact-based happenings, which are
recorded on sticky notes as model elements of past occasions, are
supplemented by other kinds of model elements that capture supporting
details about the dynamic environment. Time order is recorded from left to
right. The orange-colored elements (if rendered in color) in the model in
Figure 3.3 are events, and the other colors indicate supplemental, supporting
elements. From the number of orange elements consistently used across the
timeline, it should be clear that this is a tool for events-first modeling.




Figure 3.3 EventStorming produces insights and awareness of business
opportunities.


When Remote Sessions Are Demanded
EventStorming is primarily facilitated as an in-person activity. However, it
can be approximated using online collaborative tooling such as with voice
and video calls, as well as by using a virtual whiteboard with drawing
capabilities. The authors have both experienced and discussed the
advantages and disadvantages of holding storming sessions in a virtual
environment.
    The advantage of using remote sessions is that teams can be composed of
remote workers who are still required to collaborate to get creative work
done. In the era of virtual-everything due to health threats created by in-
person collaboration, this is not only an advantage but an imperative. Even
assuming that in-person collaboration becomes generally viable again,
remote sessions will continue to be a necessity—even if it wasn’t an option
due to businesses’ policies before the COVID-19 pandemic. Remote is here
to stay.
    The major impediment commonly encountered with remote
EventStorming sessions is that the communication channels are stifled. Most
have by now witnessed that conversation between just two people, given a
few seconds in delay of body motion and voice reception, is often choppy.
When attempting to involve a large number of people in such a discussion,
this problem becomes even worse. With in-person sessions, conversations
tend to fork and rejoin—but if that starts to happen with a greater number of
people participating virtually, it’s going to be far worse than what happens
when only two individuals are talking. This might be handled by establishing
conversation protocols such as hand raising and virtual breakout rooms, but
none of these can facilitate the kind of interactions that in-person sessions
afford. As with any collaborative setting, we get what we get to the extent of
the platform’s limitations.
    There is also a physical space limitation in many remote encounters,
given that a video call and the virtual whiteboard both require computer
display real estate. When participants have at least two displays or one very
large display, this is not really an issue. Hosting the video call within a
smaller display area and the virtual whiteboard in a larger area can
generally make the experience better; however, it is less common for
business executives and other management to possess such large viewing
spaces. You should strongly consider this as a cost of doing business. You
can overcome the display real estate limitations by purchasing enough large
external displays for everyone who is needed to participate. Such displays
can usually be acquired for a few hundred dollars/euros each, and most
notebook computers have the capacity to drive both the onboard and external
displays simultaneously. Those currently unfamiliar with these large displays
will soon find them indispensable even beyond remote EventStorming.
    Some practitioners—including the originator of EventStorming, Alberto
Brandolini—conclude that it is impossible to use this technique properly
with online collaboration tools [Remote-Bad]. Others prefer the virtual
approach over in-person sessions and are quite comfortable with it. Such
facilitators tend to have a very limited number of participants not by
intention, but rather based on need.
    The widespread existence of remote teams, as well as the desperate times
that have forced remoteness upon us even when it is not desired, have
created a clear need for virtual EventStorming sessions. This is something
that even Alberto has acknowledged [Remote-Demanded].


Facilitating Sessions
This section of the chapter discusses EventStorming as facilitated in-person.
Using the previous advice and common sense, apply the best practices
outlined in the sections that follow as much as possible when you have no
other choice than remote facilitation. The physical modeling tools are
discussed first, followed by a description of the efforts needed from
individuals.

Modeling Surface
EventStorming requires a virtually unlimited modeling surface, which can be
created by attaching a long strip of paper on a wide wall, say 10
meters/yards.1 This width is obviously not unlimited, but for a lot of cases it
will be enough, and thus as good as unlimited. If it’s not enough, teams must
find a wider wall or continue on an adjacent wall. Depending on purchasing
options, rolls of compatible paper (914 mm/36 inch wide) might be
available—for example, 3M Masking Paper [3M-Paper], 3M Scotch Banner
and Sign Paper [Scotch-Paper], Pacon Colored Kraft Duo-Finish Paper
[Pacon-Paper], and various plotter paper options. Figure 3.4 illustrates this
setup.
1. Yes, the authors are well aware that meters and yards are not the same length. But for those who
   understand metric and those who understand standard, the measurements have meaning.
Figure 3.4 Use a wide wall and a long strip of paper for the modeling
surface.


Markers
Participants must do handwriting, so you should get these awesome pens:
Sharpie Fine Point Permanent Marker [Sharpie] (not Sharpie Ultra Fine!),
shown in Figure 3.5. This is not a joke; the pens make a noticeable
difference. If they’re using pencils, ballpoint pens, or ultra-fine-point pens,
participants won’t be able to see the handwriting well from even a short
distance away. If they’re using very thick markers, the handwriting will be
illegible due to ink bleed and limited writing space. Also not to be
overlooked is that the authors insist the Sharpie Fine Point pens make all
participants smarter. Just Right™ is not just for “Goldilocks and the Three
Bears” [Goldilocks].
Figure 3.5 The right marker makes everyone smarter. Promise.


Sticky Notes
A plentiful amount of sticky notes of a specific set of colors are used as
model element types. Every color represents a different kind of concept
within a specific modeling perspective. Even so, an important consideration
is to avoid turning storming sessions into a science. Keep the modeling
experience simple, remembering that the business itself is complex enough
without adding an extra burden of modeling complexity. The most important
aspect of storming is to engender open communication leading to discovery-
based learning. Correcting newcomers in an effort to create the “perfectly
defined model” will backfire, because that will chase away people critical
to success from sharing in vital communication. If everyone understands one
another and contributes to breakthrough learning, call it a successful
experience.
    Consider using the element colors and types shown in Figure 3.6 and
described in the following list.
Commands are light blue. A command is an imperative, an explicit
request to do something. Generally, commands are the result of a user
gesture to perform some action on data.
Events are orange. An event records a fact that something important
happened in a given model context, and is frequently the outcome of a
user successfully executing a command. An event is named as a noun–
verb in the past tense. For example, our model includes events named
Policy Application Submitted, Month Ended, and Ledger Period
Closed. Given that this tool is named EventStorming, it is expected that
the greater number of stickies will be events, at least early on, because
it is events that drive the modeling experience.
Policies are purple. A policy is a named business rule or set of rules
that must be met, or a set of guidelines available for use upon an
outcome. For example, after a command is executed, an event is emitted
and there might be a decision on how this event impacts the
downstream model. (Purple is a generic color that might actually be
named lilac or mulberry by the manufacturer.)
Aggregates/entities are pale yellow. This is where data is held,
commands are applied and affect the data, and events are the resulting
outcomes that describe what happened. These elements are the nouns of
a model, such as Application, Risk, Policy, Claim, and Coverage.
User roles are bright yellow. This is a user who plays a role in the
model, such as an Underwriter or Adjuster. It might also be the name of
a persona chosen for the purpose of representing someone with
enumerated characteristics. These elements are useful for walking
through specific scenarios, stories, and use cases. The personas can be
used to predict how the imaginary individuals will think and what they
will do or want to do under a given set of circumstances.
Views/queries are forest green. To render a view for a user, a query
must be executed on a datastore to retrieve the view’s data. This
element can also represent when an event occurrence must be projected
into the datastore to update the view data for subsequent querying and
rendering to the user interface.
Processes are purple. A process is similar to a policy but is
responsible for carrying out a series of steps to cause an ultimate
outcome. The routing rules for executing the series of steps are
basically a policy that specifies the process. (Purple is a generic color
that might actually be named lilac or mulberry.)
Contexts and external systems are light pink. It’s possible that your
business process will receive a stimulus from an external system, or
that an external system will be affected by the process being modeled.
The external systems and subsystems are contextual regarding the teams
and conversations within them. Additionally, as the storming activity
increases, it might become clearer which areas of the system belong in
specific communication contexts. If so, place a pink sticky above the
area of the model and name the context.
Opportunities are lime green. Mark areas of the model that represent
opportunities to explore and experiment within to exploit new
competitive advantage. Those familiar with strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, threats (SWOT) analysis might consider these to be
similar to opportunities.
Problems are red. These stickies mark spots in the model where
problems in a specific area of the business process require further
exploration and experimentation. The additional efforts should lead to
improvement, with possible innovation. Those familiar with SWOT
analysis might consider these to be similar to threats.
Voting arrows are dark blue. After a productive storming session,
modelers are each given two dark-blue stickies on which to draw
arrows and point them to opportunities and/or problems in the model.
The opportunities and/or problems that have the most arrows pointing
to them should be our next areas of focus.
Notes are white. Notes can be written directly on any of the applicable
model elements if there is room to do so. Writing a note might be a sign
that a policy should be defined instead. Sometimes notes crosscut
multiple model elements but don’t call for policies. Also, drawing
directional/flow arrows can be useful, especially when the flow turns
back upstream. Both types of notes can be put on white stickies or
another-color note that is clearly not a model element. Don’t write
directly on the paper modeling surface. Model element stickies get
moved around, and notes on stickies can move with them. Notes and
symbols written on the paper modeling surface cannot be moved, so
they end up as distracting scratch-outs all over the place.
Figure 3.6 The sticky note modeling elements by color and type name.
(Note: For print-book readers, colors have been denoted with
patterns.)


    Since the inception of the EventStorming technique, sticky notes with the
“standard colors” have become increasingly more difficult to find, so you
might need to adjust your color palette to whatever is available. In such
cases, be sure to provide a template similar to that illustrated in Figure 3.6.
It’s quite important to use distinct colors for each model element type to keep
all collaborators in sync with each other.
    In addition, you should create a unique icon for each of the model element
types. The main reason for the icon is to indicate the element type for
participants who are colorblind. When conducting workshops, the authors
regularly encounter students who have some form of colorblindness. For
some people, the difference between colors shows up distinctly as shades of
gray or as a darker hue. Even so, the icons can help them distinguish element
types at a quick glance, and can even be advantageous for new participants
not familiar with the color palette.


Big-Picture Modeling
When using EventStorming, big-picture modeling is an exercise in
discovering the overall flow of the system under exploration. Typically a
commercial transcontinental flight cruises at 35,000 feet/10,700 meters, give
or take. With clear skies, from that altitude the human eye can see 240
miles/386 kilometers, and possibly farther. Relatively speaking, that’s the
kind of system vision of process and flow desired from big-picture storming.
Standing on the ground, the human eye can see approximately 3.3 miles/5.3
kilometers. That might be the desired relative distance, but probably even
less, when using design-level storming.

  Note
  Using EventStorming for big-picture modeling is the topic of this book.
  Detailed discussions and examples of design-level modeling are found
  in our follow-on implementation book, Implementing Strategic
  Monoliths and Microservices (Vernon & Jaskuła, Addison-Wesley,
  forthcoming).


   To use EventStorming effectively, it’s important to understand how the
modeling elements work together. Depending on the scope (either big picture
or design level), there will tend to be fewer or more—or at least different—
numbers and combinations of model element types in use. Consider creating
a cheatsheet based on the common use of big-picture model elements.

Cheatsheet
The tool name EventStorming gives a pretty good clue of the priority within
the model element types. Even so, other elements will be quite helpful. Nine
are discussed in this book, and can be employed in various combinations
depending on the modeling situation at hand. Figure 3.7 provides a view of
the cheatsheet modeling elements, and the following bullet points give ideas
on how to use them.

     Events. Create a timeline from left to right using any number of event
     elements that are needed to express the ideas within the process. More
     details on this process appear later in the section “Applying the Tools,”
     but for now think in terms of flooding the modeling surface with events.
     To begin with, the order is less important than the existence of events,
     and the more the better.
     Commands. An event is generally caused by a command, but not
     always. A command is typically the result of some user action. Thus, if
     showing the command that causes an event is useful, place the command
     element to the left of the event that it causes. That’s because the
     command occurs in time order prior to the event.
     Policies. Because some previous unknowns will be discovered during
     storming, the session participants will naturally be unfamiliar with
     some of the ideas in the making. Rather than taking a significant amount
     of time to try to dig into the details that nobody currently knows in
     depth, use a policy sticky to name the area of ambiguity and then move
     on. It will be better to undertake detailed specification at a point when
     more research can be done. Sometimes the people experiencing
     disagreement won’t readily think of moving on, so the storming
     facilitator is responsible for marking the spot and keeping the team
     focused.
     User role/persona. Whether or not it is decided to show a command
     that causes an event in a specific area of the model, it might be useful to
     show the kind of user who will be involved in the scenario being
     realized. Put a bright-yellow user/persona sticky note before (to the left
     of) the elements that are the result of the action they make.
     Context/external system. As the storming activity reveals which
     areas of the system belong in specific communication contexts, place a
     pink sticky above each area of the model that is identifiable and name
     the context. When a command or event from an external source enters
     the model currently under design, the source of the stimulus can be
     shown with a pink sticky note. This draws attention to the fact that
consideration must be given to accepting the external stimulus, and
possibly even how it will be emitted from the external system.
View/query. When it is useful to draw careful attention to an important
user experience, place a green sticky on the modeling surface with the
name of the view and/or query that provides the user interface and/or
the data. In such cases, it’s often useful to show the user role/persona
that will interact with the view. A view/query can also be used to show
that the data that will eventually be used for this purpose must be
explicitly collected and possibly even preassembled and formatted.
Aggregate/entity. This kind of element might be less commonly
needed in the big-picture model, but it can still be helpful to show an
important data holder and behavior component known as an aggregate
or entity. This component is a noun. Commands are executed on this
component, and events are emitted from it. Thus, whenever an
aggregate/entity is used, it can be paired with a command to its left
(what it is told to do) and one or more events to its right (the outcome
emitted due to executing the command).
Opportunity and problem. Mark areas of the model where
opportunities can be exploited and where problems must be resolved.
Note that a problem is different from a policy that marks model
ambiguity and/or disagreement. A problem is something that the team
understands well enough to determine that it is currently wrong and will
cause issues in the future. Those familiar with SWOT analysis might
consider these to be similar to opportunities and threats.
Voting. After going far into the modeling exercise and identifying some
opportunities and/or problems, have the team vote on the opportunities
and/or problems that need the most attention. The opportunities and/or
problems that receive the most votes will be addressed; the others can
be backlogged for later or dismissed as unimportant.
Figure 3.7 The big-picture EventStorming cheatsheet.


    In time, the modeling surface will be flooded not only with orange events,
but also with other types of elements and colors. When there seem to be too
many, move them into time order, and tear off the redundant ones and those
that don’t belong. Now look at the floor. If it’s colorful with many stickies,
that means success. It’s cheap to make these kinds of “mistakes” and learn
from them. Removing a lot of unnecessary stickies is far better than
imagining too few.



Applying the Tools
Those invited to participate in this high-altitude modeling experience must
include both business and technical experts, either with preexisting
knowledge of the system under development or a stakeholder interest in what
is to follow. Most likely those two groups will overlap.
    Include everyone …

     Originating and responsible for carrying the vision forward
     With a vital business and/or technical stake
     Who has questions and answers about the system under exploration
     Who understands known knowns and the known unknowns
     Possessing the tenacity to unearth the unknown unknowns
     Driven to leverage acquired knowledge to achieve beyond the ordinary

    Everyone should have a marker and access to sticky notes, especially the
orange variety used to model events. All involved should speak openly.
    Consider a party or lunch catered in the office. What happens? Unless
there’s a plan in place to get things moving, most people sit or stand around
waiting for someone to make the first move toward the food. One or a few
people who are really hungry and less shy swoop right in, grab a plate, get
some food, find a place conducive to eating the type of food served, and start
eating. These first movers are sometimes called icebreakers. A planned
icebreaker makes it easier for anyone to be more open to getting some food.
It might be as simple as assigning a few people to hand out plates to others
and then escort them up to the food.
    In a similar manner, start an EventStorming session by asking one or a
few participants to be prepared to break the ice. The icebreaker(s) should
start the storming process by thinking of and writing on an orange sticky note
the name of some event in the timeline. Place it on the modeling surface
relative to where it happens in the timeline, either closer to the beginning, in
the middle, or toward the end. These icebreaker events are based on
something that is already well known or at least a common assumption about
how the system does or will function. Figure 3.8 shows the early placement
of a few icebreaker events.
Figure 3.8 Icebreaker events get the storming under way and promote
spontaneity.


    One of the worst problems with an EventStorming session occurs when
the team starts off seeking a high degree of agreement and desire for
consensus and team approval. That is actually the way to shut down
creativity. Agility emphasizes individual expression and spontaneity over
consensus and approval. Because everyone has a marker and sticky notes,
spontaneity is promoted. Encourage everyone to write down what they know
and what they think would be an improvement over what exists or what is
assumed.
    Conversations will ebb and flow. The timeline can be sorted out after
ideas flow for a while and an ebb occurs. Some participants will detach
from the main group and then rejoin. This is all-natural and should not be
discouraged.
    Sometimes there will be uncertainty and even disagreements over how
things currently are or how they should be. These ambiguities might be
resolved if the right business experts are present, but sometimes there’s
simply not enough understanding of the existing or proposed business
process rules. The wrong way to handle this issue is to allow the
disagreements to continue, because it’s an indication that the right questions
and the right answers aren’t available. In such cases, the facilitator should
wield the purple policy sticky, slap it on the modeling surface at the point of
confusion, and name it. Consider this a placeholder for a future conversation
that will probably require interviews with those better acquainted with the
subject matter. It might also require research to learn more about standards
that must be followed, and probably experimentation around the specific
sphere of knowledge, or current lack thereof.
    Figure 3.9 demonstrates how a policy can be used to mark the unknowns
around the events in question. Refer back to Figure 2.6 and Figure 2.7 in
Chapter 2, which show discoveries around the impact named One-Click
Application Submission. The events in Figure 3.9 correspond to the
deliverables surfaced there. This EventStorming session may have occurred
before or after the Impact Mapping session, or simultaneously. These are
tools that can easily be used together at just the right time.




Figure 3.9 The Agent Underwriting Policy marks a place where the
model needs more details.


    The point of the Agent Underwriting Policy in Figure 3.9 is that the
storming team is uncertain about the details around the submission of the full
array of data required for agent customer import and of the same customer’s
application for coverage. The idea from Figures 2.6 and 2.7 is that the One-
Click Application Submission must carry the full payload of customer
account and application information, but the team doesn’t yet know what that
must be or how it will be provided by the agent (e.g., WellBank). So, they
mark this area with a policy that must receive attention from at least a few
different NuCoverage subject-matter experts. Using the policy allows the
storming session to move on without getting bogged down in details that
cannot be disambiguated at the present time.
    Figure 3.9 also indicates how a command is the cause of one or more
events. The command Submit Agent Customer Application is incoming from
the external Agent System (e.g., WellBank). The team decided to show this
command in the big-picture model because it helped illustrate the full context
of the usage and process scenario. Indicating that the external Agent System
is responsible for issuing the command calls out the need for considerable
work to be done in that area. The external system will no doubt be the
objective of ongoing EventStorming sessions that involve another group.
That group will likely have some overlap of members from this effort.
    Reviewing Figure 3.10, both an opportunity and a problem have been
discovered. When an Insured user views their policy information, they
should be prompted to enhance their coverage. For example, a user who has
a good driving record might be offered multi-car discounts. Further, when
NuCoverage begins to offer home insurance through the white-label channel,
the Insured might also be offered more favorable home insurance coverage
and pricing. The team discusses how this can be done, and is certain it will
require additional data from the agent—for example, WellBank. This process
should include proactive email and campaigns as well as offers shared in
customers’ monthly bank statements.
Figure 3.10. An opportunity and a problem have been identified.


    Figure 3.10 also highlights a problem. Although agents such as WellBank
are satisfied with the risk and rate rules, as well as the premiums and
coverages that NuCoverage offers to its customers, the team anticipates that
some agents will want to specify custom rules for all these items, and
possibly more. In addition, NuCoverage might need to provide customizable
user interface components, even beyond styling with rebranding.
    When the team reaches the point of voting on opportunities and problems,
the consensus is that the Upsell Coverage opportunity should definitely be
pursued immediately. However, because WellBank is the first agent that will
go live and it is currently happy to offer the standard NuCoverage risk and
rate rules, as well as premiums and coverages, the team has voted that now
is not the last responsible moment to make decisions on Agent Custom Rules
Required. This specific problem will be backlogged and addressed at the
appropriate future time. The section “Applying the Tools” in Chapter 6,
“Mapping, Failing, and Succeeding—Choose Two,” explains what happens
at that future time.
    Another issue that the NuCoverage team would like to address is why so
many applicants drop out of the application process before completion,
which NuCoverage observed from available data. Compared to those users
who start out applying, the full application submission rate is very low,
which means significant numbers of potential new policies aren’t being
issued. NuCoverage decides to use EventStorming to discover the current
subscription process.
    Figure 3.11 shows just the beginning of the subscription process, but very
early on, an interesting pattern can be observed. The Underwriting and Rate
contexts are constantly exchanging information. The discussion between team
members reveals that the rate according to risk has to be constantly assessed
and the rate must be repeatedly calculated while the subscription process is
ongoing. Based on the current assessed risk, a number of additional
questions may be posed to the applicant, who fills in their responses.
Consequently, as different application forms’ fields are being filled in, the
risk and rate are reassessed and recalculated over and over again.




Figure 3.11 Current subscription process.


    The team has quickly identified that the Rate context must have very
detailed data to calculate the fairest price and assess the correct risk, and
this has a very direct impact on the user experience. To get the final rate,
applicants must respond to many questions that sometimes they cannot
answer without having very specific documents in front of them. And if it
happens that the estimated risk is high, the subscription process is stopped,
leaving the applicant frustrated and without the ability to apply for a policy
or even see the calculated premium prices. The team concludes that the
subscription process is too cumbersome and that the risk assessment and rate
calculation must be done differently. They throw out the current
EventStorming model and start a new one.
    It happens that for some time, the Rate team has been doing controlled
and safe experiments with machine learning algorithms in an effort to replace
the old method of rate calculation and risk assessment. They didn’t want to
follow the hype and play around with machine learning algorithms, but rather
wanted to make practical use of this approach. Thus, experimentation
afforded the team the opportunity to learn how the software could benefit
from machine learning. They were experiencing real pain in maintaining the
current risk assessment and rate calculation models. The rules were really
complicated, it was very difficult to include the new rules into the model,
and adjusting calculations of prices was very error prone. The Rate team
was spending part of their time fixing production bugs based on wrongly
calculated prices and poorly assessed risks. Figure 3.12 highlights the
results of their work.




Figure 3.12 Discovery of the machine learning opportunity.


    The impact on the business was sizable. Machine learning seemed to be a
really promising technology, given that the company already had a lot of
historical data. Additionally, more data can be readily purchased2 from data
providers, so as to enrich the machine learning algorithms. Given even
minimal input from the application form, the team could then use the new
algorithms to assess risk and calculate a rate. Even if the team expects some
number of false positives, the risk of the business insuring too many bad
drivers is not that high. Over time, the machine learning algorithms will be
fine-tuned and the results should be better. Also, the team will experiment
with the new implementation through A/B testing to further limit the risk of
delivering financially damaging implementations. The discovery of this
opportunity has boosted the team’s enthusiasm, and the fact that the
application process can be simplified has led to another discovery.
2. This reference does not mean private personal information sold without the consent of the owners,
   but rather non-identifiable information that can be purchased in some countries. Such information
   includes data about vehicles and the risks associated with them: accidents, number of stolen units, etc.

   NuCoverage’s business people, hearing that the application process can
be simplified, came up with another idea. They had for some time
considered how they could use social media channels to drive sales, but
knew it would be nearly impossible because of the complicated application
form. Now, though, they could envision a chatbot on Facebook that would
allow users to apply for a policy with only a few clicks. Not only would the
business leverage social media recommendation engines, but it could also
determine the best risk and price based on the contextualized and historical
data available to the machine learning algorithm. This was captured in the
model shown in Figure 3.13.
Figure 3.13 EventStorming led to another interesting discovery.


    The business knows that most young people are solely using social media
and mobile phones as their view out to the world. Opening this policy
application channel would be a key enabler in NuCoverage’s quest to expand
to new markets. Winning over young people, by demonstrating that the
business understands them, has the potential to build loyalty for life.
    Yet, the business must also demonstrate its ability to leap forward and
grow with its policyholders and ongoing social trends, no matter what
changes life brings. The business must address the next stages in the life of
every policyholder, because most will involve new insurable risks. This
means more experimentation and discovery-based learning to uncover deep
knowledge as facilitated by the domain-driven approaches you will learn
about in Part II of this book.
Summary
You should embrace tools that help teams overcome communication
challenges and achieve deep dives into collaborative communication,
learning, and improved software construction. Enabling safe and rapid
experimentation within a failure-tolerant culture is key to creating an
environment supportive of innovation. EventStorming captures the expression
of human thinking. It includes ways to record intentions expressed as
actionable commands, and the result of such actions as events are key to
exploration. In addition, a number of modeling elements are available for
deeper learning: policies, data and behavioral entities, user roles, views,
contextual boundaries, as well as ways to mark opportunities and problems,
and which ones to pursue.
    The most prominent points of this chapter are as follows:

     Events-first modeling bridges the communication gap between all
     stakeholders and enables human-oriented productivity and discovery.
     Driving experimentation with events-first models assists with active
     learning, and accelerates knowledge acquisition at a low cost, in terms
     of both people’s time and tooling.
     EventStorming enables cross-divisional cooperation by overcoming the
     challenges of existing business silos that hinder essential
     communication.
     Beginning modeling efforts by examining events helps teams leverage
     constructive feedback and achieve rapid strides toward deep learning
     by making sense of business software complexities.

    So far, this book has heavily emphasized the realization of business
software strategy through learning and discovery to bring about
differentiating innovation. In Part II, we note how businesses can reach
domain-driven results by building on the approaches already discussed.
Employing a knowledge-driven perspective unveils a steady stream of
improvements to software products, leading to strategic differentiation with
competitive advantage.
References
[3M-Paper] https://www.3m.com/3M/en_US/company-us/all-3m-
products/~/3M-White-Masking-Paper/?N=5002385+3293242382&rt=rud
[DDD-Distilled] Vaugh Vernon. Domain-Driven Design Distilled. Boston:
Addison-Wesley, 2016.
[Edison-Museum] http://edisonmuseum.org/content3399.html
[EventStorming] https://leanpub.com/introducing_eventstorming
[Fortune-Campbell]
https://archive.fortune.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/1996/05/13/2
12382/index.htm
[Goldilocks]
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goldilocks_and_the_Three_Bears
[HBR-Failure] https://hbr.org/2011/04/strategies-for-learning-from-failure
[Inverted-U]
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258180060_Too_Much_of_a_Goo
d_Thing_The_Challenge_and_Opportunity_of_the_Inverted_U
[Pacon-Paper] https://pacon.com/dual-light/rainbow-colored-kraft-duo-
finish-rolls-36-x-1000-white.html
[Phone-History] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_the_telephone
[Remote-Bad] https://blog.avanscoperta.it/2020/03/26/remote-
eventstorming/
[Remote-Demanded]
https://blog.avanscoperta.it/2020/03/26/eventstorming-in-covid-19-times
[Sharpie] https://www.sharpie.com/all-
markers/classic/super/SHSuperBlackFine
[Time-Edison] https://time.com/3517011/thomas-edison/
Acknowledgments

Writing a book is hard work. Readers might think that the more books
written, the better the process is for the author. Multi-book authors would
probably agree that the writing flows better as experience grows. Yet, most
multi-book authors probably aim higher each time than they knew how to do
previously. Knowing what lies ahead before the writing begins can be
unnerving. The experienced author knows that each book has a life of its own
and requires more mental energy and writing precision than even their own
expectations could predict.
    It happens every time, at least to one author involved in this effort. In the
case of this book, one author knows what to fear and still did it anyway. The
second author had translated a book from English to French, but his
willingness to sign up for pure writing was based on the experienced author
telling him not to worry.
    That might be what a shark cage guide says just before the steel around
the rank amateur plunges them into the breathtakingly cold waters off of Cape
Town, South Africa. Truth is, the spectators who gaze upon great whites in
action are fairly safe, at least by statistical accounts, because no one has ever
died from that extreme viewing melee. Still, it’s a good thing that sharks
aren’t as attracted to yellow and even brown in water as they are to blood.
(We’ll leave the close-call research to you.) So, trying to write a book
probably won’t kill you. Even so, have you ever wondered about the ratio
between the people who have said they are going to write a book, but don’t,
and those who actually do write a book? It’s probably similar to those who
say they will one day dive with great white sharks and those who actually
do.
    It might take one, two, or a few people to author a book. But it takes an
army to review, edit, edit, edit—add more edits—produce, and publish that
book. The first draft manuscript of this book was considered “very clean,”
but there were still hundreds of additions, deletions, and general corrections
made in every single chapter. And don’t bring up the illustrations. Please.
Even the very best of writers—which these authors would never claim to be
—are subject to a daunting battery of “live rounds” before their book is
ready for the public. Actually, we’ll clarify that. That’s the case if you are an
author under the prestigious Addison-Wesley brand. (We won’t go into the
number of obvious errors you can find in the first few pages of books
produced by other tech publishers.) The analogy of “live rounds” seems
appropriate, because Pearson supports a small army of the best editors with
the best aim that can be hired.
    We are grateful to Pearson Addison-Wesley for giving us the opportunity
to publish under their highly respected label. They have guided us through
the process of writing this book until the publication was in sight. Special
thanks go to our executive editor, Haze Humbert, for driving the process of
acquisition, review, development, and full editorial production so smoothly,
and coddling the process when an overly optimistic author didn’t deliver all
chapters as early as he anticipated. Haze’s assistant editor, Menka Mehta,
kept correspondence and calendars in sync and flowing. Our development
editors Sheri Replin and Chris Cleveland offered high-level edits and
prepared our chapters for page layout. Thanks to Rachel Paul for keeping the
publication process clipping along. Thanks also to Jill Hobbs for being so
kind as she made our “very clean” manuscript read superbly; it’s amazing
what a fine copy editor can do for a book, and especially a book written by
tech authors. When you see things happening steadily but don’t know how,
it’s probably due to a very competent director of product management, and in
our case that is Julie Phifer.
    In case it is not abundantly clear, the vast majority of editorial
professionals with whom we work are women, and we think it is fair to
include this team as “women in tech.” If you are a woman in tech and want to
be a book author, you can’t hope for a better team to work with. These
authors are not only proud to collaborate with this team, but highly honored
that they have trusted us enough to be their extended members. So, future
women authors, or future multi-book women authors, please allow me to
introduce Haze Humbert, as your gateway to the best experience that book
authoring can offer.
    This book would not have been the same without the valuable feedback
from our reviewers. In particular, we would like to thank Mary Poppendieck,
who provided an extensive review of our book and offered rich feedback,
and wrote a great foreword. Mary gave us her in-depth perspective on the
difference between a software developer and a software engineer. Of course,
any company can hire for the position of software engineer, but Mary
describes a role that goes far beyond a title. Readers will find many of her
viewpoints highlighted by sidebars and boxes, but her gifts to our project are
in no way “side anything”—her input is nothing less than pure gold. Pay
attention to what she has to say.
    Other reviewers who offered particularly valuable reviews have served
in such roles as CTO, chief architect, principal architect, and similar, and in
a range of companies from very large to nimble startups. They are listed here
in order by given (first) name: Benjamin Nitu, Eoin Woods, Frank Grimm,
Olaf Zimmermann, Tom Stockton, and Vladik Khononov. There were several
others who offered helpful feedback, including C-level executives, vice
presidents, and other executives, who shall remain unnamed. We are honored
to have gathered a group of highly experienced tech executives who were
early readers, and we are thrilled that they were very impressed with our
book. We would be remiss if we did not mention the many people who
offered to read and review our manuscript early on. We would have taken
pleasure in that, but for various reasons it was not possible to include them.
For every bit of help you provided and the confidence that you showed in us,
thank you one and all.



Vaughn Vernon
This book would truly not have been possible without Haze Humbert. When
Haze took over from my previous executive editor at Addison-Wesley, she
actively suggested and discussed ideas for future books that I might write.
Haze was very patient with me. After having three books published in
roughly five years, I didn’t look forward to authoring another one anytime
soon. I wasn’t burned out, just keenly aware of the commitment necessary to
bring a new book to the world. And I was enjoying designing and creating
software more than writing books. Being a creative person, during my
discussions with Haze I pitched a number of ideas about which she could
have laughed out loud. Yet, her kind demeanor and patience covered my
audacious and/or ludicrous project pitches.
    In early 2020, Haze offered an opportunity that was much more realistic,
but completely unexpected and quite difficult to believe and digest, and
whose acceptance seemed daunting. Her offer was to become the editor of
my own Vaughn Vernon Signature Series. Knowing that my previous books
had been successful—even best sellers—and appreciating that I could
possibly achieve that feat again with another book, was far less earthshaking
than fathoming the inception and delivery of a signature series. It was mind-
blowing stuff. After a few weeks and several discussions with my trusted
advisor, Nicole, the idea sank in. One thought that solidified the possibility
of succeeding was this: If Pearson Addison-Wesley, with its unmatched
experience as an elite publisher, thought enough of my work to make that
offer, it meant that the company was confident that I would succeed. There’s
no way that such a publisher would pitch, invest in, and back this effort if it
thought anything otherwise.
    Based on that alone, not on my own abilities, I accepted. So here I am
today, deeply thankful to Haze and the others with whom she works and
represents. Thank you all so much.
    I am grateful to Tomasz Jaskuła for accepting my offer to co-author this
book with me. I hope the sharks didn’t get too close for comfort. Tomasz is
smart and tenacious, and has also been a worthy business partner in our
training and consulting efforts. He’s also done nearly all of the heavy lifting
for the .NET implementation of our open source reactive platform, VLINGO
XOOM.
    Both of my parents have been a stabilizing force for me, and have taught
me and supported my efforts for as long as I can remember. When I wrote my
first published book, Implementing Domain-Driven Design, my parents
were still full of life and mobile. More than eight years since, and after many
months of lockdown have accumulated due to the pandemic, they now face
additional challenges. It’s a relief that in-person visits with them are once
again permitted, and our time together is so enjoyable. Mom still has her
witty sense of humor, and her stamina has not entirely abandoned her. I am
happy that Dad still yearns for handheld computers, books, and other tools
that enable him to remain in touch with engineering. I look forward to seeing
his eyes light up when I drop by with a new gadget or book. Mom and Dad, I
can’t thank you enough.
    I can’t say enough about the ongoing support from my wife and our son.
As crazy as the past 18 months or so have been, we’ve managed to grow
together under continually changing circumstances. Nicole has been
incredibly resilient through what seemed like unavoidable damage to our
businesses. Despite the challenges, she has led us to new highs in the growth
of both our training and consulting company, Kalele, and our software
product startup VLINGO. VLINGO XOOM, our open source reactive
platform and our initial product, is healthy and its adoption is growing.
VLINGO is also building two new SaaS products. Not only have our teams
been effective, but Nicole’s business savvy has only expanded under greater
challenges. It is inconceivable that I could have succeeded with anything at
all, let alone a signature series and new book authoring, without her.



Tomasz Jaskuła
Back in 2013, Vaughn Vernon authored an outstanding book, Implementing
Domain-Driven Design. He followed that with a world tour of workshops
under the same name. His was the first book in which Domain-Driven Design
was described from a practical point of view, shedding light on many
theoretical concepts that were previously misunderstood or unclear for years
in the Domain-Driven Design community. When I first learned about
Vaughn’s IDDD Workshop, I didn’t hesitate to attend as soon as possible. It
was a time when I was applying Domain-Driven Design on different
projects, and I couldn’t miss the opportunity to meet one of the most
prominent members of the community. So, in 2013 I met Vaughn in Leuven,
Belgium, where one of the workshops took place. This was also where I met
most of the Domain-Driven Design community influencers, who were there to
learn from Vaughn! A few years later, I’m proud to have coauthored this book
with Vaughn, who has become a friend. He has been supportive of me through
the years and I’m really grateful for the confidence he has in me. Writing this
book was a great learning experience. Thank you, Vaughn, for all your help,
your confidence in me, and your support.
    I would also like to thank Nicole Andrade, who, with all the kindness in
the world, has supported us through the effort of writing this book. She has
played an important role in strengthening the friendship between Vaughn and
me through the years, and I know she will continue to do so for years to
come.
    Writing the book without the support from my friend and business partner
François Morin of our company, Luteceo, would have been much more
difficult. His encouragement of my writing, and his willingness to take care
of running the company while I was not available, gave me the space I
needed to take on this project.
    I would like to thank my parents Barbara and Stefan, who have always
believed in me and supported me through my personal challenges. They
taught me early the importance of being curious and learning continuously,
which is one of the greatest pieces of advice I could have ever received.
    Finally, I would not have been able to write this book without the
unconditional support and love from my wife Teresa and my lovely
daughters Lola and Mila. Their encouragement and support were essential
for me to complete this book. Thank you so much.
About the Authors

Vaughn Vernon is an entrepreneur, software developer, and architect with
more than 35 years of experience in a broad range of business domains.
Vaughn is a leading expert in Domain-Driven Design and reactive
architecture and programming, and champions simplicity. Students of his
workshops are consistently impressed by the breadth and depth of what he
teaches and his unique approaches, and as a result have become ongoing
students attending his other well-known workshops. He consults and trains
around Domain-Driven Design, reactive software development, as well as
EventStorming and Event-Driven Architecture, helping teams and
organizations realize the potential of business-driven and reactive systems as
they transform their businesses from technology-driven legacy web
implementation approaches. Vaughn is the author of four books, including the
one you are now reading. His books and his Vaughn Vernon Signature Series
are all published by Addison-Wesley.
  Kalele: https://kalele.io
  VLINGO: https://vlingo.io
  Twitter: @VaughnVernon
  LinkedIn: https://linkedin.com/in/vaughnvernon/

Tomasz Jaskuła is CTO and co-founder of Luteceo, a software consulting
company in Paris. Tomasz has more than 20 years of professional experience
as a developer and software architect, and worked for many companies in the
e-commerce, industry, insurance, and financial fields. He has mainly focused
on creating software that delivers true business value, aligns with strategic
business initiatives, and provides solutions with clearly identifiable
competitive advantages. Tomasz is also a main contributor to the OSS
project XOOM for the .NET platform. In his free time, Tomasz perfects his
guitar playing and spends time with his family.
Twitter: @tjaskula
LinkedIn: https://linkedin.com/in/tomasz-jaskula-16b2823/
Part I

Transformational Strategic
Learning through Experimentation



Executive Summary

Part I of the book introduces the goals of this book by establishing digital
transformation as a revenue-generating business strategy. Every nontrivial
business must take seriously the vital need to focus on software building as
the only way to survive the next few decades of interindustry competition.
Yet, survival all too often results from delivering from a position of
weakness and fear, or simply lack of innovative thinking.
    To lead with boldness, courage, and confidence requires delivering
business-driven differentiating software that transcends the obvious and
ordinary benefits that the survivors manage to shove in front of users. The
clear winners turn up the dial on innovation. This kind of success can be
fostered by improving what a given industry has already achieved, and by
realizing the improvements as software products. Some winners will, as
inventors, entirely change the way an industry works. Even so, invention is
not necessary to be a winning innovator.
   Accomplishing innovation as an industry leader happens deliberately.
The greatest innovations have come from relentless experimentation coupled
with continuous improvement. The mindset and tools that support this kind of
drive are taught in the first three chapters.



Chapter 1: Business Goals and Digital
Transformation
SpaceX didn’t invent the rocket or space travel and exploration. Instead,
SpaceX innovated to the extreme in a preexisting but relatively closed
industry.

     Understand that the real goal is business-driven breakthroughs rather
     than a steady stream of shiny new technical products to excite the geeks.
     Unless the shiny things have a clear and justifiable purpose, they will
     likely serve only to sidetrack real business-centric innovations. The
     focus should be on innovation with software products.
     Recognize that innovation in general consists of realizing breakthrough
     improvements on what exists. There is a strong possibility that the
     potential for uniquely innovative products that can capture new markets
     has been staring everyone in the face. What exists can be the catalyst
     for innovation that delivers even greater value than was available
     yesterday, given new delivery mechanisms and revenue models.
     Perceive where software efforts go wrong. Doing so can be a great way
     to recognize when the same problems start to happen in a local system
     project, or already have occurred. Such problems usually begin with a
     lack of effective collaborative communication, or when communication
     occurs but without recognizing when topics shift from one area of
     expertise to another. Both situations lead to large, mud-like software
     that just won’t die.
     Communication is about knowledge, and knowledge sharing is the only
     way to go beyond the obvious and ordinary. Continuously challenging
     assumptions that are based on ordinary thinking—what is obvious—is
     the first step toward experimentation that leads to discovery.
     Thinking like a product company is not wrong for any business. Many
     businesses sell nontechnology products. When businesses invest in
     software as products, that adds a new dimension in quality and elicits
     motivations to improve through clear customer-based revenue goals
     rather than the internal desire for endless pet features. If a business is
     not there yet, it’s time to get unstuck.



Chapter 2: Essential Strategic Learning
Tools
SpaceX would not have been successful as quickly as it was, or possibly not
ever, unless team members allowed themselves to crash rockets in an effort
to learn quickly. Crashing rockets is a lot more expensive than rapidly failing
software experiments. The SpaceX outcome led to market domination.

     Put business initiatives before software architecture and technical
     platforms. Tell potential customers that the software they should use
     sports a Microservices architecture or runs in the cloud, and that
     message will likely be received with blank stares. Users don’t care
     about Microservices or the cloud; they care about outcomes.
     The quickest way to deliver the best outcomes for users is by driving in
     the straightest possible lines of incremental improvement. Select from
     the best service-level architecture and deployment options based on
     full knowledge of need and purpose.
     Experiments fail, and failure is not a bad thing. Every fast failure
     results in rapid learning. Employ an engineering model that depends on
     an experimentation mindset, not a contractor model that freezes in the
     face of the unknown.
     Embrace failure culture, but understand that failure culture is not blame
     culture. Innovation is difficult enough without troubling the vulnerable
     scientific minds with threats of reprisals for tiptoeing on the razor’s
     edge. When controlled failures lead to success, those failures look like
     the red carpet leading to a pot of gold.
     Recognizing the business capabilities of the business enterprise is a
     sound way to see where investing in strategic software initiatives
     matters most. Don’t build what you can buy or download for free,
     because these solutions are generic and non-differentiating, and often
     complex to implement. Your business is defined by its core capabilities
     and will deliver value if given proper focus and investment.



Chapter 3: Events-First Experimentation
and Discovery
How can the broad range of personality types overcome communication
challenges to achieve deep dives into collaborative communication, learning,
experimentation- and discovery-based innovation, and improved software
construction?

     Don’t segregate the extroverts and the introverts. Pushing business and
     technical minds in separate directions will lead to software that reflects
     that intentional segregation. It won’t be fulfilling—more so the polar
     opposite. Find ways to bring the two mindsets together with an
     unending drive toward discovery-based innovation. The “ways” are
     introduced in Chapter 3 and further explored in Part 2.
     “Events-first” might sound foreign or even intimidating. It need not be.
     Considering that nearly everything (and possibly everything) in
     everyday life is done due to events that stimulate our reactions. In
     software, events are records of things that have happened and that cause
     additional things to happen in response. Focusing on events as a
     learning and discovery tool is first-rate experience in experimentation.
     Experimentation is effective when your organization is iterating quickly
     by means of rapid learning tools. Rapid learning requires collaborative
     communication between business and technical experts. These
     fundamental skills are enhanced with lightweight modeling tools that
     are as expensive as paper and pens, or the use of free online
     collaboration tools.
     Whether in-person or remote, or a hybrid experimentation session of
     mixed in-person and remote participants, inexpensive and free tools are
     available to support a lightweight, exploratory activity, known as
     EventStorming. The important detail is to make sure that the session
     includes both business and technical experts who can answer the
     obvious questions and are willing to challenge the ordinary.

    Prepare for a potentially new way of thinking. Computing and software
are no longer ways to avoid repetitive, manual, paper-based tasks. That
thinking is at least 30 years behind the curve. Don’t treat software as a cost
center. Today’s thinking seeks to deliver software that changes everything, as
a new era of business emerges in every industry. Promote software to a
profit center, and demand strategic innovation as the only acceptable results.
Chapter 1

Business Goals and Digital
Transformation


The most outstanding business achievement is to create a product that is
needed by a great number of consumers, is completely unique, and is
optimally priced. Historically, and in a general sense, the realization of such
an accomplishment has depended on the ability to identify what is essential
or highly desirable for a key market demographic. This is reflected in a
maxim captured by the writings of Plato: “Our need will be the real creator.”
Today, this statement is better known as “Necessity is the mother of
invention.”
    Yet, the most profound innovators are those who invent an ingenious
product even before consumers realize it is needed. Such achievements have
occurred serendipitously, but have also been born from those daring enough
to ask, “Why not?”1 Perhaps mathematician and philosopher Alfred North
Whitehead struck on this notion when he argued that “the basis of invention
is science, and science is almost wholly the outgrowth of pleasurable
intellectual curiosity” [ANW].
1. (George) Bernard Shaw: “Some men see things as they are and ask why. Others dream things that
   never were and ask why not.”

    Of course, the vast majority of businesses face a stark reality:
Breakthroughs in product development that lead to far-reaching market
impact aren’t an everyday happening. Inventing entirely unique products that
capture whole markets might seem as likely as aiming at nothing and hitting
the center of a pot of gold.
    As a result, the predominant business plan is to create competition. The
uniqueness is seen in pricing the replica rather than in creating the original.
Hitting such a large target is entirely ordinary and lacking in imagination and
is not even a sure means of success. If creating (more) competition seems to
be the best play, consider Steve Jobs’s advice: “You can’t look at the
competition and say you’re going to do it better. You have to look at the
competition and say you’re going to do it differently.”


                             SpaceX Innovation

   Between the years 1970 and 2000, the cost to launch a kilogram to
   space averaged $18,500 US per kilogram. For a SpaceX Falcon 9, the
   cost is just $2,720 per kilogram. That’s a factor of 7:1 improvement,
   and so it’s no secret why SpaceX has almost all of the space launch
   business these days. How did they do it? What they did not do was
   work under contract to the government—that is, the only funding
   mechanism up until then. Their goal was to dramatically reduce the
   cost to launch stuff into space. Their main sub-goal under that was to
   recover and reuse booster rockets. There’s a wonderful YouTube
   video of all the boosters they crashed in order to achieve their goal.
   The strategy of integrating events (in this case, test booster launches)
   is how multiple engineering teams rapidly try out their latest version
   with all the other teams. Government contracts would never have
   tolerated the crashes that SpaceX suffered. Yet, the crashes speeded
   up the development of a reliable, cheap booster rocket by perhaps a
   factor of 5, simply by trying things out to discover the unknown
   unknowns, instead of trying to think everything through in excruciating
   detail. That is a pretty classic engineering approach, but would never
   be allowed in a contracting model. The SpaceX team said it was far
   cheaper to have crashes and find the problems than to try to wait
   forever until there was no risk. [Mary Poppendieck]


   Imitation is not a strategy. Differentiation is.
   Differentiation is the strategic business goal that must be constantly
sought after. If pure invention seems nearly impossible, continuous and
tenacious improvement toward innovation should not. In this book, we have
undertaken the task of helping readers achieve strategic business
differentiation through relentless improvement in digital transformation.



Digital Transformation: What Is the Goal?
Understanding that the making of the unordinary is a major feat should not
dissuade anyone from taking small, scientific steps with ongoing
determination toward actual innovation. No matter the complexity in reaching
Z, performing the science of experimentation to arrive at B when starting
from A is a realistic expectation. After that, reaching C is doable, which then
leads to D. It’s a matter of keeping our lab coat and pocket protector on, and
acknowledging that unique products that can capture new markets have likely
been staring us in the face all along.
    Whether Microsoft Office was considered a worker-productivity
innovation from the outset, it certainly has been the most successful suite in
that market. With Office 365, Microsoft didn’t have to reinvent the word
processor and the spreadsheet to innovate. It did, however, add a new
delivery mechanism and capabilities to enable full teams to collaborate,
among other features. Did Microsoft win yet again by innovating through
digital transformation?
    Digital transformation is left to the eye of the business innovator, but
commonly businesses lose sight of the innovation part of transformation.
Transformative innovation requires that the business understands the
difference between changing infrastructural platforms and building new
product value. For example, although taking business digital assets from the
on-premises datacenter to the cloud might be an important IT initiative, it is
not in itself a business initiative in innovation.
    Does migrating your software to the cloud qualify as a digital
transformation? Possibly, but more so if the move supports future
differentiation. It best qualifies if the cloud delivers new opportunities to
innovate or at least to unburden the extremely high cost of digital asset
operations and channel those funds to new products. Think of the cloud as
creating opportunities by freeing you from most traditional datacenter
responsibilities. It won’t be transformative, however, if the shift to the cloud
amounts to trading one set of costs for a different set of costs. Amazon
offering its already successful computing infrastructure to the outside world
was a digital transformation for the company that resulted in cloud
innovation. Paying a subscription to Amazon to use its cloud is not a
transformative innovation to the subscriber. The lesson is clear: Innovate or
be innovated on.
    Just as migrating to the cloud is not an innovation, neither is creating a
new distributed computing architecture. Users don’t care about distributed
computing, Microservices, or Monoliths, or even features. Users care about
outcomes. Improved user outcomes are needed rapidly and without
negatively impacting their workflows. For software to stand a chance at
meaningful transformation, its architecture and design must support the
delivery of better user outcomes as rapidly as possible.
    When using the cloud, an improved architecture and design approach (and
any additional well-tuned steps that lead to productivity gains) make
reaching innovative transformational goals possible. Using infrastructure as
a service frees the business to work on innovative business software rather
than churning on trying to innovate on its infrastructure. Not only are
infrastructure innovations time-consuming and costly, but they might not
benefit the business’s bottom line, and developing infrastructure in-house
might never address infrastructure and operational needs as well as AWS,
Google Cloud Platform, and Azure. Yet, this is not always the case. For
some businesses, it would be much more cost-effective to bring operations
in-house or keep them there [a16z-CloudCostParadox].
    Remember, it’s A to B, B to C, C to D. … Be willing to iterate on any of
these steps so that you can learn enough to take the next one. Understanding
that going back from J to G before reaching K is expected, and that Z need
not ever happen, is liberating. Teams can innovate, but none of these
transformational steps can tolerate lengthy cycles. Chapter 2, “Essential
Strategic Learning Tools,” shows how experimentation is the friend of
innovation and the enemy of indecision.


Software Architecture Quick Glance
This section introduces the term software architecture—a term that is
referred to often herein. It’s a rather broad topic that is covered in more
detail throughout this book.
    For now, think of software architecture as similar to building
architecture. A building has structure, and it reflects the results of
communication that has taken place between the architect and the owner
regarding the design features, by providing the features as specified. A
building forms a whole system of various subsystems, each of which has its
own specific purpose and role. These subsystems are all loosely or more
tightly connected with other parts of the building, working separately or in
conjunction with others to make the building serve its purpose. For example,
a building’s air conditioning requires electrical power, duct work, a
thermostat, insulation, and even a closed area of the building to cool, if that
subsystem is to be effective.
    Likewise, a software architecture provides structural design—that is, the
formulation of many structures, not one. The structural design organizes the
system components, affording them the means to communicate as they work
together. The structure also serves to segregate clusters of components so
they can function independently. The structures must, therefore, help achieve
quality attributes rather than functional ones, while the components within
implement the functionality specified by teams of system builders.
    Figure 1.1 illustrates two subsystems (showing only a fragment of a
whole system), each having components that work together internally but in
isolation from the other subsystem. The two subsystems exchange
information through a communication channel, with the box in between
representing the information that is exchanged. Assume that these two
subsystems are physically separated into two deployment units, and
communicate via a network. This forms a portion of a distributed system.




Figure 1.1 A software architecture provides structure within
subsystems and supports communication between them.
    Another important aspect of both building and software architecture is
that they must support inevitable change. If existing components fail to meet
new demands in either architecture, they must be replaceable without
extreme cost or effort. The architecture must also be able to accommodate
possible needed expansion, again without major impact to the overall
architecture.



Why Software Goes Wrong
We don’t want to overstate the seriousness of the poor state of enterprise
software development, and we don’t think it can be overstated.
    When discussing enterprise software system conditions with Fortune and
Global companies, we quickly learn about their major pain points. These are
always related to aged software that has undergone decades of maintenance,
long after innovation took place. Most discussions identify that software
development is considered a cost center to the business, which makes it that
much more difficult to invest in improvements. Today, however, software
should be a profit center. Unfortunately, the collective corporate mindset is
stuck 30-plus years back when software was meant to make some operations
work faster than manual labor.
    A specific application (or subsystem) starts with a core business reason
to be built. Over time, its core purpose will be enhanced or even altered
considerably. Continuous additions of features can become so extensive that
the application’s original purpose is lost and it likely means different things
to different business functions, with the full diversity of those understandings
not readily known. This often leads to many hands stirring the pot. Eventually
the urgent development transitions from strategic to keeping the software
running by fixing urgent bugs and patching data directly in the database in an
effort to compensate for failures. New features are generally added slowly
and gingerly in an attempt to avoid producing even more bugs. Even so,
injecting new bugs is inevitable: With the ever-increasing level of system
disorder and lost historical perspective, it’s impossible to determine the full
impact a single given change will have on the greater body of software.
    Teams admit that there is no clear and intentional expression of software
architecture, either in individual applications (subsystems) or even overall
in any large system. Where some sense of architecture exists, it is generally
brittle and obsolete given advances in hardware design and operational
environments such as the cloud. Software design is also unintentional, and
thus appears to be nonexistent. In consequence, most ideas behind an
implementation are implicit, committed to the memories of a few people who
worked on it. Both architecture and design are by and large ad hoc and just
plain weird. These unrecognized failures make for some really sloppy
results due to slipshod work.
    Just as dangerous as producing no well-defined architecture at all is
introducing architecture for merely technical reasons. A fascination often
exists among software architects and developers with regard to a novel
development style relative to what they previously employed, or even a
newly named software tool that is the subject of a lot of hype and industry
buzz. This generally introduces accidental complexity2 because the IT
professionals don’t fully understand what impacts their ill-advised decisions
will have on the overall system, including its execution environment and
operations. Yes, Microservices architecture and tools such as Kubernetes,
although duly applicable in the proper context, drive a lot of unqualified
adoption. Unfortunately, such adoption is rarely driven by insights into
business needs.
2. Accidental complexity is caused by developers trying to solve problems, and can be fixed. There is
   also essential complexity inherent in some software, which is caused by the problems being solved.
   Although essential complexity cannot be avoided, it can often be isolated in subsystems and
   components specifically designed to tackle them.

   The prolonged buildup of software model inaccuracies within the system
from failure to perform urgent changes is described as the debt metaphor. In
contrast, the accumulation from accepting uncontrolled changes to a system is
known as software entropy. Both are worth a closer look.


Debt Metaphor
Decades ago, a very smart software developer, Ward Cunningham, who was
at the time working on financial software, needed to explain to his boss why
the current efforts directed toward software change were necessary
[Cunningham]. The changes being made were not in any way ad hoc; in fact,
they were quite the opposite. The kinds of changes being made would make it
look as if the software developers had known all along what they were
doing, and serve to make it look like it was easy to do. The specific
technique they used is now known as software refactoring. In this case, the
refactoring was done in the way it was meant to be implemented—that is, to
reflect the acquisition of new business knowledge into the software model.
    To justify this work, Cunningham needed to explain that if the team didn’t
make adjustments to the software to match their increased learning about the
problem domain, they would continue to stumble over the disagreement
between the software that existed and their current, refined understanding. In
turn, the continued stumbling would slow down the team’s progress on
continued development, which is like paying interest on a loan. Thus, the
debt metaphor was born.
    Anyone can borrow money to enable them to do things sooner than if they
hadn’t obtained the money. Of course, as long as the loan exists, the
borrower will be paying interest. The primary idea in taking on debt in the
software is to be able to release sooner, but with the idea that you must pay
the debt sooner rather than later. The debt is paid by refactoring the software
to reflect the team’s newly acquired knowledge of the business needs. In the
industry at that time, just as it is today, software was rushed out to users
knowing that debt existed, but too often teams had the idea that you never
have to pay off the debt.
    Of course, we all know what happens next. If debt continues to stack up
and the person borrows more and more, all the borrower’s money goes to
paying interest and they reach a point where they have zero buying power.
Matters work the same way with software debt, because eventually
developers deep in debt will be severely compromised. Adding new
features will take longer and longer, to the point where the team will make
almost no progress.
    One of the major problems with the contemporary understanding of the
debt metaphor is that many developers think this metaphor supports
deliberately delivering poorly designed and implemented software so as to
deliver sooner. Yet, the metaphor doesn’t support that practice. Attempting
that feat is more like borrowing on subprime loans3 with upward adjustable
interest rates, which often results in the borrower becoming financially
overextended to the point of defaulting. Debt is useful only as long as it is
controlled; otherwise, it creates instability within the entire system.
3. It’s difficult to comprehend that some are unfamiliar with the 2008 financial crisis that extended years
   into the future. This (ultimately global) crisis was triggered by subprime lending to unqualified
   borrowers for home purchases. Some early readers of the manuscript for this book asked, “What is a
   subprime loan?” Learning about that history could save those readers from a lot of financial grief.



Software Entropy
Software entropy4 is a different metaphor but closely related to the debt
metaphor in terms of the software system conditions it describes. The word
entropy is used in statistical mechanics in the field of thermodynamics to
measure a system’s disorder. Without attempting to go too deep into this
topic: “The second law of thermodynamics states that the entropy of an
isolated system never decreases over time. Isolated systems spontaneously
evolve towards thermodynamic equilibrium, the state with maximum
entropy” [Entropy]. The software entropy metaphor names the condition of a
software system where change is inevitable, and that change will cause
increasing uncontrolled complexity unless a vigorous effort is made to
prevent it [Jacobson].
4. Other analogs besides entropy also paint a vivid picture of the problem, such as software rot,
   software erosion, and software decay. The authors mostly use entropy.



Big Ball of Mud
An application or system like the one previously described has become
known as a Big Ball of Mud. In terms of architecture, it has been further
described as haphazardly structured; sprawling; sloppy; duct-taped-and-
baling-wired; jungle; unregulated growth; repeated, expedient repair.
“Information is shared promiscuously among distant elements of the system,
often to the point where nearly all the important information becomes global
or duplicated. The overall structure of the system may never have been well
defined. If it was, it may have eroded beyond recognition” [BBoM].
    It seems appropriate to describe the Big Ball of Mud “architecture” as the
unarchitecture.
    Throughout the remainder of this chapter, as well as in this book in
general, we will key in on a few of these characteristics: haphazardly
structured; unregulated growth; repeated, expedient repair; information
shared promiscuously; all important information global or duplicated.
    An enterprise norm of the Big Ball of Mud results in organizations
experiencing competitive paralysis, which has spread across business
industries. It is quite common for large enterprises, which once enjoyed
competitive distinction, to become hamstrung by systems with deep debt and
nearly complete entropy.
    You can easily contrast the Big Ball of Mud system in Figure 1.2 to that
depicted in Figure 1.1. Of course, the segment of the system in Figure 1.1
doesn’t represent the number of features that are supported by the system in
Figure 1.2, but clearly the architecture of the first system brings order,
whereas the lack thereof in the second offers chaos.




Figure 1.2 The Big Ball of Mud might be classified as the
unarchitecture.


   These chaotic conditions prevent more than a few software releases per
year, which result in even worse problems than the software releases of
previous years. Individuals and the teams to which they belong tend to
become indifferent and complacent because they know they can’t produce the
change they see as necessary to turn things around. The next level from there
is becoming disillusioned and demoralized. Businesses facing this situation
cannot innovate in software and continue to compete under such conditions.
Eventually they fall victim to a nimble startup that can make significant
strides forward, to the point where within a few months to a few years, it can
displace previous market leaders.


Running Example
From this point forward, we present a case study using an existing Big Ball
of Mud and describe a situation where the affected business struggles to
innovate as it faces the realities of the associated deep debt and entropy.
Because you might already be tired of reading bad news, here’s a spoiler:
The situation improves over time.
    There is no better way to explain the issues every company has to face
with software development than with examples borrowed from the real
world. The example offered here as a case study in dealing with an existing
Big Ball of Mud comes from the insurance industry.
    At some point in life, just about everyone has to deal with an insurance
company. There are various reasons why people seek to obtain diverse
insurance policies. Some are to address legal requirements, and some
provide security measures for the future. These policies include protection
for health, personal lines such as life, automobile, home, mortgage, financial
products investments, international travel, and even the loss of a favorite set
of golf clubs. Policy product innovation in the field of insurance seems
endless, where almost any risk imaginable can be covered. If there is a
potential risk, you’re likely to find an insurance company that will provide
coverage for it.
    The basic idea behind insurance is that some person or thing is at risk of
loss, and for a fee, the calculated financial value of the insured person or
thing may be recovered when such loss occurs. Insurance is a successful
business proposition due to the law of large numbers. This law says that
given a large number of persons and things being covered for risks, the
overall risk of loss among all of those covered persons and things is quite
small, so the fees paid by all will be far greater than the actual payments
made for losses. Also, the greater the probability of loss, the greater the fee
that the insurance company will receive to provide coverage.
    Imagine the complexity of the insurance domain. Is coverage for
automobiles and homes the same? Does adjusting a few business rules that
apply to automobiles make covering homes possible? Even if automobile
and home policies might be considered “close enough” to hold a lot in
common, think of the different risks involved in these two policy types.
    Consider some example scenarios. There is a much higher possibility of
an automobile striking another automobile than there is of a part of a house
striking another house and causing damage. The likelihood of a fire occurring
in a kitchen due to normal everyday use is greater than the likelihood of the
car’s engine catching fire due to normal everyday use. As we can see, the
difference between the two kinds of insurance isn’t subtle. When considering
the variety of possible kinds of coverage, it requires substantial investment
to provide policies that have value to those facing risk and that won’t be a
losing proposition to the insurance company.
    Thus, it’s understandable that the complexity among insurance firms in
terms of business strategy, operations, and software development is
considerable. That is why insurance companies tend to specialize in a small
subset of insurable products. It’s not that they wouldn’t want to be a larger
player in the market, but rather that costs could easily outweigh the benefits
of competing in all possible segments. It’s not surprising, then, that insurance
companies more often attempt to lead in insurance products in which they
have already earned expertise. Even so, adjusting business strategies,
accepting unfamiliar yet measured risks, and developing new products might
be too lucrative an opportunity to pass up.
    It is time to introduce NuCoverage Insurance. This fictitious company is
based on real-world scenarios previously experienced by the authors.
NuCoverage has become the leader in low-cost auto insurance in the United
States. The company was founded in 2001 with a business plan to focus on
providing lower-cost premiums for safe drivers. It saw a clear opportunity
in focusing on this specific market, and it succeeded. The success came from
the company’s ability to assess risks and premiums very accurately and offer
the lowest-cost policies on the market. Almost 20 years later, the company is
insuring 23% of the overall US market, but nearly 70% in the specialized
lower-cost safe-driver market.
Current Business Context
Although NuCoverage is a leader in auto insurance, it would like to expand
its business to other kinds of insurance products. The company has recently
added home insurance and is working on adding personal lines of insurance.
However, adding new insurance products became more complex than was
originally perceived.
    While the development process of personal lines of insurance was
ongoing, management had an opportunity to sign a partnership with one of the
largest US banks, WellBank. The deal involves enabling WellBank to sell
auto insurance under its own brand. WellBank sees great potential in selling
auto insurance along with its familiar auto loans. Behind the WellBank auto
insurance policies is NuCoverage.
    Of course, there are differences between NuCoverage auto insurance
products and the ones to be sold by WellBank. The most prominent
differences relate to the following areas:

     Premiums and coverages
     Rules and premium price calculation
     Risk assessment

   Although NuCoverage has never before experienced this kind of
partnership, the business leaders immediately saw the potential to expand
their reach, and possibly even introduce a completely new and innovative
business strategy. But in what form?


Business Opportunity
NuCoverage’s board of directors and executives recognized an even larger
strategic opportunity than the WellBank partnership: They could introduce a
white-label5 insurance platform that would support any number of fledgling
insurers. Many types of businesses might potentially support selling
insurance products under the business’s own brand. Each business best
knows its customers and grasps what insurance products could be offered.
The recently inked partnership with WellBank is just one example.
NuCoverage can certainly identify other forward-thinking partners that would
share the vision of selling insurance products under a white label.
5. A white-label product is a product or service produced by one company (the producer) that other
   companies (the marketers) rebrand to make it appear as if they had made it.

    For example, NuCoverage could establish partnerships with car makers
that offer their own financing. When a customer purchases a car, the dealer
could offer both financing and manufacturer-branded insurance. The
possibilities are endless, due to the fact that any random company cannot
easily become an insurance company, but can still benefit from the margins
gained through insurance sales. In the long run, NuCoverage considered
diversifying with new insurance products such as motorcycle, yacht, and
even pet insurance.
    This possibility seems very exciting to the board and executives, but
when the software management team learned about the plans, a few of them
had to swallow hard. The original auto insurance application was built
quickly under a lot of pressure to deliver, which quickly led to a Big Ball of
Mud Monolith. As Figure 1.3 illustrates, with more than 20 years of changes
and deep unpaid debt, and the ongoing development of the system for the
personal lines of insurance, the teams have reached a point of stifling
unplanned complexity. The existing software will absolutely not support
current business goals. All the same, development needs to answer the call.
Figure 1.3 The NuCoverage Big Ball of Mud. All business activities are
intertwined with tangled software components that are in deep debt
and near maximum entropy.


    What NuCoverage must understand is that its business is no longer
insurance alone. It was always a product company, but its products were
insurance policies. Its digital transformation is leading the firm to become a
technology company, and its products now include software. To that end,
NuCoverage must start thinking like a technology product company and
making decisions that support that positioning—not only as a quick patch, but
for the long term. This is a very important shift in the company mindset.
NuCoverage’s digital transformation cannot be successful if it is driven only
by technology choices. Company executives will need to focus on changing
the mindset of the organization’s members as well as the organizational
culture and processes before they decide what digital tools to use and how to
use them.



Your Enterprise and Conway’s Law
A long time ago (well, in 1967), in a galaxy not far away (our own), another
really smart software developer presented an unavoidable reality of system
development. It’s so unavoidable that it has become known as a law. The
really smart developer is Mel Conway, and the unavoidable reality is known
as Conway’s Law.

   Conway’s Law: “Organizations which design systems are constrained
   to produce designs which are copies of the communication structures
   of these organizations” [Conway].

   The correlation to the preceding description of Big Ball of Mud is fairly
obvious. It’s generally a matter of broken communication that causes the
“haphazardly structured; unregulated growth; repeated, expedient repair.”
   Still, there is another big communication component that’s almost always
missing: the business stakeholders and the technical stakeholders having
productive communication that leads to deep learning, which in turn leads to
innovation.

   Assertion: Those who want to build good software that innovates
   must get this communication–learning–innovation pathway right
   before trying anything else.

    Funny things, these laws. Is it possible to “get better” at a law? For
example, humans can’t really “get better” at the law of gravity. We know that
if we jump, we will land. The law and our earth’s gravitational influence
even enable us to calculate how much hang time anyone who jumps can
possibly have. Some people can jump higher and farther, but they are still
subject to the same law of gravity as everyone else on earth.
    Just as we don’t get better at the law of gravity, we don’t really get better
at Conway’s Law. We are subject to it. So how do we get Conway’s Law,
right? By training ourselves to be better at dealing with the unavoidable
realities of this law. Consider the challenges and the possibilities.


Communication Is about Knowledge
Knowledge is the most important asset in every company. An organization
cannot excel at everything, so it must choose its core competencies. The
specific knowledge a company acquires within its domain of expertise
enables building competitive advantage.
    Although a company’s knowledge can be materialized in physical
artifacts such as documentation, and in models and algorithms by means of
source code implementations, these are not comparable to the collective
knowledge of its workers. The greater part of the knowledge is carried by
individuals in their minds. The knowledge that has not been externalized is
known as tacit knowledge. It can be collective, such as the routines of
unwritten procedures within the business, or the personal preferred ways of
working that every individual possesses. Personal knowledge is about skills
and crafts—the undocumented trade secrets and historical and contextual
knowledge that a company has collected since its founding.
    People inside the organization exchange knowledge through effective
communication. The better their communication is, the better the company’s
knowledge sharing will be. Yet, knowledge is not just shared statically as if
feeding encyclopedic input with no other gain. Sharing knowledge with an
achievement goal in mind results in learning, and the experience of
collective learning can result in breakthrough innovation.

Knowledge Is Not an Artifact
Because knowledge is not something that one person passes to another in the
same way that a physical object is exchanged, the knowledge transfer takes
place as a combination of sense-giving and sense-reading, as illustrated in
Figure 1.4 [Polanyi].
Figure 1.4 Tacit knowledge transfer through the process of sense-
giving and sense-reading.


    Sense-giving occurs when a person communicates knowledge. The
knowledge is structured into information and externalized [LAMSADE]. The
person on the receiving side undergoes the process of sense-reading. This
individual extracts data from the information received, creating personal
knowledge and internalizing it. The probability that two people will give the
same meaning to the same information is determined not just by the accuracy
of the communication that has occurred between those individuals, but also
by past experiences and the specific contexts in which the receiver places it.
    It is not guaranteed that the piece of information that someone receives is
exactly what another person wants to communicate. This is illustrated with a
concrete example.


The Telephone Game
The Telephone Game illustrates the trouble with certain communication
structures. You might know this game by another name, but the rules are the
same. People form a line, and at one end of the line a person whispers a
message to the next person in line, which is then repeated to the next person,
and so forth, until the message reaches the last person in the line. Finally, the
last message receiver tells everyone the message that they received, and the
person at the beginning of the line discloses the original message. Of course,
the fun comes from the repeated message becoming badly distorted by the
time it reaches the end.
    What’s most interesting about this game and the effects on communication
is that the distortion occurs at every separate point of communication.
Everyone in the line, even those closest to the message’s origin, will be told
something that they can’t repeat accurately. The more points of relay, the
more distorted the message becomes.
    In essence, every point of relayed communication creates a new
translation. This highlights the reality that even communication between just
two people is difficult. It’s not unfeasible to reach clarity and agreement, but
it can be challenging to get there.
    When this happens in business, it’s not a game, and it isn’t fun. And, of
course, the more complex the message, the more likely it is for greater
degrees of inaccuracy to occur. As Figure 1.5 shows, there are often many
points of relay. In very large organizations, there might be even more than 20
levels. The authors often hear of so much hierarchy that it seems insuperably
difficult for anything in the organization to be accomplished with any degree
of accuracy, and the software developers near the end of the line marvel at it.
Figure 1.5 Typical communication structure from C-level to project
managers to developers.


Reaching Agreement Is Hard
The negative feelings of team members, such as indifference, complacency,
disillusionment, and demoralization, can be overcome. It’s done by helping
the team create reachable goals and providing new, lightweight techniques,
such as shaping the team for better communication and engaging in stepwise,
value-driven restructuring of the software.
    Yet, the separations between points of communication and even the style
of communication at each level of hierarchy can cause a widening gap in
business and technical stakeholders. When the communication gap is broad
in the face of big changes, agreement is hard to achieve.
    A noxious problem exists when technical leadership see themselves and
their teams as threatened by criticism of their work and hints that big change
is imminent. After all, the distorted message being heard intimates that what
has existed for a long time isn’t sustainable. As has been noted more than a
few times throughout history, humans have egos and more often than not are
heavily invested in what they have produced as a result of hard work. This
strong attachment is often referred to as being “married.” When an institution
as tightly connected as marriage seems breakable, the involved parties often
adopt a defensive posture that not only tightly grips what has been done, but
also clings to how things have been done. Moving beyond that hardened
stance isn’t easy.
    There are also those from outside who strongly recommend the kind of
changes that are incompatible with business as usual. This apparent
adversary hasn’t gone through the decades of hard work under conflicting
time forces that are blamed for the deep software debt and entropy that today
throbs like two sore thumbs. All of these uncomfortable perceptions
accumulate into a pressure cooker of emotions and shouts of “Executive
betrayal!” in the conscious thoughts of technical leadership. It’s obvious that
the responsible parties have been singled out and will now be repaid for
ongoing delivery under unrelenting impossible circumstances with a swift
shove under a speeding bus.
    When technical leadership has these misgivings, they typically multiply
their doubts by confiding in at least a few members of their teams who will
support their concerns. Naturally those supportive team members themselves
confide in others, and the fear leads to widespread resistance.


But Not Impossible
This whole problem is most often perpetuated by a company culture known
as “us versus them.” This happens, once again, because of deficient
communication structures. Glancing back at Figure 1.5, do you see a big
problem? It’s the hierarchy, which breeds an “us versus them” mentality.
Edicts come down from on high and subordinates carry out the orders. If this
hierarchy is retained, executives shouldn’t expect outcomes that lead to
cooperative change.
   Cooperative change must emanate from leadership, which begins at the
executive level. When executive leadership can see the untenable result of
hierarchical command and control, the answer is not to replace the old
controlled with the newly controlled.
   In every endeavor, teams are by far more successful at large undertakings
than are individuals. Mature sports teams succeed by crafting innovative
playbooks and communicating each play to the whole team with tedious
precision.
   Acting like a team requires being a team. In teams, communication is not
one way. Any one team member can have enough experience to suggest that
something was overlooked in the playbook, or that a given play could be
better with this or that additional move or removal of an inefficiency. When
every team member is respected for their competency and experienced
viewpoint, it serves to make communication that much more effective (Figure
1.6).




Figure 1.6 Optimal communication structures are the result of team
play.


   Consider these keys to optimal communication:

     It’s us, not us and them.
     Servant leadership must not be beneath anyone.
     Realize the power in building strategic organizational structures.
     No one should feel threatened for communicating their constructive
     viewpoints.
     Positive influence is critical in motivating people toward constructive
     action.
     Forming business–technical partnerships based on mutual respect is
     essential.
     Deep communication, critical thinking, and cooperation are
     indispensable to achieve disruptive, transformational, software
     systems.

These strategic behavioral patterns are not new and novel. They are centuries
old and are the practices of successful organizations.
   Conway’s Law doesn’t leave anyone guessing about how to make
organizational communication structures work for the greater good. As the
conclusion of Conway’s paper states:

   We have found a criterion for the structuring of design organizations:
   a design effort should be organized according to the need for
   communication.
       Because the design which occurs first is almost never the best
   possible solution, the prevailing system concept may need to change.
   Therefore, flexibility of organization is important to effective
   design.
       Ways must be found to reward design managers for keeping their
   organizations lean and flexible. [Conway]

These ideas are reflected in Figure 1.5 and are woven throughout this book.



(Re)Thinking Software Strategy
Focusing on thinking and rethinking before the more technical bits is
advisable. Until we understand what strategic business goals must be
pursued, we shouldn’t try to specify system technical characteristics. After
some thoughts on thinking and rethinking, introducing system-level planning
will have meaning and purpose.


Thinking
Known as the source of many quotable quotes, (George) Bernard Shaw made
this statement with regard to thinking:

   I suppose that you seldom think. Few people think more than two or
   three times a year. I have made an international reputation for myself
   by thinking once or twice a week.

Of course, we all think every day. Life would be impossible without thought.
Yet, Shaw’s entertaining statement exposes an interesting fact about people in
general. Much of life is conducted in routine function and regularly employs
a kind of autopilot. The less people need to think about specifics, the less
they will tend to think consciously about what they do. This is why older
people tend to lose cognition unless they remain mentally engaged into their
later years. Shaw shows that deep thought by even the most notable among
thinkers may not occur that often. Rightly, then, a lack of deep thought is a
concern even among knowledge workers.
    The problem with knowledge workers going on autopilot is that software
has little tolerance for mistakes, and especially mistakes left unaddressed for
long periods of time. If individual software developers aren’t careful, they
will become lax in paying debt in their software and transition into the mode
of allowing unregulated growth and using repeated, expedient repair.
    There is also a concern that developers will begin to increasingly rely on
what product companies want to sell them, rather than thinking for
themselves in the context of their business focus. New technology buzz and
hype are pumped in from outside with much more frequency than is possible
from internal business channels. However, the constant drumbeats are
missing the context of what matters most locally. Developers who have
become complacent may wish for technology to solve the problems. Others
will simply long for new toys to engage their minds. Likewise, the dynamic
underlying the Fear of Missing Out (FOMO) is not driven by deep, critical
thought.
    As Figure 1.7 highlights, thinking a lot about everything involved in
system specification is essential in making proper business decisions, and
later the necessary supporting technical decisions. Here are some motivation
checkers:

     What are we doing? Perhaps poor-quality software is being released
     as a means to meet a deadline. This doesn’t put the teams in a good
     position to refactor later, and chances are strong that refactoring is not
     planned. It’s possible that the team is pushing for a big
     reimplementation using a newer, more popular architecture as a
     solution. Don’t overlook the fact that those involved have already
     failed to introduce a helpful architecture into existing systems or
     allowed a lapse in maintaining the architecture that was already in
     place.
     Why are we doing it? External messages based on selling products as
     solutions may sound more attractive than taking sensible steps to shore
     up existing software that has lost its reason for existing in exchange for
     simply keeping it operational. FOMO and CV-driven development can
     become a stronger motivator rather than practicing good development
     techniques. Be certain that a particular architecture or technology is
     justified by actual business and technical needs.
     Think about all the things. Every single learning must be examined
     with critical thought, both for and against. Having a strong opinion and
     talking the loudest is proof of nothing. Thinking in an informed manner,
     clearly, broadly, deeply, and critically are all extremely important.
     These can lead to deep learning.
Figure 1.7 Be a leader in thought. Think a lot and discuss.


   Seeking deep thought kicks off our real mission, which is rethinking our
approach to software development that leads to strategic differentiation.


Rethinking
The ancient Hippocratic Oath6 is said to have included the statement “First
do no harm.” This seems relevant not only in medicine but in other fields,
including software engineering. A legacy system is just that—a legacy.
Legacy implies value, something that is inherited. After all, if it didn’t have
value, it wouldn’t be a legacy; it would be unplugged. The system’s
continued and broad use is what makes it irreplaceable at present. As much
as software professionals often think that the business doesn’t get it, the
business totally gets that decades of investment into a system that has
supported and still supports revenues must not be harmed.
6. Whether the Hippocratic Oath is still considered relevant and applicable today, or at what point the
   specific statement “First do no harm” originated, is beside the point being made. Many physicians still
   perceive the oath and the highlighted statement as important.

    Of course, the deep debt and entropy might not be the fault of those
currently responsible for keeping a system operational, or those who highly
recommend its ultimate replacement. Frankly, many legacy systems do need
some help into retirement. This is especially the case when these systems are
implemented with one or more archaic programming languages,
technologies, and hardware created by people with great-grandchildren, or
who are no longer with us. If this sounds like COBOL using an old database
and running on mainframe computers, the authors won’t deny the similarities.
    Still, there are other systems matching this description, such as the many
business systems built on C/C++. At the time the work was done, C/C++ was
admittedly a better choice than COBOL. One big advantage was the low
memory footprint required by C programs, and the fact that a lot of software
was being built for PCs and their 256K–640K RAM limits. There are also
systems built on completely obsolete and unsupported languages and
technologies such as FoxPro, marginalized Delphi, and the only-mostly-dead
Visual Basic language.
    The major problem with replacing a legacy system is related to losing
features in the replacement process or just plain breaking things that
previously worked. Replacement also happens in the face of continued
legacy change—perhaps slow change, but change nonetheless. Change
doesn’t necessarily mean new features. It can mean daily patches of code and
persisted data. Trying to replace a moving target is like, well, trying to
replace a moving target. It’s hard. This is not to mention the fact that the
software is already in the condition it’s in because it hasn’t received the care
it has both deserved and needed. So suddenly introducing great care as the
target moves and as people are actively firing rounds at it seems iffy at best.
    That a system is to be justifiably replaced using modern architectures,
programming languages, and technologies doesn’t make the task any less
precarious. Many conclude that jumping in and getting it over with by ripping
apart the current implementation and coding up a new one is the only way to
go. It is common for those championing such efforts to request several
months to accomplish this feat, undisturbed by change. That request
translates into halting the moving target for a number of months, and as has
already been noted, the system will very likely require patches to code and
data. Shall those be put on hold for an unknown length of time?


                         When There’s No Choice

   One of the authors was involved in such an effort when platforms
   shifted out from under an implementation. For example, think of
   moving a large system with a graphical user interface implemented on
   MS-DOS to the Microsoft Windows API. One really tricky thing,
   among many that you never think about until you are deep into the
   problem, is that two APIs may transpose parameters. For example, in
   the different APIs, the GUI X,Y coordinate system changed. Missing
   even one of those translations can cause untold problems that are
   extremely difficult to track down. In this case, “extremely difficult”
   involved months of investigation. The overarching reason for the
   complexity was the unsafe memory space with C/C++ programs,
   where incorrect memory references not only overwrite memory in
   invalid ways, but sometimes end up overwriting memory in different
   ways every time. Thus, the bizarre memory access violations
   occurred in many mysterious ways.
       Of course, that’s not a typical problem faced in today’s
   modernizations—modern programming languages mostly prevent that
   specific kind of error. In any case, there are potential gotchas that are
   completely unpredictable. Dealing with these kinds of unplanned
   complications can eat up much of the “number of months” that were
   presumably reserved for “jumping in, ripping apart, and coding up a
   new one.” It’s always harder and takes longer than you think.


   Where is the rethinking in all this? In blowing the common legacy escape
hatch, it appears likely that a lot of harm will be done. It’s a knee-jerk
reaction to vast problems that leads to a high probability of replacing them
with immense problems or ending up with two sets of enormous problems.
The Big Ball of Mud being the enterprise norm leads to competitive
paralysis—but to first cause no harm, the patient must still be able to breathe
if there can be any hope to perform health-restoring treatments. We need to
find a way to jump into a reimplementation, but not by doing one of those
cannonball dives that makes a huge splash. This requires some special anti-
splash measures and maneuvers.
    What hasn’t been considered is the creation of new learning
opportunities. If we merely rewrite in C# a large system that was originally
implemented in Visual Basic, from a strategic point of view nothing at all has
been learned. One client, for example, observed in a replacement effort of a
COBOL legacy system that 70% of the business rules developed over 40
years had become obsolete. These still lived in the COBOL code and
required cognitive load to deal with them. Now, imagine not learning this
information, but instead spending the time and the effort to translate all of
these business rules from COBOL to a modern architecture, programming
language, and technology set. The transformation was already a complex
multiyear program without including a very large body of unnecessary
rework.
    Expanding our previous motivation checkers, the following questions
highlight the need for vital strategic learnings:

     What are the business goals and strategies? Every software feature
     within a strategic initiative should have direct traceability to a core
     business goal. To accomplish this, state (1) the business goal, (2) the
     target market segment (persons and/or groups) that must be influenced
     to reach that goal, and (3) the impact that must be made on the target
     market segment. Until the necessary impacts are understood, there is no
     way to identify the software functionality that is needed or a range of
     specific requirements. The tools for uncovering the strategic goals and
     impacts are described later in this book.
     Why aren’t we doing it? There’s another important term in technology
     that needs to be taken into account when making strategic decisions:
     You Aren’t Gonna Need It (YAGNI). This term was meant to help
     teams avoid the development of currently unnecessary business
     features, and there are good reasons to do so. Spending time and money,
     and taking risks, on delivering unnecessary software is a poor choice.
     Unfortunately, declaring YAGNI has become a general way to cast any
     opposing viewpoint in a bad light. Using YAGNI as a trump card won’t
     win team loyalty or create breakthrough learning opportunities.
     Sometimes not implementing some features that “aren’t needed” is a
     mistake of enormous proportions. If a breakthrough that can lead to
     innovative differentiation is shot down immediately, it’s likely more a
     problem with the shooters’ ability to think deeply and recognize an
     opportunity or the loss thereof. In fact, absolutely refusing to make
     room for subsequent discussions will reveal the weakest thinkers in the
     mix.
     Can we try new things? Teams might agree or disagree about what
     might work in their target market. It is mostly impossible to absolutely
     foresee the market’s reaction to a given expression of strategy. Gauging
     the market’s response accurately requires giving the market the
     opportunity to try out the business ideas. Using the science of
     experimentation may provide the only true way to understand the real
     possibilities and limitations of strategies; however, to try new things,
     it’s not always easy to think outside of the established mental model. “It
     is tremendously difficult for people to realize when they are chained to
     a model, especially if it is subconscious or so woven into the culture or
     their expectations that they can no longer see how much it is holding
     them back” [Brabandère].
     What are the service-level requirements? Once a reasonable set of
     strategic business goals is understood, the teams involved can start to
     identify the necessary architectural decisions that must be made. The
     candidate architectural decisions will depend on the service-level
     requirements. Teams should not settle on solutions too quickly because
     there are often advantages in delaying decisions about some details of
     the architecture. For example, even if the teams are convinced that a
     Microservices architecture is necessary, delaying the introduction of
     services separated by the computing network can help the team focus on
     actual business drivers rather than trying to cope with the distributed
     computing overhead too early. (See the section “Deployment Last,” in
     Chapter 2, “Essential Strategic Learning Tools.”)

    Rethinking is a critical step, and it feels right. There is a benefit from
thinking multidimensionally and critically, and rethinking from a position of
ordinary to a fresh strategic vantage point.
    We need not conclude, however, that all legacy Monoliths are necessarily
the Big Ball of Mud variety. While the vast majority are definitely Big Ball
of Mud systems, we must think carefully before making this judgment. The
point being made follows next.



Are Monoliths Bad?
Over the past several years, the words Monolith and Monolithic as applied
to software have come to have very negative connotations. Even so, just
because the vast majority of Monolithic legacy systems have arrived at the
Big Ball of Mud zone, that doesn’t mean it is a necessary destination. It’s not
the Monolith that’s the problem—it’s the mud.
    The term Monolith can simply mean that the software of an entire
application or whole system is housed in a container that is designed to hold
more than one subsystem. The Monolith container often holds all or most of
the subsystems of an entire application or system. Because every part of the
system is held in one container, it is described as self-contained.
    The internal architecture of a Monolith can be designed to keep the
components of different subsystems isolated from each other, but can also
provide the means for communication and information exchange between
subsystems. Figure 1.8 shows the same two subsystems from Figure 1.1, but
with both subsystems inside a Monolithic container.
Figure 1.8 A Monolithic container showing a portion of a whole
system. Only two of possibly several subsystems that make up the
whole are shown here.


    In Figure 1.1, we assumed that the two subsystems were physically
separated from each other in two processes, and that they communicated via
a network. That diagram implies a distributed system. In Figure 1.8, the same
two subsystems are physically together in the same process and perform their
information exchange through simple in-process mechanisms such as
programming language methods or functions.
    Even if the ultimate system architecture is to be Microservices, there are
advantages to the system starting out life as a Monolith. Not having a
network between subsystems can prevent a lot of problems that are
unnecessary to contend with early on and are quite counterproductive. Also,
using a Monolith is a good way to demonstrate commitment to loose coupling
between subsystems when it is easier to allow tight coupling. If transforming
to a Microservices architecture is the plan, you will ultimately find out how
loose the coupling actually is.
    Although some oppose the approach of using a Monolithic architecture
for early development where a distributed Microservices architecture is the
target, please reserve judgment until this topic is discussed in Parts II and III
of this book.



Are Microservices Good?
The term Microservice has come to mean many different things. One
definition is that a Microservice should be no more than 100 lines of code.
Another claims that it’s not 100 lines, but 400. Yet another asserts that it’s
1,000 lines. There are at least a few problems with all of these attempted
definitions, which probably reflect more on the name itself. The term
“micro” is often seen to imply size—but what does “micro” mean?
    When using “micro” to describe computer CPUs, the full term is
microprocessors. The basic idea behind a microprocessor is that it packs all
the functionality of a CPU onto one or a few integrated circuits. Before the
design and availability of microprocessors, computers typically relied on a
number of circuit boards with many integrated circuits.
    Note, however, that the term microprocessor doesn’t carry the idea of
size, as if some arbitrary specific number of integrated circuits or transistors
is either appropriate or not. Figure 1.9 shows a case in point—that one of the
most powerful CPUs available is still a microprocessor. For example, the
28-core Xeon Platinum 8180 sports 8 billion transistors. The Intel 4004 had
2,250 transistors (year 1971). Both are microprocessors.




Figure 1.9 The Intel Xeon is one of the most powerful modern
microprocessors. No one has said it is not a microprocessor because it
has “too many circuits and transistors.”


   Microprocessor limits are generally set based on purpose; that is, some
microprocessor types simply don’t need to provide the power of others.
They can be used for small devices that have limited power resources, and
thus should require less draws on power. Also, when the power of a single
microprocessor—even one of outstanding proportions—is not enough for the
computing circumstances, computers are supplied with multiple
microprocessors.
    Another problem with putting some arbitrary limit on the number of lines
of code in a Microservice is the fact that a programming language has a lot to
do with the number of lines of code required to support some specific system
functionality. Saying that this limit is 100 lines of code for Java is different
than saying it is 100 lines of code for Ruby, because Java tends to require
33% more code than Ruby. In a matchup of Java versus Clojure, Java
requires around 360% more lines of code.
    Furthermore, and even more germane to the point, creating tiny-tiny
Microservices has been shown to result in a number of disadvantages:

     The sheer number of Microservices can grow beyond hundreds, to
     thousands, and even tens of thousands.
     Lack of dependency comprehension leads to unpredictability of
     changes.
     Unpredictability of change results in no changes or decommissioning.
     More Microservices are created with similar (copy-paste)
     functionality.
     The expense of ever-growing yet often obsolete Microservices
     increases.

    These major disadvantages suggest that the result is unlikely to be the
hoped-for cleaner distributed system solution and autonomy. With the
background given in this chapter, the problem should be apparent. In essence,
the many tiny-tiny Micro-services have created the same situation as the
Monolithic Big Ball of Mud, as seen in Figure 1.10. No one understands the
system, which falls prey to the same issues that are experienced with a
Monolithic Big Ball of Mud: haphazard structure; unregulated growth;
repeated, expedient repair; information shared promiscuously; all important
information global or duplicated.
Figure 1.10 Many tiny-tiny Microservices result in a distributed Big
Ball of Mud.


    Some solutions and additional efforts may be made to move beyond these
outcomes, but they generally do not use a completely separate container
deployment per Microservice.
    The best way to think about a Microservice is not by defining the size, but
rather by determining the purpose. A Microservice is smallish in comparison
to a Monolith, but the guidance we provide is to avoid implementing tiny-
tiny Microservices. These points are discussed in detail later, in Part II of
this book.



Don’t Blame Agile
In the 1969 film If It’s Tuesday, This Must Be Belgium, a tour guide leads
groups of Americans on fast-paced sightseeing tours through Europe. As far
as touring is concerned, this is a classic example of travelers going through
the motions.
    The same kind of tour can happen with agile software development. “It’s
10:00 a.m. and we’re standing. We must be doing agile.” With reference to
daily standups, going through the motions turns otherwise valuable project
communications into mere ceremony. Reading Scrum.org on the topic “Agile:
Methodology or Framework or Philosophy” is a real eye-opener. At the time
of writing, there were approximately 20 replies to this post, and about as
many different answers.7 A reasonable question regarding this concern is,
why should that matter?
7. Given that the number of permutations in three options is six, somehow ending with 20 answers
   seems odder than the fact that there are even 20 answers at all.

    Recently, agile software development has drawn a lot of criticism.
Perhaps most of the criticism is directed toward a specific project
management methodology for which mastery certifications can be obtained
after a few days of training, because the two are often conflated. This is a
sad state, given what agile software development should represent. Much of
the industry claiming to use agile methodology or to be agile can’t really
define it, as noted in the previous Scrum.org experience.
    The original agile philosophy never promised to turn poor software
developers into good software developers. Has agile made any promises at
all? There’s a mindset to developing software in an agile way (the Agile
Manifesto), and there is a history behind that [Cockburn]. As already
observed, agile can’t even cause developers to embrace that mindset.
    Consider one problem. The ideas of agile software development have
been reduced to arguments over whether to refer to this approach as Agile,
agile, or “Agile.” In fact, we could even draw fire for referring to it as an
“approach.” So, from here on, we will refer to “it” no longer as “it” but as
#agile. This terminology is intended to represent every possible use.
However each individual chooses to spell #agile, software developers must
demand to get more from #agile than #agile takes from them.
    Consider a second problem. A vast complexity has become wrapped
around some rather straightforward concepts. For example, the terms and
steps of #agile are actually presented as subway maps. At least one high-end
consultancy represents its #agile approach in the form of a map of the New
York City or London subway/tube system. Although traveling anywhere on an
extensive subway network is not extremely complicated, most wouldn’t
choose to take every route in a large system on a daily or weekly basis just
to reach a necessary destination, such as the workplace in the morning and
home in the evening.
    This is all very unfortunate. Many have hijacked #agile and moved it far
away from its origins, or simply travel in naivety. Usage should be far
simpler. Working in #agile should boil down to these four things:
collaborate, deliver, reflect, and improve [Cockburn-Forgiveness].
    Before accepting any extraneous and elaborate routes, teams should learn
how to get to work and back home in these four basic steps:

  1. Identify goals. Goals are larger than individual work tasks. They
     require collaboration to find the impacts that your software must make
     on the consumer. These kinds of impacts change the consumers’
     behaviors in positive ways. They are recognized by consumers as what
     they need, but before they even realized their need.
  2. Define short iterations and implement. An iteration is a procedure in
     which repetition of a sequence of operations yields results successively
     closer to a desired result. A team collaborates to identify these. Given
     project pressures, unavoidable interruptions, and other distractions,
     including the end of day and week, teams should limit work items to a
     number that can be readily remembered and grasped.
  3. Deploy increments when legitimate value is achieved. An increment
     is the action or process of increasing, especially in quantity or value;
     something gained or added; or the amount or degree by which something
     changes. If delivery of value is not possible by means of one day’s
     work, then at least an increment toward value can be reached. Teams
     should be able to string together one or two additional days of iterations
     and reach value delivery.
  4. Review the outcome, record debt, goto 1. Now reflect on what was
     accomplished (or not), with the intention of improving. Has the
     increment achieved an intended and vital impact? If not, the team may
     shift toward another set of iterations with increments of different value.
     If so, note what the team sees as reasons for success. Even when
     reaching delivery of some critical value, it is normal that an incremental
     result doesn’t leave the team feeling entirely successful. Implementation
     leads to increased learning and a clearer understanding of the problem
     space. The iteration is time boxed and doesn’t leave enough time to
     immediately remodel or refactor current results. Record it as debt. The
     debt can be addressed in the next iterations, leading to an increment of
     improved value that gets delivered.

   Planning too far ahead will lead to conflicts in goals and execution.
Going too far too fast can lead to purposely overlooking debt or forgetting to
record it. When under heavy pressure, the team might fail to care for debt
sooner than later.
   The few steps identified in this brief overview of essential #agile can
take teams a long way forward. This is the mindset that experimentation
affords, and what #agile should primarily be about. It’s possible to get more
out of #agile than #agile takes.



Getting Unstuck
Any company that has gotten stuck in a Big Ball of Mud and taken complex
detours with technologies and techniques needs to get unstuck and find its
way out. There isn’t one single answer; there are no silver bullets. At the
same time, there are means that can serve companies well.
    A software system that has become deeply in debt and possibly reached
the maximum entropy level took years or even decades for its sterling
qualities to erode and digress that far. It’s going to take time to make
progress out of this mess. Even so, effecting big change is not a waste of time
or money. Consider two reasons for this assertion, both based on the poor
decision to continue to invest in a losing proposition:

     Escalation of commitment. This is a human behavior pattern in which
     an individual or group facing increasingly negative outcomes from a
     decision, action, or investment nevertheless continues the behavior
     instead of altering course. The actor maintains behaviors that are
     irrational, but align with previous decisions and actions [EoC].
     Sunk cost fallacy. A sunk cost is a sum paid in the past that is no
     longer relevant to decisions about the future. “Sunk costs do, in fact,
     influence people’s decisions, with people believing that investments
     (e.g., sunk costs) justify further expenditures. People demonstrate ‘a
     greater tendency to continue an endeavor once an investment in money,
     effort, or time has been made.’ Such behavior may be described as
     ‘throwing good money after bad,’ while refusing to succumb to what
     may be described as ‘cutting one’s losses’” [SunkCost].

This does not mean that saving any part of the preexisting system always
equates to chasing the sunk cost fallacy. The point is that continuing to
maintain the existing system as is, with its deep debt and near maximum
entropy, is a losing proposition from both an emotional standpoint and a
financial position.
    Time won’t stand still and change won’t cease while teams heroically
defeat the great brown blob. Moving onward as time ticks away while
surrounded by mud and inevitable change, and without sinking deeper, is an
absolute necessity. Succeeding under those conditions depends more on
attitude than on distributed computing. Positive attitude is developed through
confidence, and the remainder of this book delivers a number of tools and
techniques to build the confidence needed to make strides to achieve
strategic innovation.



Summary
This chapter discussed the importance of innovation as a means to achieve
software differentiation as a primary business goal. To aim for relentless
improvement in digital transformation is the strongest play in the age of
“software is eating the world.” Software architecture was introduced, along
with the role that it plays inside every company. The chapter explored how
the effects of Conway’s Law shape the communication paths inside
organizations and teams, and the ways it impacts the software produced by
organizations and teams. Discussing the importance of communication
brought the topic of knowledge to the fore. Knowledge is one of the most
important assets in every company. To obtain the best results with software,
knowledge must be raised from tacit to shared. Knowledge cannot be shared
without proper communication paths, and competitive advantage can’t be
achieved without either. Ultimately, bad communication leads to incomplete
knowledge and poorly modeled software—and then to the Big Ball of Mud
as the best possible outcome. Finally, we focused on the original #agile
mindset and how it can help teams to get unstuck and focus on the right goals.
    The principal points made in this chapter are as follows:

     Innovation is the most important aspect of digital transformation.
     Innovation leads to profitable differentiation from competitors, and
     should therefore be a strategic goal of every company.
     Software architecture must support the inevitable change without
     extreme cost and effort. Without good architecture, the best alternative
     is bad architecture, which eventually leads to unarchitecture.
     The Big Bull of Mud is often the outcome of broken communication that
     can’t possibly lead to deep learning and shared knowledge.
     The people in organizations must exchange knowledge through open
     and nuanced communication that can lead to breakthroughs in
     innovation.
     Monoliths are not necessarily bad and Microservices are not
     necessarily good. Choosing one over the other based on purpose is a
     result of an informed decision.

   Chapter 2 introduces strategic learning tools that can help mitigate poor
communication and set the bar higher for enterprise culture. By applying
these tools, you can learn how to make informed decisions based on
experimentation, and how they can affect the resulting software and its
architecture.



References
[ANW] A. N. Whitehead. “Technical Education and Its Relation to Science
and Literature.” Mathematical Gazette 9, no. 128 (1917): 20–33.
[a16z-CloudCostParadox] https://a16z.com/2021/05/27/cost-of-cloud-
paradox-market-cap-cloud-lifecycle-scale-growth-repatriation-optimization/
[BBoM] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_ball_of_mud
[Brabandère] Luc de Brabandère and Alan Iny. Thinking in New Boxes: A
New Paradigm for Business Creativity. New York: Random House, 2013.
[Cockburn]
https://web.archive.org/web/20170626102447/http://alistair.cockburn.us/Ho
w+I+saved+Agile+and+the+Rest+of+the+World
[Cockburn-Forgiveness] https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=pq1EXK_yL04 (presented in French, English, and Spanish)
[Conway] http://melconway.com/Home/Committees_Paper.html
[Cunningham] http://wiki.c2.com/?WardExplainsDebtMetaphor
[Entropy] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entropy
[EoC] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Escalation_of_commitment
[Jacobson] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_entropy
[LAMSADE] Pierre-Emmanuel Arduin, Michel Grundstein, Elsa Negre, and
Camille Rosenthal-Sabroux. “Formalizing an Empirical Model: A Way to
Enhance the Communication between Users and Designers.” IEEE 7th
International Conference on Research Challenges in Information Science
(2013): 1–10. doi: 10.1109/RCIS.2013.6577697.
[Manifesto] https://agilemanifesto.org/
[Polanyi] M. Polanyi. “Sense-Giving and Sense-Reading.” Philosophy:
Journal of the Royal Institute of Philosophy 42, no. 162 (1967): 301–323.
[SunkCost] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sunk_cost
Chapter 2

Essential Strategic Learning Tools


A strategy is the what aspect of business creation, leading to new initiatives
that are intentionally unique and produce a combination of profit sources. It
asks, what must our business do to differentiate, or extend and increase its
uniqueness, from other businesses? This makes strategic planning a means to
attain innovation, but there must actually be innovation in recognizing a
valuable, differentiated strategy.

   So you can’t go out and ask people, you know, what the next big thing
   is. There’s a great quote by Henry Ford, right? He said, “If I’d have
   asked my customers what they wanted, they would have told me ‘A
   faster horse.’”
                                                             —Steve Jobs

This doesn’t mean that it would be fruitless to ask a customer what they think
is the next big thing. Actually “a faster horse” can be a great hint that “faster
travel” is the critical takeaway. It is important to talk with customers and the
public in general. Still, the business should have the talent to gain a keen
understanding of the what part of business. It’s a requisite for success. It must
be sought after, and the dig-and-find happens through learning. Note the
earlier part of the quote from Jobs, speaking of Apple’s own internal talent
with regard to the iPod.

   We did iTunes because we all love music. We made what we thought
   was the best jukebox in iTunes. Then we all wanted to carry our
   whole music libraries around with us. The team worked really hard.
   And the reason that they worked so hard is because we all wanted
   one. You know? I mean, the first few hundred customers were us.
        It’s not about pop culture, and it’s not about fooling people, and
   it’s not about convincing people that they want something they don’t.
   We figure out what we want. And I think we’re pretty good at having
   the right discipline to think through whether a lot of other people are
   going to want it, too. That’s what we get paid to do.
                                                                —Steve Jobs

   To learn well, it sure helps to have good tools for digging to unearth
knowledge from people and facts. This chapter provides strategic discovery
tools and demonstrates how they can be used. Some of the best tools are
more inside than outside.



Making Decisions Early and Late, Right
and Wrong
Decisions can be paralyzing if you don’t learn how to thrive on making
timely, as well as right and wrong, decisions. Both can work to our
advantage. Don’t fear decision making. Understand when decisions should be
made. Some decisions are best made as early as possible; others are best
made as late as possible. Some decisions will be right; some will be wrong.
Gain the fortitude and acquire the techniques required to celebrate hard
decisions, right and wrong.
    A common principle of #agile is that all decisions should be made at the
last responsible moment [Cohn]. How do we know when we have reached
this “last responsible moment” decision point at any given time? Advice is
provided by Mary and Tom Poppendieck:

   Concurrent software development means starting development when
   only partial requirements are known and developing in short
   iterations that provide the feedback that causes the system to emerge.
   Concurrent development makes it possible to delay commitment until
   the last responsible moment, that is, the moment at which failing to
   make a decision eliminates an important alternative. If commitments
   are delayed beyond the last responsible moment, then decisions are
   made by default, which is generally not a good approach to making
   decisions. [Poppendieck]

    More concisely, it can be said that decisions should not be made
irresponsibly, whether they are made early or late [LeanArch]. Irresponsible
decision making occurs when there is not enough insight to support any given
decision, which is likely an occasion of making decisions too early. Yet,
gaining necessary insight is possible if there is currently enough information
to support a decision. If information is available but unvetted, the next steps
should be obvious.
    As time advances, avoiding necessary decisions is even worse than
making the wrong decisions. Self-motivated workers don’t sit around
waiting for things to happen. Early on, writing some initial code or defining
general-purpose modeling abstractions is common behavior, and usually
involves at least a few opinionated developers going in different directions.
These arbitrary actions lead to commitments but exclude the team from the
decision-making process. That pattern sets a definite structure for the
application or the underlying architecture that can last for the entire software
life cycle.
    Ask yourself, is it really desirable to commit to uncontrolled structure,
form, and abstraction based on unconfirmed assumptions? Obviously, it is
best to consciously decide on the direction that application architecture
should take. Even so, it’s possible for a team to drag its collective feet for
fear of creating the wrong architecture.
    Decisions can be made if the team has enough information to get started.
This might involve several practitioners providing different viewpoints, but
kicking the can down the road can’t go on indefinitely. Moreover, if we make
some poor decisions, they are not necessarily written in stone. Assuming a
team can be honest about the negative impacts of accepting poor decisions
and not allowing them to go unaddressed, they will take corrective action as
quickly as possible. Refactoring an architectural structure early on is not a
large time sink. Later on, that cost increases. Making course corrections is
all part of learning, and learning should lead to changes.
    Yet, if we waited a long time to start structuring the application before we
made the wrong decision, what would be gained? Would delaying have
brought about the same decision that was made when corrective action was
taken? Or was experiencing the ill effects of a wrong decision what led to
the better decision? Experience has shown that the latter tends to prevail.
This is why we record debt and pay it as soon as possible. That is actually
mature decision making at the last responsible moment.
    This points back to attitude: Don’t be paralyzed by decision making or by
making a decision that proves to be wrong. As a computer scientist—a
purposeful juxtaposition to a software developer—almost everything done
can be treated as an experiment. We are confident that some experiments are
only confirmations that our assumptions were correct. Other experiments are
undertaken to determine if anything we thought stands up to the test.
    In the end, making some decisions early on is irresponsible. For example,
settling upfront on architecture, such as using Microservices, or trying to
create generalized solutions and modeling abstractions, is wrong. These
decisions should be postponed until we prove that those choices are justified
and necessary.
    The difference between experts and amateurs has much to do with timing.
    In his essay “Delaying Commitment” (IEEE Software, May/June 1988),
leading British computer scientist and professor Harold Thimbleby observes
that the difference between amateurs and experts is that experts know how to
delay commitments and conceal their errors for as long as possible,
repairing flaws before they cause problems. Amateurs try to get everything
right the first time, so overloading their problem-solving capacity that they
end up committing early to wrong decisions [DrDobbs].
    What Thimbleby didn’t say is that the expert continuously records debt
and pays it, even if it is done informally in their isolated thoughts.
    The outcome of making decisions is the learning process it triggers.
Decision leads to actions, which cause new requirements and knowledge to
emerge. At the same time, progress is made in solving core application
challenges. Don’t neglect this aspect of decision making, because in the end
it comes down to learning and knowledge acquisition. As described in
Chapter 1, “Business Goals and Digital Transformation,” knowledge is the
most important asset in any business. Knowledge changes everything.
    There is still the risk that our uncertainties will influence us in other
ways. Cognitive biases regularly lead people to make irresponsible
decisions. We may also fall for fallacies such as the Fear of Missing Out,
among others [LogFal]. Consider some influences in the context of
irresponsibly choosing Microservices:

     Appeal to authority. An appeal to authority is an argument stemming
     from a person judged to be an authority and affirming a proposition to
     the claim that the proposition is true. For example, if someone
     recognized as an expert claims that Microservices are good and
     Monoliths are bad, the listener can make decisions that are harmful and
     inappropriate for their own context.
     Appeal to novelty. Appeals to novelty assume that the newness of an
     idea is evidence of its truth. If Microservices are the newest fad,
     adoption is a must.
     Bandwagon fallacy. Similar to Fear of Missing Out. The bandwagon
     fallacy occurs when arguments appeal to the growing popularity of an
     idea as a reason for accepting it as true. People take the mere fact that
     an idea suddenly attracts adherents as a reason to join in with the trend
     and become adherents of the idea themselves. Microservices are
     growing in popularity so we have to adopt them very quickly as well.

   Tools are available that can help fight all kinds of fallacies and
confirmation biases. One of them is to use critical thinking.

   Critical thinking is a type of thinking pattern that requires people to
   be reflective, and pay attention to decision-making which guides their
   beliefs and actions. Critical thinking allows people to deduct with
   more logic, to process sophisticated information and to look at
   various sides of issues, so that they can produce more solid
   conclusions. [CT]

    Software development involves a considerable amount of decision
making, whether or not a specific decision has a large impact. It’s rarely
straightforward to trace the roads taken, and the roads not taken, through the
software life cycle. This is especially the case for the project newcomer.
Yet, it’s even difficult for long-time team members to recall every past
decision. Perhaps a given team member wasn’t directly involved in a
specific decision. More often, the sheer number of decisions made by a team,
combined with the fact that the memories of those decisions aren’t
strengthened by frequent travel through the hippocampus, impedes instant
recall. Under these conditions, a team is often left with only the result of a
decision, without a way of tracing why it was made.
    Although commonly neglected or completely unconsidered, decision
tracking should be one of the most important activities in software
development. Tools such as Architecture Decision Record (ADR) help
teams maintain a decision log, which is very helpful in tracking the team’s
decision journey, including what happened and why. ADR helps connect the
initial subject of the decision to the expected and ultimate outcome of that
decision. The section “Strategic Architecture,” later in this chapter,
describes ADR and other techniques in more detail.
    A wealth of software development techniques exist that can help teams in
deferring binding long-term decisions and tracing the decisions being made
in the life cycle of a software development project. These are described
later in this book. One such tool is the Ports and Adapters Architecture,
which is discussed in Chapter 8, “Foundation Architecture.” In addition,
cognitive frameworks such as Cynefin, which is described later in this
chapter, may be used to aid in decision making.



Culture and Teams
Creating an #agile culture that uses experimentation and learning requires
that people be rewarded for being wrong as long as that process eventually
leads to being right, whatever “right” ends up being. Businesses that want to
succeed at digital transformation must change their culture from a perspective
of software as support to the view of software as product. Culture is a big
deal, and so is how teams are formed and supported.


               Engineering Model versus Contractor Model

   This is a good place to introduce the idea of using an engineering
   model approach to software development as opposed to the contractor
   model. First consider the typical contractor model. Under this model,
   whether used by employees or actual contractors, developers must be
   given accurate tasks to work on, and they must not fail in even small
   ways. The engineering model uses hypothesis-based experimentation
   to explore multiple options in an effort to learn and improve.
       SpaceX and Tesla use the engineering model. In contrast, the vast
   majority of software projects operate within the contractor model. In
   the face-off between these two approaches, which leads to the
   greatest innovation per capita across the software industry is clear.
       “SpaceX reached their key goals—dramatically reduce the cost to
   launch payload into space, and recover and reuse booster rockets—
   on a greatly reduced timeline. How? What SpaceX did not do was to
   work under contract to the government, which was the only funding
   mechanism for space exploration until recent years. Instead, they
   were willing to crash rockets to reach their goals. The strategy of
   integrating events (in this case, test booster launches) is how multiple
   engineering teams rapidly try out their latest version of components
   with those developed by all the other teams. The government would
   never have tolerated the crashes that SpaceX suffered, meaning that
   government contractors had no choice but to be correct the first time.
   Yet, SpaceX speeded up the development of a reliable, cheap,
   booster rocket by perhaps a factor of five simply by trying things out
   to discover the unknown unknowns, instead of trying to think
   everything through in excruciating detail. This is a classic engineering
   approach, but would generally not be allowed in a contractor model.
   The SpaceX engineering teams found that it was far cheaper to have
   crashes in order to find the problems rather than to wait ‘forever’
   until there was no risk” [Mary Poppendieck].


   The culture of a business encompasses values and behaviors that
contribute to its unique physical, social, and psychological environment.
Culture influences the way teams interact, the context within which
knowledge is created, the acceptance or resistance they will have toward
certain changes, and ultimately the way they share knowledge or withhold it.
Culture represents the collective values, beliefs, and principles of
organizational members [Org-Culture].
   Organizations should strive for what is considered a healthy culture. The
aim is to derive cultural benefits, such as a better alignment with achieving
the organization’s vision, mission, and goals. Other benefits include
increased team cohesiveness among the company’s various departments and
divisions, higher employee motivation, and greater efficiency.
    Culture is not set in stone. It can be improved or damaged depending on
the actions of leadership and employees. If the culture is currently unhealthy,
it needs to be altered to yield sound, healthy benefits.
    The building of a healthy organizational culture should be set in motion
before attempts are made to build anything else. Businesses that don’t take
healthy cultural aspects far enough risk losing their workforce, and
consequently a part of their knowledge base. This failure also undermines
productivity and innovation in the long term, which leads to the business
becoming less successful.
    A culture that focuses on facilitating innovation is valued by leaders and
employees alike. Although leaders claim to understand what building a
culture for innovation entails, creating and sustaining it is hard. An
impediment to building cultures that are innovative is, obviously, not
understanding what such a culture is and how to cultivate it.


Failure Is Not Fatal
An organization’s viewpoint on failure is one of the most important cultural
factors, for good or for ill. Why are so many teams afraid to fail? The fear of
failure determines the way that the team members make decisions, or
completely avoid making them. More accurately, the fear of making the
wrong decision, which then leads to failure, is often the reason that decisions
are perpetually deferred or never made.
    Recall from earlier in this chapter that the engineering model trumps the
contractor model by allowing for failure so that the organization can learn.
Failure is not the objective. Instead, the point is to challenge assumptions
enough that some failure is inevitable. All experimental failure is a means to
an end, to learn what works. It’s said that if a team doesn’t fail at all, they
are not exploring. Instead, the team is resting their decisions on what they
already know as best, and that’s very likely ordinary.
    Is the fear of failure worse than failure itself? Which is worse, failing or
never trying? The Wright brothers began aeronautical research and
experimentation in 1899, with many failures following their initial efforts. It
is said that they owed much of their success to the many failures of others
before them. Most people remember only their first successful powered
airplane flight of 1903. That is, in fact, the way it should be—celebrate the
arrival and the route taken.
    Building an #agile, failure-tolerant culture that fosters willingness to
experiment and provides people with psychological safety can only increase
business success and competitive advantage. However, it has to be
counterbalanced by some exacting behaviors. While an organization’s culture
should be tolerant to failures, it should be intolerant toward incompetence
and complacency [Pisano]. This attitude is especially very important in
software development, as it is fraught with uncertainty. The large number of
Big Ball of Mud (see Chapter 1, “Business Goals and Digital
Transformation”) systems, and the fact that these are the norm throughout the
world, proves that failure in the midst of some success is quite common.
This problem ends up being recursive, however, which leads to strategic
demise.

  1. Creating a Big Ball of Mud from the outset is a failure in terms of
     software development principles (this doesn’t imply that it was
     intentional).
  2. The fact that the Big Ball of Mud system actually functions to the extent
     that it is useful is an initial success for the business.
  3. Given no effort to change the long-term impacts of 1, the Big Ball of
     Mud system codebase will only become worse, which will have a
     greater effect later.
  4. The Big Ball of Mud system’s ability to respond to change decreases to
     the point of inertia, which ultimately produces failure in terms of
     providing for the business’s long-term needs.

    Failures can lead to interesting learning opportunities. Important lessons
learned can also be a result of poor model designs, brittle code, deficient
architectures, flawed analysis, and general incompetence. Recognizing these
situations before point 3, and certainly before point 4, is critical.
    Therefore, the distinction has to be made between positive and negative
failures. Positive failure yields information and knowledge, while negative
failure can be expensive and harmful to businesses. The rewards of failure
should only be realized in the face of tangible learning outcomes and
knowledge that ultimately result in success. The Wright brothers failed many
times, but they also eventually succeeded in flight.


Failure Culture Is Not Blame Culture
The relationship between failure and blame culture is often not well
understood. Blame culture is negative, as it is based on punishment of
failures, whether those failures eventually lead to positive or negative
results. In a blame culture, learning outcomes are not celebrated, and often
not taken into account as truly critical to ultimate success. Instead, they are
discarded.
    Blame culture also hinders any initiatives in experimentation. The result
is that things continue to be done in the same, pedestrian, ordinary way.
Everybody is afraid to try something new, because if they fail, they will be
blamed. In organizations with a blame culture, successes are at best passed
over, as if there was no possibility of a failure, and failures are punishable.
No one wants to take risks. This smells like the contractor model.
    As a result, instead of innovating, businesses attempt to increase profit
through operational efficiencies. A few of the most popular approaches are
the use of mergers and acquisitions. These account for numerous personnel
consolidations, which do lead to greater profits. This route does not often
attempt business innovation as a profitable pursuit. Instead, operational
efficiencies are seen as the easiest way to continue producing favorable
annual reports to shareholders. Although this strategy can work for a time, it
can’t produce endless gains. In fact, it’s just a different path to diminishing
returns. Without another merger or acquisition, profits edge toward zero.


       Life and Death Decisions: COVID-19 Vaccines and Mining
                                Rescue

   During the pandemic, the US government funded numerous vaccine
   research and development projects. Some failed. Some succeeded.
   The government knew that some would fail, but it was willing to take
   that risk in anticipation that some would succeed.
         The mining disaster in Chile and subsequent rescue is another
     example of experimentation. The operation was headed up by
     probably the top mining engineer in the country, who tried 4 or 5
     approaches at the same time to rescue the miners. Some failed; others
     did not reach the miners as quickly as the one that was successful, and
     just in time. What mattered is that lives were saved.
         The use of multiple options is always the proper engineering
     approach when the challenge is a matter of life and death. Even if
     that’s not the case, exploring multiple options is usually the fastest,
     most efficient way to solve tough problems. [Mary Poppendieck]


    To say the least, a business focused on operational efficiencies is a
breeding ground for blame culture. This flawed culture uses
(passive-)aggressive management, micromanagement inside of teams,
invasive time tracking of a team’s work, and pushing team members to work
late hours as a way to meet deadlines. Blame plays a major role when
performance is so critically scrutinized that the only way to avoid looking
bad is to make others look bad.
    Experimentation need not be more expensive than the lack of it. The same
goes for communication that leads to effective learning through knowledge
sharing. Consider both in the face of Conway’s Law.


Getting Conway’s Law Right
As stated in Chapter 1, “Business Goals and Digital Transformation,” we
cannot “get better” at Conway’s Law, just as we cannot “get better” at the
law of gravity. Laws are unavoidable. With gravity on the earth scale, there
is no alternation in a normal setting. If you stand somewhere in France or in
the United States, the force of gravity is the same. However, at the universe
scale, gravity is not the same. Depending on whether a person is on the earth
or the moon, they will not experience gravity in the same way. This holds as
well for Conway’s Law.1
1. Until we experience software development on the moon, we’ll state only that different conditions can
   change the influence of Conway’s Law for teams on earth.
    Each organization experiences Conway’s Law differently because each
one is structured and organized differently. Making organizational changes
will either reduce or intensify the influence of Conway’s Law. As highlighted
in Team Topologies [TT], if the desired theoretical system architecture
doesn’t fit the organizational model, then one of the two will need to change.
    Yet, it is a mistake to think that any reorganization should be undertaken
only for technical architecture purposes. Technical architecture is a
supporting requirement for business strategic architecture. The individual
team organization must facilitate the necessary contextual conversations
between the business experts and the software development experts.
“Domain expert engagement is to architecture as end user engagement is to
feature development. You should find that end users and domain experts are
your most treasured contacts in Lean and Agile projects” [LA].

   There is the organizational pattern “Inverse Conway Maneuver”
   coined in 2015 by people from ThoughtWorks. It was codified when
   Microservices became very popular. The pattern advises to organize
   teams according to the desired architecture structure, rather than
   expecting existing teams to match up to the architectural goals. By
   reconfiguring teams for the optimal inter-team communication, the
   desired architecture is more likely due to the optimized
   communications structure. [TW-ICM]

Mel Conway’s original paper addresses this very “maneuver” in the
conclusion. Pertinent quotes from that paper are listed here for context:

   “We have found a criterion for the structuring of design organizations:
   a design effort should be organized according to the need for
   communication.”

   “Flexibility of organization is important to effective design.”

   “Reward design managers for keeping their organizations lean and
   flexible.”

Conway deserves credit for having the insight to codify the solution to the
law that he observed so long ago in 1967 (and published in 1968).
    The question remains, how can teams be organized effectively to improve
the communication between teams? We list some opportunities here:

     Keep the team together. According to Bruce Tuckman [Tuckman], the
     team must undergo the steps of forming and norming, before it reaches
     the performing stage. It takes time for team members to find ways of
     effectively working with each other. Many exchanges are informal and
     a matter of habit. Teams build a tacit knowledge that enables them to
     perform2—but that takes time.
    2. When a team is working in project mode and the project is considered complete, the team is
       often disbanded and the software is handed over to the maintenance team. The tacit
       knowledge of the former team doesn’t survive the transition.

     Limit the team size. You should build the smallest possible team, but
     no smaller, to work on a given software domain solution. Coordination
     and communication costs inside big teams become worse
     asymptotically as the team grows. Moreover, the team size factor is
     dictated not only by the first Conway’s Law (“Communication dictates
     design”); that is, communication paths can also be estimated by
     applying Fred Brooks’s intercommunication formula: n(n – 1) / 2
     [Brooks]. The more people who compose a team, the worse
     communication will be. There will be too many communication paths.
     For example, with 10 people there will be 45 communication paths,3
     and with 50 people there will be 1,225 paths. Teams of 5 to 10 people
     are considered optimal.
    3. 10 * (10 – 1) / 2 = 45.

     Make independent teams. Effective coordination between teams that
     are dependent on each other requires much time and effort. Minimizing
     code dependencies, coordination of releases, and deployments can
     have positive impacts on both delivery times and quality.
     Organize teams around business capabilities. Software development
     is a very complex process requiring a wide variety of skills. Therefore,
     encourage diversity of skills inside the team. If the team is composed of
     people having different skills, such as business expert, software
     architect, developer, tester, DevOps, and even an end user, they can be
     equal to the task. Such a range of skills not only affords autonomy for
decision making and accountability, but also, according to Conway’s
Law, enables the building of a healthier structure (not focused on siloed
skills). With this approach, it won’t be necessary to have a lot of
communication outside of the team to carry out daily responsibilities.
Define communication gateways for teams. A team with a broad
skill set and vital autonomy can optimize in-team communication, but
must still shape inter-team communication through gateways. The result
might be a similar shape as the communication between architecture
components. Consider inter-team discussions to require protocols,
along with mapping and translation between teams. The protocols
should establish boundaries to protect against interfering with team
goals, distractions, and possibly even unauthorized exchanges. These
should reflect a one-to-one relationship with the integrating software
architectures. The topic of context mapping is discussed in Chapter 6,
“Mapping, Failing, and Succeeding—Choose Two.”
Assign a single responsibility to the team. Requiring a single team to
manage too many tasks and contexts in the same architecture, or worse,
assigning multiple projects in parallel, will not end well. Unless these
mistakes are avoided, communication complexity will increase and
overlap, with the risk of mixing together and confusing contextual
concepts. Yet, single responsibility doesn’t necessarily mean a single
context, because the team may decide that solving a single problem
space may require multiple contexts.
Eliminate multitasking from the team. Although not directly related
to Conway’s Law, human brains don’t multitask very effectively, and
especially not in complex problem-solving situations. Multitasking
requires context switching. Humans are bad at this because we require
context-dependent memory. Each context switch can require several or
even dozens of minutes to complete. Multitasking is not just a
productivity killer—it also breaks down effective communication
channels. The misperception that multitasking works for humans is
remedied by observing the large number of errors produced by a person
who tries it, such as completely overlooking steps that are basic to
anyone giving due focus. It’s amazing how below-average very
intelligent people become under such circumstances.
    Figure 2.1 depicts different team organizations yielding different
architecture structures that match the respective team organizations. On the
left, teams are silos of skills. Often, the team at the communication cross-
roads—the backed team in Figure 2.1—has all the burden of communication
and coordination between the others—DBA teams and UI teams. What makes
the teams even less efficient is that they work in multiple business contexts—
here, it’s Claims, Underwriting, and Insurance Products—which is an
additional source of complexity to take into account. The interdependencies
and highly coordinated communications complicate value delivery to the
business.




Figure 2.1 Conway’s Law. Left: Skill silos. Right: Cross-functional
skills, business capabilities.


    On the right side of Figure 2.1, teams are cross-functional and aligned
with business capabilities. Note that these teams are autonomous and
responsible for the whole life cycle of the subsystem architecture that they
own. Their day-to-day responsibility is not just the software development;
the team also has insight into how software they developed behaves in
production. This leads to better contact with end users, as the team members
have to assist them as part of their support work. It is a kind of virtuous
circle, because the new insights from customers and users help teams to
enhance the business capability for which they are responsible.
    A point not to be overlooked is the criticality of creating teams primarily
for the sake of in-team contextual communication between business experts
and software development experts. If a given team can talk across to other
teams with great ease but can’t have deep communication with business
experts in support of building their own strategic deliverables, the
fundamental communication problem has not been solved, and is possibly
even worse than before the reorganization.


Enabling Safe Experimentations
Acknowledging the difference between blame and failure culture is the first
step toward building a better and healthy culture. The next step is to enable
safe experimentation for businesses—which doesn’t mean an organization
simply allows its teams to throw in random architectural choices or
technologies.
    Safe experimentation means discipline, and discipline means carefully
selecting ideas that will potentially yield great learning results and
knowledge. There are different interpretations of “safety,” but as Erik
Hollnagel states, “Safety is a freedom from unacceptable risk” [Hollnagel].
In other words, this process must allow for the prevention of unwanted
events and protection against unwanted outcomes.
    While the safe experimentation is ongoing, the learning process is
evaluated, and the information gathered is inspected, which enables the
organization to decide whether the experimentation should be moved
forward or canceled. What counts is increasing safety by reducing failures
and, therefore, the risk for the business. Killing a safe experimentation is less
risky than trying out new things blindly and calling it experimentation;
otherwise, everything can be called experimentation.



Modules First
So, we’re going from “essential strategic learning tools,” including a
discussion of a culture of failure as necessary to succeed, directly into some
techie topic of “modules”? First of all, this topic is really not very technical.
Everyone understands that containers of various kinds are made to hold items
inside (e.g., kitchen drawers and drawers for storing food in a refrigerator).
How the containers are labeled and what is put inside of each should be
logical. Otherwise, when it comes time to retrieve the desired items from a
container, they will be hard to find. For software development, teams must
get this right before trying to do much else. Wasn’t the same assertion made
in Chapter 1 regarding Conway’s Law? Yes, exactly.
    Conway’s Law continues [Conway]:

   Why do large systems disintegrate? The process seems to occur in
   three steps, the first two of which are controllable and the third of
   which is a direct result of our homomorphism.
       First, the realization by the initial designers that the system will
   be large, together with certain pressures in their organization, make
   irresistible the temptation to assign too many people to a design
   effort.
       Second, application of the conventional wisdom of management
   to a large design organization causes its communication structure to
   disintegrate.
       Third, the homomorphism insures that the structure of the system
   will reflect the disintegration which has occurred in the design
   organization.

Considering modules only a “techie topic” is to sell short one of the most
valuable tools that supports strategic learning.
    Modularity is also the solution to how humans deal with very complex
problems that must be solved. No one person is able to keep in mind the
whole business problem space and deal efficiently with it. Before solving a
big problem, humans tend to decompose what they know into smaller sets of
problems. The smaller problems are easier to reason about. Of course,
solutions to smaller problems are then combined to address the big problem;
otherwise, modularity would be useless.
    This way of solving problems has deep roots in psychology and reflects
the limitations of the human mind. The human brain can keep a very limited
set of concepts in focus at one time. This is described in George A. Miller’s
paper from 1956, “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some
Limits on Our Capacity for Processing Information” [Miller]. Miller’s Law
says that humans can keep 7 ± 2 “chunks” or pieces of information in short-
term memory. The exact number can vary from person to person, but what is
sure is that this capacity is very limited. Due to this limitation, humans work
out a hierarchical decomposition of information into smaller chunks, until
they are about the right size to feed our mental model without causing stress
on cognitive load, which would prevent processing of the information.
    Now, back to the point of modules. Applying these components to
complex problem solving helps manage chunks of information that have
undergone the process of decomposition. This makes complex problem
solving possible because humans can use stepwise processing to create
successful outcomes.
    Modularity is an indispensable foundation for Conway’s Law as well.
That’s because modules are where we should capture critical
communication and what is learned from it. At the same time, modules can
save teams from smearing mud all over their solution space. Modules are
used both as conceptual boundaries and as physical compartments.
    Don’t worry. It will all make sense in a moment. Consider how modules
support learning through communication.
    Figure 2.2 shows three modules: Insurance Products, Underwriting, and
Claims. Each of the three is the home of a separate business capability.
Figure 2.2 A module is both a conceptual boundary and a physical
compartment.


    A team consists of both business and software development stakeholders.
For the sake of this example, one team is assumed to work on only one of the
three business capabilities. The team that will be discussed here is
responsible for delivering a solution for Underwriting.
    For this team, Underwriting is considered the primary context for their
conversations. To provide an Underwriting solution, however, the team will
also likely need to discuss Insurance Products and Claims, and even other
capabilities of the business. Yet, they have no responsibility or authority in
those other conversational contexts.
    Because their conversations will take various paths through the entire
business domain, team members must recognize when their discussions
“exit” their own context, “enter” another context, and possibly still others,
and then “return” to their own context. When in conversation, if the team
learns something relative to their own context, they should record some
words or expressions in their contextual module that they consider to be
keepers—that is, ones that will definitely help drive their further discussions
and the ultimate solution.
    A conceptual module doesn’t have a location, so where are the
conversations literally recorded? For now this could be on a whiteboard, in
a wiki, or in another kind of document. Certainly, the issue of not losing this
information from an erased whiteboard should influence how it’s captured
more permanently.
    If it helps for the sake of their communication, the team can also record
any part of their conversation that applies to another module, but the team
doesn’t have the authority to make firm, lasting decisions about those other
contexts. In fact, if the team requires any official details about the other
contexts, they will have to communicate with the respective teams. So, any
terms or expressions they come up with for foreign contexts are only proxies
for the real things for which the other teams are responsible. Also, whether
proxy or official, the terms and expressions recorded for other contexts are
placed in the respective contextual module, not in the team’s module.
    As the team’s conversations progress, they lead to more learning, and the
team continues to identify additional business concepts. Figure 2.3 reflects
the progress, including the notion that creating additional modules inside the
main Underwriting module helps to further organize their conversations as
they become more specific.




Figure 2.3 A module compartment of other module compartments used
to organize source code.


    A fair question is, would it make sense to promote the internal modules—
Intake, Processing, Policy, and Renewals—to top-level modules of their
own? That’s a possibility to consider in time, and there are advantages to
doing so. But where exactly? At this time, the team should fall back on the
earlier advice that in essence asserts, “The team doesn’t yet have enough
information to accept that decision.” It would be irresponsible to go there
now. Future conversations might lead in that direction, but jumping to that
conclusion now doesn’t make sense. At this time, calling this a
(non-)decision based on the currently identified concepts, and the team’s
understanding of the cohesiveness of each concept relative to the others,
makes them less likely to be separated.
    This is pretty cool. It’s like the team is trying to keep everything all tidy
inside their own conceptual boundary. But they’re not just trying—they’re
succeeding. This is a major step in the right direction for avoiding the Big
Ball of Mud. Considering that good communication and making decisions are
the primary strengths behind software development, the team is definitely on
the right track.
   It’s essential to also reflect these measures in the software
implementation. The team must prevent the reflection of order in their
conversational design into a software model from being undermined over
time. This leads to the second use of modules: A module is also a physical
compartment. The team should create a physical module in which to place
their source code. Using what’s exemplified in Figure 2.3, Table 2.1 lists
examples of corresponding software modules.


Table 2.1 Modules of Underwriting Provide Explicit Compartments for
the Implementation
Module Name                                    Description
NuCoverage.Underwriting                        The Underwriting root
                                               module
NuCoverage.Underwriting.Model                  The module where the
                                               Underwriting Model is
                                               kept
NuCoverage.Underwriting.Model.Intake           The module of the Model
                                               of Intake
NuCoverage.Underwriting.Model.Policy           The module of the Model
                                               of a Policy
NuCoverage.Underwriting.Model.Processing The module of the Model
                                         of Processing
NuCoverage.Underwriting.Model.Renewals The module of the Model
                                       of Renewals


    Depending on the actual programming language in use, these modules can
be declared a bit differently, but that’s not important now. What is important
is that the team can create compartments with very explicit names that clearly
identify where things belong. Given their basic sensibility, there’s no way for
confusion or disorderliness to exist at this point in time.
    Another advantage of this approach is that if at any future time the team
does decide to promote any of the models to become a top-level module on
its own, the refactoring of what exists is quite straightforward. Considering
this point, it’s clear that modularity trumps knee-jerk deployment decisions
every single time.



Deployment Last
Choosing Microservices first is dangerous. Choosing Monoliths for the long
term is also dangerous. As with any decision making in #agile, these
decisions should be made at the last responsible moment. The following are
two principles from the Agile Manifesto:

       Our highest priority is to satisfy the customer through early and
       continuous delivery of valuable software.
       Deliver working software frequently, at intervals ranging from a couple
       of weeks to a couple of months, with a preference for the shorter
       timescale.

Today, “a preference to the shorter timescale” can mean days, hours, or even
minutes. In summary, this translates to deliver early and deliver often.
   Under such conditions, how can deployment decisions be delayed for as
long as possible? Think type rather than inception and frequency.
Deployment type is a choice, and there are multiple deployment options from
which to choose. Choices can change. Delivery inception and ongoing
frequency are mandatory, regardless of the deployment choices.4
4. Chapter 9, “Message- and Event-Driven Architectures,” covers how this may be different for the
   serverless architecture, which may include function as a service (FaaS).

    Early on, it is best to choose a deployment option that supports fast
experimentation, implementation, and delivery. This specifically points to
using a Monolithic architecture in the early stages, because trying to solve
distributed computing problems before the business problems are understood
is an act of futility.
    To get this right out in the open, many software developers love the ideas
behind distributed computing. It’s cool, thrilling even, to consider the
prospects. For those who have never attempted this at all, or have little
experience, it’s exciting to think in terms of getting elbow deep into
distributed computing as soon as possible.
    It’s a bit like anything new, such as driving. When you’re young, the
opportunity to drive is generally a highly anticipated adventure. After the
challenge of driving is no longer new, driving fast might be a new thrill to
seek. After a high-cost speeding citation or a bad accident (plus a high-cost
citation!) curtails the allure of high-speed driving on public roads, the
realization sets in that driving is for the most part a means to an end. Still, the
idea of getting an incredible sports car and having access to a racetrack
elicits new thrilling thoughts. Even so, in time the appeal of traveling safely
from one point to another is hard to deny. Especially when you have a family,
it’s top priority.
    Those who have done distributed computing find it challenging, and there
is undeniable pleasure in getting it to work well. At the same time,
distributed computing is not a thrill sport. And it’s hard. Any experienced
software developer who is capable of being both realistic and responsible
will admit that distributed computing is a means to an end. It should be the
business drivers that lead to considering any computing infrastructure that
will produce good customer outcomes.
    If delivering software to the cloud is a means to the end of producing
business-driven customer satisfaction, it’s likely that at least some
distributed computing will be required. All the same, finding ways to reduce
the total distribution of computing resources or reducing the complexities as
much as possible should be the top priority. If still in doubt about this, please
return to Chapter 1 and reread the section, “Digital Transformation: What Is
the Goal?”
    We’re not advocating for Monoliths over Microservices. We’re
advocating for the best possible decision for the business circumstances.
Avoiding the problems inherent to distributed computing—inter-subsystem
software communication that involves a network connection—best supports
early delivery and sustained delivery. Early on, there is no need to face the
scale and performance challenges because they simply don’t exist.
    When the business decides at the last responsible moment that opening up
greater access to the system is in sight, the team must be prepared to measure
how the system handles the increasing load. When performance and scale
indicators are trending toward the need to address these issues, extracting
one or more modules from a Monolith into Microservices is likely a
reasonable way forward. Admittedly, this requires a style of development
using architecture and design techniques that reflect the loose coupling of
Microservices but work seamlessly inside a Monolith, and without the
failure conditions common to distributed computing.
    When the team has decided on modules first, and when deployment
options start out as simple as possible, that approach puts them on solid
ground to make decisions based on empirical information at the most
responsible time.



Everything in Between
After modules, but before advanced deployment decisions, there is
considerable work to be done. The work involves the following tasks:

     Identifying which business capabilities will be hosted in a given part of
     the system
     Pinpointing impactful strategic functionality
     Understanding software development complexity and risk
     Collaborating to understand the overall business process
     Reasoning out the assertions employed to prove all this works
     correctly.

   The sections that follow cover the first three of these tasks. Chapter 3,
“Events-First Experimentation and Discovery,” covers collaborative
learning around business processes, and reasoning on software correctness
assertions.


Business Capabilities, Business Processes, and
Strategic Goals
A business capability is a function of the business that exists to generate
revenues. Some functions are core business capabilities, while others are
not. A core business capability is one at which the business must excel and
differentiate within. The business must innovate in its core capabilities. A
supporting business capability is one that is needed to make one or more of
the core capabilities work, but not one in which the business should attempt
to innovate. Yet, a supporting capability might not be available for off-the-
shelf purchase, in which case it must likely be built. There are also generic
business capabilities, such as those that keep the business functioning but
don’t directly support the business core capabilities. These generic business
capabilities should be purchased (licensed, subscription, etc.) wherever
possible.
    Note that a business capability is a what of the business, not the how.
Consider that Underwriting is a NuCoverage business capability. How the
company performs this capability could be by humans using snail mail and
telephones, or it could be with fully automated digital workflow processing.
The what and the how are two different things. How being an implementation
detail is important, but one that could change over time. Even so, the what—
Underwriting—will likely exist into the foreseeable future.
    NuCoverage must innovate to offer insurance products at competitive
discounts and still drive gains that are at least as good as those realized by
the competition. Additionally, NuCoverage will now innovate by offering its
insurance products with white labels. These are clearly direct revenue
generators. Yet, which are the core business capabilities and which are
supporting business capabilities? Consider the reasoning illustrated in
Figure 2.4 and described in the list that follows.

     Underwriting is the capability that produces a decision on whether a
     given insurable risk is worth issuing a policy or whether a policy must
     be denied. The business capability is implemented with digital
     workflow processing, but how the workflow processing is
     accomplished is not a business capability.
     Because Underwriting doesn’t occur in a vacuum, assume that some
     form of risk management is necessary to distinguish what’s a good
     business investment from what’s bad for the business. In insurance, this
     risk management centers on actuarial concerns and is complex enough
     to hold the status of being a science. The current Actuarial business
capability is based on industry data and experience, but will be
enhanced with larger datasets and fast machine learning (ML)
algorithms in the future that can determine good risks versus bad risks.
The future algorithms will be the implementation, but are not the
business capability.
Every insurance company must handle claims filed against policies, and
NuCoverage is no exception. Fair loss recovery is the deal that
insurance companies make with insureds. For a digital-first insurance
company, deeply understanding a policyholder loss and the applicable
coverage is a core business capability. It’s a matter of not overpaying
on the replacement value, but also not taking a reputation hit due to
unfair settlements. How would Claims work? That’s a necessary
question to answer, but the how is different from the what that is the
business capability.
NuCoverage grew to the point where using an enterprise resource
planning (ERP) system helps the operational side of the business be
efficient, and this is not by any means unimportant. Operational
efficiencies should benefit NuCoverage as much as possible. Yet, as
previously noted, thriving on operational efficiencies alone is not a
sustainable business model. Because the ERP is not core to revenue
generation, it is generic with respect to the core capabilities of the
business. Not to oversimplify matters, but to highlight the distinction
between core and other capabilities, selecting an ERP was in essence a
matter of choosing between multiple products that checked all the same
boxes on the features and benefits list.
NuCoverage is now on the cusp of entering the white-label insurance
platform market. Although it might be considered only a change to a
different technology set, it’s even more of a mindset adjustment.
NuCoverage must shift into a software-as-a-product mode rather than
viewing software as support. Just getting this up and running is core. It
will move away from being core in time, after it’s a well-oiled
machine, but presently it’s critically important to make the WellBank
deal successful.
Figure 2.4 Some NuCoverage business capabilities. Solid boxes are
present business capabilities; dashed boxes are future business
capabilities.


   The preceding points prompt the need to answer a few questions. Is
Underwriting a core business capability? Is Actuarial a supporting business
capability? Are there details under Claims that might reveal more business
capabilities? How will NuCoverage succeed in taking such a big leap to
incorporate a completely new business model without harming its current
one? These questions are answered later when we examine them more
closely against strategic design.
   For now, let’s focus on the business processes—the hows of a business
and their relationship to the what, a Business capability. Business processes
are a succession of activities that define and support business capabilities
and, therefore, the strategic business goals. Most processes involve multiple
business capabilities that work together, as represented in Figure 2.5.




Figure 2.5 Business processes involve multiple business capabilities to
support a strategic goal.


   For example, the Claims business capability involves many business
processes, such as Check Claim Request and Settle Claim, that support the
capability. The Check Claim Request business process existed before
NuCoverage defined a new strategic goal—namely, supporting white-label
insurance—but it must certainly be adapted to the new goal as seen in Figure
2.5. Consider how the Check Claim Request business process currently
works:

  1. It kicks in when a new claim against a policy is recorded. Checking a
     claim request might require coordination of multiple business
     capabilities aside from Claims. For instance, the Policy business
     capability would be needed to check whether the policy is still active. It
     might happen that a claim is recorded toward an inactive or just expired
     policy. Obviously, the request could be dropped most of the time, but
     not necessarily always. There are always corner cases in any business
     that have to be addressed.
  2. Once the check is done, the Policy business capability provides the
     coverage information, which determines how the claim should be
     handled.
  3. Next, the Policy Holder Management business capability provides the
     current and historical views of the policy holder information. It might be
     useful to check any information related to the driver involved in a claim
     if there are any issues recorded against the driver’s driving license,
     such as suspension or a cancellation, or to check the current
     policyholder’s postal address for the claim follow-up process.
  4. A check with the Actuarial business capability is done to discard any
     fraudulent claim request.

    To support the white-label business strategic goal, NuCoverage might
decide to implement a parallel Check Claim Request for mobile devices.
This could become an enabler for making more deals with agent customers,
such as WellBank. It is important to note that more business capabilities
would be involved in this process, all operating at the same time. The
Claims business capability might also be part of wider business processes at
the organization level.
    An important question remains unanswered. How can teams discuss and
discover business capabilities and business processes without conflating or
confusing the two, leading the session astray? Here are some rules of thumb:

     The best way to differentiate a business capability from a business
     process is with a naming style. Generally, business capabilities should
     be named with a noun–verb combination, such as Subscription Billing5
     or Claims Processing.6 In contrast, business processes should be
     named with a verb–noun combination, such as Check Claim Request.
    5. The name Billing was chosen for this business capability because it is a verb, and it
       demonstrates how it could be mistaken for a business process. Note that the whole name is
       Subscription Billing, which adheres to the rules of business capability naming. Elsewhere in
       the book, Billing might be used for brevity.

    6. Elsewhere in the book, Claims might be used for brevity instead of the full name Claims
       Processing.

     A business process demonstrates that a company is interested in how to
     get things done, and the corresponding process models are an excellent
     depiction of how the business flows. Thus, the business capabilities
     capture the structure, whereas the business processes capture the flow.
     Business processes can change frequently due to technology advances,
     regulation, internal policies, channel preferences, and other factors, so
     they are considered volatile. Business capabilities capture the essence
     of what a business does and focus on the outcomes; thus, they change
     far less often.

    A business capability facilitates strategic-level communication. The
benefits of using business capabilities for strategic discussions include their
higher-level, conceptual, and more abstract notions and intentions. Yet,
attempting to identify business capabilities in discussions with business
stakeholders can become sidetracked by process. Many business people are
process-driven and results-focused, so they naturally prefer to talk about
business processes rather than business capabilities.
    For all these reasons, it is important to understand and to recognize the
difference between a business capability and a business process. This is a
subtle but very important distinction. The process creates coupling between
business capabilities. Wrongly designed model boundaries mistakenly based
on processes instead of business capabilities, and vice versa, could cripple
business activities and operations, and they work against natural
communication channels in the organization. Chapter 5, “Contextual
Expertise,” explores how business capabilities are realized as software
models.
    The important takeaways are simply stated: Business processes underpin
business capabilities, and business capabilities underpin business strategy.


Strategic Delivery on Purpose
One of the biggest problems in software development is developing
functionality and features within software that have little to no value to the
business. Yes, this is the classic reason for asserting You Aren’t Gonna Need
It (YAGNI)—but even so, calling YAGNI in such cases mostly fails to
happen or fails to be heard.
    Oftentimes, this waste happens because software developers don’t have
well-established communication channels and collaboration with business
stakeholders. This naturally leads to creating software that never should have
existed. It’s not so much that some teams thought a feature was a good idea in
their own opinion and delivered it on the fly. Instead, it’s more often the case
that the developers don’t understand the requirements as expressed by
business stakeholders. If they don’t know that their implementation is wrong
and won’t be used until some future time, it will remain unused and lurking
as a distant problem in waiting.
    Just as common is the problem in which business stakeholders and
influential customers/users demand some functionality, or sales and
marketing perceive a need due to becoming aware of the potential for closing
a big deal, and that demand drives the addition. Then, after the imagined
value is delivered, the demand may evaporate for any number of reasons:
The customer/user finds a workaround, or loses zeal, and the sales team
closes the deal on a promise, or even loses the deal altogether. At some
point, the imagined value is forgotten after the hard and risky work of
bringing it to fruition is complete.
    Another reason for implementing unnecessary features is even more basic
—plain old bad decisions. Of course, this problem can be chalked up to
failing to learn, but going so far as to fully implement such features can be
too high a price to pay if that cost could be avoided by undertaking less
expensive experimentation.
    All of these situations are a major source of frustration for both the
business stakeholders and the software development team. To add to this
morass, when decision logs are not kept, there is little to no traceability
other than a reliance on tacit knowledge. At the same time, although decision
logs tell a team why something happened, they are of little help in the case of
backing out wrong features. Some will argue that source code versioning can
point to the means to remove the unused code—and that’s true if the
versioning decisions were made with the assumption that the feature could
be wrong. Frankly, using source code versioning for backing out features that
were not suspected as being wrong, that have lurked for a long time, and on
which other features are now dependent, is an iffy proposition at best.
    In all of the aforementioned cases, the problem isn’t the weakness of
source code versioning. It’s generally one of two problems:

     It’s a matter of failed communications, a warning that has already been
     sounded with a consistent drumbeat in this book.
     An opinion and obsession forced a decision, rather than clearly
     identified goal-based business drivers.

In the first case, please return to the drums section. In the second case, there’s
a clear need to surface actual business goals.
    A decision-making tool named Impact Mapping [Impact] was built for
facilitating such decisions and can help distinguish strategic functionality
investments from mere imaginary value. To pinpoint the impacts that must be
made to achieve strategic goals, consider the following questions:

  1. Why? List a number of business goals. A complete list of goals is not
     necessary because goals can be named one at a time. Yet, listing a few
     or several might help pinpoint the more strategic ones, and indicate how
     they differ from the lesser important ones. “Make Mary Happy” is not a
     business goal, and neither is “Make WellBank Happy.” “Bundle Home
     and Auto Insurance” is a business goal, as are “Quote Home and Auto
     Bundle Rate by Home Address” and “White-Label Auto Insurance.”
  2. Who? For a given goal, identify one or more actors that must be
     influenced to change their behaviors to make the business goals
     successful. For the purpose of this tool, an “actor” is a person, a group,
     an organization, a system, or something similar that must be influenced
     to achieve the stated goal. Any actor identified can be positive, neutral,
     or negative. In other words, the influence made must change the
     behavior of an actor that is already positive with respect to the
     business. Alternatively, the actor might currently be indifferent or even
     negative to the business. This could be a user of another solution or the
     business offering that solution, and in both cases our business must
     influence a change in behavior.
  3. How? Define the impacts that must be made on each actor to achieve
     the goal. This is not a grab bag of every possible feature that an actor
     might need, but rather a select set of business activities focused on
     achieving the strategic goal by changing a very specific behavior, or
     lack thereof, to an improved one. It’s important to include impacts that
     address not just positive actors, but also neutral and negative ones. For
     negative actors, state impacts that could impede this business’s positive
     impacts, and how the impedances can be combated and removed.
  4. What? Name the deliverables necessary to realize each impact. In the
     context of strategic software, deliverables are generally the software
     features that implement the means to cause a specific impact. Note,
     however, that in identifying deliverables, it is possible that software is
     not the best answer. Or it could be that an interim measure should be
     taken until the software can be implemented. For example, until
     NuCoverage can implement a highly automated Actuarial system that is
     based on fast data analyzed using machine learning algorithms, the
     company might choose to bootstrap its Underwriting business capability
     using highly skilled human underwriters. The underwriters can also
     help, along with actuaries as business experts, in specifying the
     Actuarial system. In time, the human underwriters can transition to work
     full-time as experts in a software innovation capacity.

    Most software initiatives will start with step 4 and probably never
identify steps 3, 2, or 1. In terms of strategic business, steps 1–4 are not only
the correct order, but also offer a clear way forward. These steps are used to
find even nontechnical or other means of gap filling to achieve a business
goal. In doing so, they can also point out ways to decrease financial
expenditures because the best deliverables may be more obvious when all
answers are not required to look like software.
    As pointed out in Impact Mapping [Impact], a mind map is a good way to
put this technique to work. Figure 2.6 provides a template and example.
Figure 2.6 Impact map for White-Label Auto Insurance.


    Of the impacts shown in Figure 2.6, some are necessary supporting ones,
and others are strategic. For example, a supporting impact is that a new
Agent, such as WellBank, must be able to register.7 Once registered,
supplying the Agent with a means to quickly submit a new, valid application
is accomplished by means of a strategic impact: One-Click Application
Submission.
7. This is not open to anyone. Becoming an insurance agent has a qualifying process. NuCoverage helps
   with onboarding new agents through a franchise arrangement, but leaves registration details to the
   new agent.
   Connected with the One-Click Application Submission impact are three
deliverables: Import Agent Customer Account, Risk Gatekeeper, and Rate
Calculator. The first one, Import Agent Customer Account, does not
currently exist in any form. The other two exist to some degree, because they
are already being used in support of the current core business. Undoubtedly,
a new deliverable will be needed that ties these together. This means that the
mappers should identify some controlling component, such as an
Underwriting Processor, to manage the background workflow. This
discovery is seen in Figure 2.7. Chapter 3 covers these components in more
detail.




Figure 2.7 Further discovery within One-Click Application Submission
reveals a controlling component named Underwriting Processor.


Using Cynefin to Make Decisions
Software development activities would be far easier if every requirement of
the system was known upfront and in precise detail. But, no: Requirements
are envisioned and then changed, and changed again, and changed again.
Experimentation outcomes, new knowledge acquisition, production usage
feedback, external factors such as competitor activity, and market disruptions
cannot be factored into the development plan months or even weeks in
advance.
   Many businesses are convinced that making a few tweaks to the original
plan will be enough. NuCoverage will pursue a new market opportunity by
means of white-label products. Naturally, this will ripple through its
business strategy, through the organization, and all the way to software
development. How can the business inform itself to a fuller degree of the
effort needed to effect this change?
   The Cynefin framework is a tool that can be used for this purpose. It was
created by Dave Snowden in 1999 and has been applied with success to
many fields, including industry, research, politics, and software
development. It helps decision makers identify how they perceive situations
and how they make sense of their own behaviors and those of others.
   As illustrated in Figure 2.8, the Cynefin framework includes four
domains: Clear, Complicated, Complex, and Chaotic. A fifth domain,
Disorder, is in the center.
Figure 2.8 Cynefin framework with its five domains.


    In the list that follows, business drivers are used as examples. However,
the Cynefin domains could also be explained using technical drivers.

     Clear. Also known as Obvious or Simple, Clear means that the
     relationship between cause and effect is known to all, is predictable in
     advance, and is self-evident for any reasonable person. Common
     practices are applied and the approach is to sense—see what’s coming
in; categorize—make it fit to predefined categories; and respond—
decide what to do. Everyone already knows the right answer.
NuCoverage’s software development team already knows how to
process electronic documents, and it’s obvious to them how it is done.
Complicated. The relationship between cause and effect needs further
analysis. In this kind of scenario, a business expert’s knowledge is used
to ensure previously successful practices are applied. While there
might be multiple solutions to the problem, an expert’s knowledge is
used to determine what should be done. The approach is to sense—see
what’s coming in; analyze—investigate or analyze using expert
knowledge; and respond—decide what to do. Although underwriting is
a common process in the insurance industry, software developers
would be unable to correctly implement an underwriting solution
without relying on expert knowledge to guide them.
Complex. The relationship between cause and effect is clear only in
hindsight. Complex problems have more unpredictable results.
Although there may be expectations regarding how to reach a correct
solution, attempting to implement those solutions may not bring good or
even acceptable results. The organization is more likely to reach a good
solution only after making mistakes or through observations that lead to
hindsight realizations. This is the place where safe experimentations
have to take place. Knowledge must be acquired from failures, and the
new understanding must be used to drive change in practices,
environments, and digital assets. In this domain, the outcome keeps
changing such that expert knowledge and common practices cannot be
applied with ensured success. Rather, it’s through the result of
innovation and emergent practices. The approach is to probe—gather
experimental input; sense—observe failure or success; and then
respond—decide what to do. Fully automated digital actuarial analysis
in multiple lines of insurance is a complex domain.
Chaotic. There is no relationship between cause and effect at the
system level. This kind of scenario requires a solution right away.
When a crisis is experienced, there is a need to address it before it
causes further harm. First, a state of order must be restored. Chaos is
caused by an accident that leads to uncontrolled outcomes, and that
requires emergency measures to bring the situation under control. The
     approach is to act—attempt to stabilize; sense—observe failure or
     success; and respond—decide what to do next. This is the situation
     where a system failure in one area cascades into other areas and leads
     to major service disruptions. The system must be first stabilized before
     any corrective action can be made.
     Disorder. This is the domain when you are uncertain of what stage you
     are in and whether any plans are working. Disorder is the most
     dangerous situation, one that must be exited as soon as possible. To do
     so, the situation must be quickly decomposed; the components must be
     analyzed; the organization must determine to which of the other four
     domains a given component belongs; and it must choose the proper
     approach to solve each component of the problem. Planned progress
     can be made only after order is restored. It’s clear now that Disorder is
     centralized because the components of the situation are pushed out into
     one of the other four domains.

    With both the Chaotic and Disorder domains, after stabilizing the
situation, attention must be given to producing a thorough retrospective and
to a prevention plan to avoid the exact or similar future disruptions.
Naturally, the prevention plan, including well-informed changes to flawed
digital assets, must be carried out very soon, and requires improved
monitoring and observation of the affected areas and the overall system.
    A key component of the Cynefin framework is knowledge. Understanding
each situation helps make both the problem and the solution more obvious.
Using the recommended approach of each domain (sense–categorize–
respond, etc.) helps one better understand the problem and to transition each
to the lower level of complexity. The transitions between domains are made
clockwise. It’s important to note that the Clear domain solutions can cause
complacency and move to Chaos very quickly. That can happen when tacit
knowledge is lost (a key person leaves the company without knowledge
transfer), when such knowledge is applied incorrectly, or if a common
successful practice becomes obsolete but its use continues.
    According to Snowden, using agile project management is a way to
transition from the Complex domain into the Complicated domain. Breaking
down a large and complex domain into many smaller problems decreases the
complexity of the problems that must be solved.
    The takeaway is that new software development is at least in the
Complicated domain, often in the Complex one, and sometimes in the Chaos
domain. Many customers and developers see software development as a
Complicated undertaking, but rarely view it as Complex. In general,
everyone involved in software development is very good at underestimating
complexity, but is surprised when it becomes obvious, and often this ends up
in producing solutions that can even lead to chaos, or at least deep debt and
entropy.
    When a Complex domain is recognized—or worse, when it is not—if the
team is neither naive nor intellectually dishonest, they will admit that there is
no obvious way to get from problem to solution. Once Complex is
understood to be the case, an interactive approach using safe experimentation
is a must.
    Further, in a Complex domain, the best source of information for decision
makers is not prediction, but rather observing what has already happened.
Observation provides an empirical model on which iterative
experimentation is based. Adapting to frequently changing states helps the
team achieve a better understanding of the problem, which makes possible
informed decisions in support of correct solutions. The section “Applying
the Tools,” later in this chapter, demonstrates how NuCoverage uses the
Cynefin framework to determine whether it should use Microservices.



Where Is Your Spaghetti and How Fast
Does It Cook?
So far, this book has invested two chapters in ways to strategically innovate
with software development so as to seek unique business value through
differentiation. The next two chapters take this exploration further, with deep
dives into collaborative communication, learning, and improved software
organization. The reason? Innovating toward strategic, competitive advantage
is hard.
    Whatever an individual’s food preferences, pasta and other noodle dishes
are generally among the favorites of most. If that’s not the case for a few, it
certainly is true for the majority. Just imagining a pile of spaghetti or Asian
noodles with a delicious sauce sends people in pursuit of an appetite fix.
    With that in mind, it’s hard to imagine the sight of pasta sending our
appetites off a cliff. And yet, the term “spaghetti code” was introduced
decades ago to describe the sickening source code of a really poor-tasting
software system. It makes people want to pursue an altogether different kind
of fix. The saddest thing about badly written software is that business
complexity is challenging enough without adding implementation complexity.
    Spaghetti business always exists before software, and spaghetti code is
the bane of a system’s existence. Ad hoc architecture, progressive distortion
of the software model, wrongly chosen abstractions, seeking opportunities
for code reuse before use is even achieved, and unskilled developers are
some of the reasons that software complexity prevents business from tackling
business complexity to an innovative degree. Fight software complexity.
Achieve by cooking business complexity.
    Is taking a small step of cooking spaghetti a giant leap to rocket science?
It’s said that “choose-some-noun isn’t rocket science.” In this case, replace
“choose-some-noun” with software development: “software development
isn’t rocket science.” Yet, business innovation with software continues to
solve increasingly difficult problems with regularity.
    The tools provided in Chapters 1 and 2, and in the next few chapters, are
meant to help cook business spaghetti in 10–12 minutes—that is, more
rapidly than this feat would be achieved without the tools. Sometimes it’s not
the tools themselves that make for faster cooking. The key is often unlocking
human thinking to reach a higher efficiency than is possible without the tools.



Strategic Architecture
Software architecture is commonly seen as a set of decisions to be made by
technology-minded professionals. The architecture of a software component,
subsystem, and whole-system solution generally belongs to those
professionals known as software architects. The term architect has a number
of different meanings and implications, and that meaning is generally tied to a
business culture. The authors know architects with deep technical
qualifications who still work on programming tasks on a regular basis; at the
opposite extreme, some architects have only briefly or never implemented
software in their careers. In truth, neither end of this spectrum qualifies or
disqualifies those serving in the capacity of architect from filling an
important role. Qualifications are always based on aptitude, attitude,
adaptability, and agility.
    Software architects must possess the ability to create a flexible
architecture that can readily adapt to strategic changes in support of just-in-
time decision making. The worst failings in software architecture are found
where architects make architectural decisions that fall outside common
practices with proven success, and those lacking real-world constraints—
sometimes referred to as ivory tower architects and architectures—and those
that are ad hoc with no attempt at manifesting communication-based
structures. These failures can be classified into two categories: bad
architecture and no architecture. (The first chapter used the term
unarchitecture.)
    Clearly, software architects should not be the only professionals
responsible for architecture. The architecture supports the value chain
delivery that is being developed by several different stakeholders. Because
architecture is a place that supports communication among the people who
have specified a solution, as well as contains a flexible structure to support
the current and future decisions around the solution, it really belongs to every
stakeholder, including business experts and developers. This leads to a
critical point: A software architect must possess the skills to openly
facilitate the collaboration that leads to a sound architecture.
    Plain and simple, this book promotes a very simple and versatile
architecture style. It is known by a few different names. Two of the most
common names for this style are Ports and Adapters and Hexagonal. It is
also known as Clean Architecture, and a less common name is Onion
Architecture. These are all different monikers for the same thing. By any
name, this architecture style supports flexibility and adaptability at every
point of implementation and change, as you will learn in more detail in
Chapter 8, “Foundation Architecture.”
    A key perspective on strategic software architecture is how it evolved
through time, and for what reasons. It can be difficult to track the motivation
behind certain decisions through the life cycle of an application, subsystem,
and whole system. Decisions must be explained to those new to a team. It’s
also important for long-standing team members to be able to refresh their
own memories about, and explain to business stakeholders, why things are
the way they are.
    Thankfully, there is a simple, agile tool, known as the Architectural
Decision Record (ADR), that can assist in this process. ADRs help teams
track software decisions made over the long haul. An ADR provides a
document template that is used to capture each important architectural
decision made, along with its context and consequences.
    Each ADR should be stored along with the source code to which it
applies, so they are easily accessible for any team member. You might
protest that #agile doesn’t require any documentation, and that the current
code should be self-explanatory. That viewpoint is not entirely accurate. The
#agile approach avoids useless documentation, but allows for any
documentation that helps technical and business stakeholders understand the
current context. More to the point, ADRs are very lightweight.
    A number of ADR templates are available, but Michael Nygard proposed
a particularly simple, yet powerful, one [Nygard-ADR]. His point of view is
that an ADR should be a collection of records for “architecturally
significant” decisions—those that affect the structure, nonfunctional
characteristics, dependencies, interfaces, or construction techniques. Let’s
examine the structure of this template:

     Title: The self-explanatory title of the decision.
     Status: The status of the decision, such as proposed, accepted,
     rejected, deprecated, superseded, etc.
     Context: Describe the observed issue that has motivated this decision
     or change.
     Decision: Describe the solution that was chosen and why.
     Consequences: Describe what is easier or more difficult due to this
     change.

  The next section provides an example of the ADR of a team within
NuCoverage.



Applying the Tools
NuCoverage must determine whether it should continue to run its business
with the existing Monolithic application, or to use a different architecture to
support their new white-label strategy. Its senior architects recommend using
a Microservices architecture. It’s unwise to make such a decision hastily.
The business and technical stakeholders decided to use the Cynefin
framework to gain a better understanding of the situation by means of a
decision-making tool that fosters thorough analysis. Table 2.2 summarizes
what they came up with.


Table 2.2 Cynefin at Work to Determine the Risks and Complexities of
Migrating from a Monolithic Architecture to a Microservices
Architecture
                Current Context       Dangers to        Response to
                                      Migration         Dangers
Clear Known Monolith is well          Complacency       Recognize the value
Knowns      modularized.              and comfort.      and limitations of
            Splitting modules         Team has a        “common
            from in-process to        strong desire     practices.”
            network calls is not      to dig into the   Don’t assume it’s
            a problem.                distributed       just a simple
            Microservices             systems.          transition to
            common practices          No deep           Microservices.
            are well known to         analysis made     Don’t oversimplify
            every member of the       of the current    the solution.
            team.                     state.
                                      Universal
                                      common
                                      practices
                                      don’t exist.
             Current Context        Dangers to        Response to
                                    Migration         Dangers
Complicated Monolith may not        New               Encourage external
Known       be well                 approaches to     and internal
Unknowns    modularized, but        migration are     stakeholders to
            it’s currently          ignored by        challenge experts’
            unknown for the         experts.          opinions.
            whole scope of          Experts are       Use experiments
            application.            overconfident     and scenarios-
            Common practices        in their own      based analysis to
            for Microservices       solutions or in   force people to
            aren’t established in   the efficiency    think differently and
            the community.          of past           in a different way
            The team has no         solutions.        about the response.
            experience in the       Views of
            migration from          experts are
            Monoliths to            conflicting
            Microservices.          and they
                                    cannot agree
                                    on a common
                                    approach to
                                    migration.
           Current Context         Dangers to        Response to
                                   Migration         Dangers
Complex    Monolith is not well    Desire for        Be patient and
Unknown    modularized, and        accelerated       allow the patterns
Unknowns   certainly it won’t be   resolution of     to emerge through
           easy to replace in-     the migration     experimentation.
           process                 problem from      Learn from failures
           communication by        stakeholders.     and see which
           means of the            Temptation to     practices work and
           network.                force a given     which don’t work.
           No one agrees on        decision on
           best practices for      the rest of the
           migrating from the      stakeholders.
           Monolith to             Authoritarian
           Microservices.          response
           The team has no         model to
           experience in the       migration.
           migration to
           Microservices, and
           it is difficult to
           identify real experts
           for the task.
               Current Context      Dangers to       Response to
                                    Migration        Dangers
Chaotic     Monolithic              Relying too      Set up parallel
Unknowables application is          long on local    teams to work on
            difficult to deploy     practices that   the same domain
            and to restart on a     were             problem.
            daily basis.            discovered       Challenge the
            Many production         through use.     current point of
            bugs cause teams to     No               view and encourage
            take extra              innovation.      innovation.
            emergency support       Relying too      Shift from this
            time to make the        much on the      context to a
            business run.           “cult of the     complex one.
                                    leader”
                                    architect to
                                    keep the
                                    business
                                    system
                                    running.


   After significant analysis, all stakeholders involved agree that
NuCoverage is in the Complex domain, because no one is confident that the
current Monolithic application can be easily transformed to a
Microservices-based distributed architecture. There appears to be no broad
agreement on the common practices either in the community or among known
Microservices experts.
   One implication of using a Microservices architecture is that messages
must be exchanged between each of the services. To make an architectural
decision around this requirement, discussions around various mechanisms
are held, which lead to the decision to initially use REST-based messaging.
This decision is captured in the ADR shown in Listing 2.1.

Listing 2.1 ADR That Captures the REST Message Exchange Decision
Click here to view code image
Title: ADR 001: REST Message Exchange

Status: Experimental; Accepted

Context: Feed event messages to collaborating subsystems

Decision: Remain technology agnostic by using Web standards

Consequences:
Advantages: HTTP; Scale; Inexpensive for experiments
Disadvantages: Performance (but unlikely)

   The current thought for the best way forward is found in the following
points:

     Ensure an environment of experimentation with the option to fail, free
     from reprisals.
     Limit the experimentation scope to the current Monolithic application.
     Engage two experts from whom the team can learn, and to help avoid
     the likelihood of failure.

    There is a sense of urgency in regard to establishing software architecture
and design patterns that can be used by NuCoverage for the safe
transformation of its Monolith to a Microservices architecture style, all in
support of the new white-label insurance strategic initiative. Even so, the
teams are making good progress and look forward to the journey ahead.



Summary
This chapter presented multiple strategic learning tools, including culture as
a success enabler. Consider these essential for any business to achieve its
strategic goal through differentiation and innovation. Making informed
decisions is vital because the outcomes of ad hoc decisions are completely
unreliable. Applying context to and forming insights into decisions is
essential. To reinforce this, culturally safe experimentation and controlled
failure are critical to better decision making, because Conway’s Law is
unforgiving of the inferior. As such, partitioning a problem space into smaller
chunks feeds understanding, and using well-formed modules is essential to
that effort. The recognition of business capabilities as modular divisions
within and across which operations occur is core to every business that is
expected to lead in revenue generation. Goal-based decisions are better than
feature-based decisions, and Impact Mapping helps teams make strategic
decisions on purpose. Some tools, such as the Cynefin framework, help with
decision making. Others, such as ADRs, enable decisions along with long-
term tracing.
    The most salient points of this chapter are as follows:

     Understanding when decisions are most appropriate is essential to
     responsible decision making.
     The results of experimentation are an important source of knowledge
     for informed decision making.
     Beware of organizational culture and how it affects the safe use of
     experimentation and controlled failure as a decision-making tool.
     Recognizing business capabilities leads to applying modularity for
     better understanding and problem solving.
     Tools such as Cynefin and ADRs can help with decision making and
     long-term traceability.

   The next chapter peers into events-first experimentation and discovery
tools, which enables rapid learning and exploration that leads to innovations.



References
[Brooks] Frederick P. Brooks, Jr. The Mythical Man-Month. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley, 1975.
[Cohn] Mike Cohn. User Stories Applied: For Agile Software Development.
Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2004.
[Conway] http://melconway.com/Home/Committees_Paper.html
[CT] “Book Reviews and Notes: Teaching Thinking Skills: Theory and
Practice. Joan Baron and Robert Sternberg. 1987. W. H. Freeman, & Co.,
New York. 275 pages. Index. ISBN 0-7167-1791-3. Paperback.” Bulletin of
Science, Technology & Society 8, no. 1 (1988): 101.
doi:10.1177/0270467688008001113. ISSN 0270-4676.
[DrDobbs] Mary Poppendieck. “Morphing the Mold.” August 1, 2003.
https://www.drdobbs.com/morphing-the-mold/184415014.
[Hollnagel] Erik Hollnagel. “The ETTO Principle: Efficiency–Thoroughness
Trade-Off or Why Things That Go Right Sometimes Go Wrong.”
https://skybrary.aero/bookshelf/books/4836.pdf.
[Impact] Gojko Adzic. Impact Mapping: Making a Big Impact with
Software Products and Projects. https://www.impactmapping.org/.
[LA] James O. Coplien and Gertrud Bjornvig. Lean Architecture: for Agile
Software Development. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2010.
[LogFal] https://www.logicalfallacies.info
[Miller] “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on
Our Capacity for Processing Information.”
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Magical_Number_Seven,_Plus_or_Minus
_Two.
[Nygard-ADR]
https://github.com/joelparkerhenderson/architecture_decision_record/blob/m
aster/adr_template_by_michael_nygard.md
[Org-Culture] “Organizational Culture.”
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Organizational_culture.
[Pisano] Gary P. Pisano. “The Hard Truth about Innovative Cultures.”
https://hbr.org/2019/01/the-hard-truth-about-innovative-cultures.
[Poppendieck] Mary Poppendieck and Tom Poppendieck. Lean Software
Development: An Agile Toolkit. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2003.
[TT] Matthew Skelton and Manuel Pais. Team Topologies. Portland, OR: IT
Revolution, 2019.
[Tuckman] Bruce W. Tuckman. “Developmental Sequence in Small Groups.”
Psychological Bulletin 63 (1965): 384–399.
[TW-ICM] https://www.thoughtworks.com/radar/techniques/inverse-
conway-maneuver
Part II

Driving Business Innovation



Executive Summary

In Part I, we established the goals of pursuing digital transformation as a
revenue-generating business strategy, and applying the proper mindset,
culture, and learning tools to facilitate this effort. Now it’s time to delve into
a software development technique that promotes and upholds the value-
generating goals. It helps businesses understand where strategic investments
should be made, and where they should not.
    The technique and practices advanced in this part of the book are readily
adoptable. To provide a brief summary, this approach acknowledges that
differences in perceptions and viewpoints within business capabilities and
processes are not only common, but necessary. That is, depending on the
context of an area of business expertise and the specific communication that
occurs there, what might appear to be equivalent concepts may, in fact, be
vastly different or have a critical nuance of difference from other
viewpoints. As an example, consider the concept of policy inside
NuCoverage. There are various meanings for this term, because in reality
policy is not a single concept, but many. To understand the differing concepts
with the same name, the term policy must be surrounded by the context in
which it has a given meaning and set of business rules.
    Admittedly, when you’re introducing a “new way” of approaching
software development, there’s a danger in it being viewed as yet another
shiny object. With that being said, it’s notable that this technique is not at all
new. The concepts are more than two decades old, and the proposed
technique codifies the essence of several worthwhile practices that have
been used for additional decades. The authors have decided to promote not
the name, but rather the practices used with this approach. That’s because
names can be misused to describe the use of poor practices, and sadly that
has been the case with this technique for a while now. Like anything, people
want to be associated with success, but often don’t want to put in the effort
necessary to understand and practice the technique as intended. Throwing
together some words is meant to elevate them to the “club,” whatever that is
supposed to mean. Yet, if the practices are the focus of this book, then
chances are better that the practices will be adopted rather than a name only.
    The other choice is to do what most software teams are prone to do:
attempt to merge the clearly recognizable differences between one term used
in multiple contexts of human thought and communication into a single
unified thing. That kind of merger has proven problematic and even
damaging time and again, and it most often leads to the large, gnarly, mud-
like software that such great effort is being spent to defeat. Intake of an
application to obtain a policy, calculating the risk and premium rate of a
potential policy, underwriting a policy, filing a claim against a policy, and
renewing a policy are all very different concepts, and they should be
modeled differently in separate software contexts. The technique and
practice offered in Part II uses separate module-based software contexts to
host the range of different uses.



Chapter 4: Reaching Domain-Driven
Results
The word domain, as used in this book, refers to a sphere of knowledge. As
already established, knowledge is one of the most valuable assets of any
business.
     Existing knowledge is important and valuable, but a business that rests
     on its current knowledge risks that it is ordinary, or that even new,
     breakthrough knowledge can become ordinary if and when the
     competition catches up. Continuous knowledge acquisition must be at
     the top of the software requirements list.
     When a sphere of knowledge is identified by a name, this domain has
     preexisting knowledge. The trick is not just to continue to acquire
     knowledge in the preexisting subsystems, but also to gain new
     breakthrough knowledge in the areas of anticipated innovation.
     A domain names and encompasses a problem space—that is, an area of
     the enterprise where new software concepts will deliver competitive
     advantage. Each of the subparts of the problem space domain are
     logically known as subdomains, and two or more of these will be used
     to establish industry leadership for the innovator.
     A single subdomain is a contextual division where a given area of
     business expertise can be explored and developed. Multiple
     subdomains each reflect a different context of expertise.
     Consider the abstractions in Chapter 4 as being the opposite of plug-in,
     all-too-familiar business capabilities. Concrete examples follow in
     Chapter 5.



Chapter 5: Contextual Expertise
There are generally multiple perspectives in a single problem space domain.
Different business experts view the problem space from different angles. The
differences in perspectives are where the contextual divisions are likely to
be established.

     A contextual division of expertise forms a perimeter around the project
     and team responsible for it. The boundary is established to keep terms,
     meanings, and business rules consistent within and to prevent any other
     terms, meanings, and business rules from infiltrating and causing
     corruption by outside forces.
     Within a contextual boundary of expertise, the terms, meanings, and
     business rules used by the single responsible team working in that area
     form a special team language. This language is ubiquitous inside the
     boundary because it is regularly expressed orally by the team, written
     in documents, and drawn in diagrams, and the source code of the
     software model reflects the language.
     A contextual division that is formed around an area of highest strategic
     importance and investment is known as the core. To make known the
     difference between the core and those contexts deemed worthy of lesser
     investment, the names supporting and generic are used for the latter.
     Generally, supporting subdomains must be developed internally or
     outsourced, but will not receive deep intellectual investment. Generic
     subdomains may be purchased or downloaded from open source
     venues.
     Business capabilities are a good place to look when establishing
     contextual boundaries. Although there can be finer divisions of
     expertise, the contexts can be first chosen as business capabilities.
     When finer-grained areas of expertise are recognized, those can be
     extracted from an initial business capability context. This points to the
     importance of understanding the organization-specific business
     capabilities.



Chapter 6: Mapping, Failing, and
Succeeding—Choose Two
Because there will always be multiple business capabilities, and related
contextual areas of expertise, it’s critical to understand how to interact and
integrate with the software models found in other context boundaries. This
requires a clear understanding of the team dynamics between any two teams,
as well as which facilities are available for integration. One set of
techniques to support such efforts is known as mappings. It’s important to use
these and other domain-driven techniques properly, or negative outcomes can
occur.

     Maps are drawings that represent reality.
     Drawing lines between any two contextual boundaries to indicate a
     relationship between them creates a map. Maps are good choices for
     displaying directions, flow, and any travel complexities.
     The lines drawn between any two context boundaries represent the
     existing inter-team relationship, direction of dependencies, and a means
     of integration.
     There are eight different ways that two contexts can be mapped, which
     are not mutually exclusive.
     An additional topographical mapping tool is provided in Chapter 6,
     which helps show specific integration points and concrete examples
     between any two or more contexts.
     Existing inter-team relationships that are not ideal might be changed if
     the status quo causes unworkable circumstances. The existing situation
     must first be understood and identified to recognize how it must change
     for the better.
     Fair warnings are provided to use the given tools properly, as opposed
     to circulating a technique name in an attempt to become a club member.
     Before any team jumps in, make sure they understand these points of
     potentially unrecoverable failure, and how to avoid them.



Chapter 7: Modeling Domain Concepts
When it comes to actual software implementation, a few powerful tools can
be applied to implement domain models.

     Entities model unique things and generally support other software
     components making changes to their data. Because of their uniqueness,
     one entity can be easily distinguished from another.
     Value objects are like currency. Paper money contains a number of
     images, numbers, and other qualities, such as the type of paper and ink,
     but in the end most people only care about its purchasing value.
     Furthermore, most people couldn’t care less about which paper note
     with a value of 5 that they have, and would willingly exchange one 5
     note for another. In other words, a value is a value is a value. Many
     things in software can be modeled as values, and far more should be
     than actually are in practice.
     Aggregates are entities that have a special purpose—namely,
     representing a set of data that per business rules must remain consistent
     at all times. The consistency rules are maintained both when in
     operation on a computer and when stored in a database.
     Domain services provide business logic that operates on entities,
     aggregates, and value objects, but are not directly associated with any
     one of the types on which they work.
     Functional behavior provides the kind of software operations that are
     like mathematical functions. These operations are meant to take one or
     more input parameters and produce an answer that is consistent with its
     mathematical properties.

    That was neither mysterious nor intimidating. This knowledge-driven
software development approach is straightforward and highlights differences
in perspectives between multiple business experts who might be describing
what appear to be the same concepts but which are actually different. It also
helps businesses understand where strategic investments should be made,
and where they should not.
Chapter 4

Reaching Domain-Driven Results


Domain-driven is a curious term. The Merriam-Webster dictionary gives ten
definitions for the word domain. The first three might be among the ideas that
come to mind when thinking of this word:

  1. Complete and absolute ownership of land
  2. A territory over which dominion is exercised
  3. A region distinctively marked by some physical feature

This book discusses business software strategy and innovation. Because
every business is unique, it could well be that “domain” draws attention to
the “dominion” of the business ownership of properties and operations, and
perhaps even the distinctive features among these. While not wrong, none of
these is the best interpretation of how “domain” is used in this book.
    Chapters 1–3 heavily emphasized realizing business software strategy
through learning and discovery to bring about differentiating innovation. This
emphasis on learning and discovery points to the fourth definition for domain
found in the Merriam-Webster dictionary, and it is the most fitting:

  4. A sphere of knowledge, influence, or activity

Every business has a specialized sphere of knowledge, which is gained
through preexisting expertise and the activities of collective and shared
learning. Once this knowledge is reflected in software products, it has
influence on consumers. Now, dipping into the first three definitions, the
results are indeed the intellectual property owned within the business
dominion. It reflects the distinctive features of business creativity that are
the reward for the investment made in knowledge acquisition and sheer
determination to advance the state of the art. This is for certain a sphere of
knowledge, influence, and activity.
    Domain-driven points out that a business drives results through
investments in knowledge acquisition within and beyond its current sphere of
influence and activity. The business drives its own advancement and growth
through steady improvements in its technology-based products. This book
continually asserts that it is learning through experimentation-based
discovery that will yield the most innovative results.


                 Innovation within an Agile Methodology

   As an example of using a methodology or process execution
   framework, Scrum identifies four primary reasons to place an item in
   the product backlog:

      1. Features
      2. Bugs
      3. Technical Work
      4. Knowledge Acquisition

       It’s disappointing that Knowledge Acquisition is consigned to last
   place, because it should always be in first place. How can a team
   place a new feature in the backlog before they understand it? Even if
   they do put the feature in the backlog before knowing it well, at a
   minimum Knowledge Acquisition must be given due diligence before
   attempting to implement it. It’s also disappointing that Knowledge
   Acquisition is often described with technical motivations, such as
   “researching various JavaScript libraries and making a selection.”
   This rationale is also unknown to most developers who consider
   themselves Scrum practitioners. The fact that such problems exist at
   all may indicate a larger problem in the methodology or at least the
   priorities of execution.
       If you’re using Scrum, promote Knowledge Acquisition into first
   place and label such tasks in terms of domain-driven experimentation,
   especially those that have a higher potential to lead to breakthroughs
   that result in differentiating innovations. Pass every new feature-
   based task under the hammer of traceable business goals through
   impacts, which might have been first discovered through
   EventStorming learning sessions.


    Using a domain-driven approach requires the prominent and consistent
involvement of business experts working with software developers. This
aligns precisely with the long-stated tenets of #agile:

     Agile Manifesto: “Our highest priority is to satisfy the customer
     through early and continuous delivery of valuable software. Business
     people and developers must work together daily throughout the project.
     The most efficient and effective method of conveying information to and
     within a development team is face-to-face conversation.” [Agile-
     Manifesto-Principles]
     Extreme Programming (XP): “The Customer is Always Available.
     One of the few requirements of extreme programming (XP) is to have
     the customer available. [This is] not only to help the development team,
     but to be a part of it as well. All phases of an XP project require
     communication with the customer, preferably face to face, on site. …
     You need the expert.” [XP]

    Admittedly, some aspects of both #agile and XP have shifted over time.
Our purpose in noting the importance of “customer” here is not to give a
strict definition, but rather to emphasize that those who understand the goals
of the domain at hand must be available, and that each must be a member of
one or more teams. These individuals might be known as a sponsor,
customer, user, product champion, and so forth. There is no need to
exhaustively identify every role that a business expert could play in any
given subsystem, but you should recognize that there must be one or more
who are able to champion the product being developed and drive the
software goals to delivery. Everyone involved, including the end users of the
product, must be pleased with the results.
Domains and Subdomains
When it comes to equities investments, knowing where to invest and where
not to invest is critical to financial success. As the saying goes, “you can’t
time the market.” That reality gives investors all the more reason to invest
based on key financial indicators and market conditions, which are sound
sources of securities industry knowledge.
    When it comes to business software strategy, understanding where to
invest the most and where to invest the least is likewise critical to financial
success. Although being completely right the first time is rare, it might not
matter so much. In the world of business, something that is currently right has
a high potential to be wrong later. Constantly monitoring attempted impacts
to achieve business goals, as well as studying market conditions that put a
spotlight on user satisfaction, are sound ways to gauge the effects of
innovation endeavors.
    Software reaches across the breadth and depth of an entire business. The
entire domain or sphere of knowledge of all software in a large enterprise is
voluminous. It’s too complex for any single project or considerably sized
business program to include the full domain’s vast details in the defined
effort’s scope. Likely a team will find that most are irrelevant, anyway.
Defining constraints for the scope of any given software development effort
is essential for successful deliveries.
    Because the sphere of a sphere of knowledge is relative to its specific
purpose, it’s not surprising that the term domain can have a few scopes and
nuances. Four are defined for the purposes of this discussion. Figure 4.1
illustrates the four scopes, which are further defined in the list that follows.

  1. Voluminous enterprise scope. All software in a large enterprise is the
     business’s full domain. At this scope, a single source of in-depth
     knowledge is impossible to create.
  2. Medium-to-large system scope. Commercial licensed enterprise
     systems, such as ERP, as well as large, custom, legacy systems fall
     within this scope. In terms of domain knowledge, these are closer to
     Scope 3, but were likely not well planned and architected. They are
     often the Big Ball of Mud systems described in Chapters 1 and 2, but
     that need not be the case.
  3. Medium-to-large problem space scope. A problem space is a sphere
     of knowledge that unfolds as a set of solutions are developed, but
     requires multiple teams whose members have various types of expertise
     (i.e., Scope 4). Ultimately, the problem space is an effort in system
     development.
  4. Smallish context scope. Every single communication context of know-
     how within a problem space is the sphere of knowledge of a specialized
     business expertise.




Figure 4.1 Four scopes of domain knowledge spheres used in this book.


    An enterprise architecture framework can assist in managing a large
digital enterprise, that of Scope 1. Yet it generally won’t provide much deep
information about each part of a large enterprise. That’s often locked up in
the team’s tacit knowledge. Such a framework is a schema or ontology,
which supports a set of formal and structured viewpoints of an enterprise.
Sometimes the framework also assists in the process of defining an
enterprise architecture. The power of such a framework is to help in
organizing and inventorying a company’s digital assets to help with planning
and decision making. Two such frameworks are the Zachman Framework
[Zachman] and The Open Group Architecture Framework [TOGAF]. Figure
4.1 provides only a limited glimpse into the overall enterprise, and is in no
way a reflection of the result of using an enterprise architecture framework.
    Scope 2, as seen in Figure 4.1, often reflects a haphazard approach that
results in the Big Ball of Mud systems described in Chapters 1 and 2. Still,
that need not be the case. A system can be architected and implemented in a
manner that doesn’t reflect an ad hoc approach. The differences in the two
can be seen in Figure 4.1 with the scopes numbered 2 that are brown/dark
colored and those that are green/lighter colored, respectively. The Big Ball
of Mud systems are generally quite large. Those thoughtfully architected tend
to be more medium in size, with new software more focused on a specific
solution, and are integrated with the preexisting Big Ball of Mud systems to
leverage what works but without getting very dirty hands.


                         Abstractions Contraptions

   This discussion might seem too abstract. If so, think of the Scope 3
   problem space as NuCoverage introducing its SaaS-based insurance
   platform. Consider the Scope 4 contextual divisions within the Scope
   3 problems space to be Intake, Underwriting, Risk, Renewals, and
   Claims. This point is explained in more detail in Chapter 5,
   “Contextual Expertise.” For now, the abstractions are useful for
   imagining and plugging in the problem space and areas of expertise
   with a specific sphere of knowledge that exists in any given business.


   Figure 4.1 also shows a single Scope 3 strategic initiative that is under
way. This area of work is meant to produce some level of breakthrough
innovation, which means that the teams lead with experiment-based learning.
An overall sphere of knowledge exists here, but a deliberate effort is being
made to divide the problem space domain into specialty areas of expertise.
This is indicated by the Scope 4 contexts inside Scope 3. This depiction is
not meant to create silos, but rather to acknowledge that the different experts
view the problem space from different angles. Collectively, the knowledge is
gained and used to solve a medium-to-large problem space, while the
specialty areas are recognized and strictly honored. As a whole problem
space, Scope 3 will have different areas of Scope 4 contextual expertise.
Each is managed by a single team. Each team includes at least one expert in
that contextual area of expertise. Making one team responsible for a context
protects the area of expertise from becoming confused and fractured by the
goals and communication-based languages that are developed by other
teams.
    This leads us to the lowest-level scope. Within the Scope 3 problem
space are five Scope 4 subdomain contexts of separate specialties. Each of
the five contexts represents where specific conversations take place
regarding a focused and relatively narrow sphere of knowledge. Every
context is where a team of one or more business experts and developers have
a shared understanding of what a given term and any number of expressions
mean in their conversations. As a goal, no ambiguities should exist inside a
given context, although undoubtedly there will be some. When any are
detected, conscious exertion is made to clear up the foggy meanings and
associated software rules and behaviors.
    Scope 4 brings up another term: subdomain. A subdomain is a subpart of
a domain, and specifically applicable within Scope 3. It’s often the case that
a subdomain is the same as a business capability. Ideally, a context, such as
that seen in Figure 4.1, should align one-to-one with a subdomain. Consider
a subdomain as primarily a problem space concept, and recognize that each
has a greater or lesser strategic business significance.
    In Chapter 5, Figure 5.1 shows the specific contexts represented in Figure
4.1 here. The names assigned to the contexts draw attention to the
corresponding subdomains. Problems arise when multiple subdomains exist
in a single modular context. Those problems tend to relate to how a single
source module becomes overloaded with concepts that are not germane to
the central theme of the context, which should be a single, well-defined
subdomain. For example, NuCoverage’s Policyholder Accounts subdomain
becomes problematic as additional insured rewards are defined. Studying
the diverging goals makes it clear that a new subdomain has emerged and
must be removed from the Policyholder Accounts and located in a new
Reward Programs subdomain. When solutions are carefully designed, each
subdomain should align one-to-one with a context of the same name.
    Does the Scope 3 problem space indicate that all the knowledge for the
solution is held inside among the five contexts? That’s very unlikely and
even more so impractical. At least a few of the five Scope 4 contexts are
integrated with preexisting Big Ball of Mud legacy systems. Any amount of
effort in a large enterprise will never eliminate all messy and unseemly
legacy bits. Leverage what’s there because it works. Any given Big Ball of
Mud system that is eventually broken apart will still have integrations with
the then smaller contexts, each of which represents a single subdomain.
Make no mistake—this will be the result of vigorous, concerted effort to
overcome the complexity caused by years of neglect.
    At least one relevant question remains: Does the Scope 3 problem space
represent an architecture where the five contexts are physically contained
inside a Monolith? Maybe. Maybe not. As emphasized in Chapter 2, it’s a
good way to start because it will delay a whole host of problems that the
teams shouldn’t be required to deal with early on. It’s possible that in time
the architecture will switch from Monolithic to distributed, but that’s a
decision to be made at the last responsible moment. For now, Scope 3 is
chiefly representative of a strategic problem space where a lot of learning
must happen to reach differentiating results.



Summary
This chapter introduced and promoted the concept that every business should
be driven to make investments in knowledge acquisition, within and beyond
its current sphere of influence and activity. The knowledge reflected in
software products is the real business differentiator and has a real influence
on the users. Yet, understanding where to invest the most and where to invest
the least is likewise critical to financial success, and must also be a
recognized component of business software strategy. The domains and
subdomains introduced in this chapter help to reinforce the proper
application of software as a profit center.
    The most essential points of this chapter are:

     Learning through experimentation-based discovery within every core
     sphere of knowledge of a business will drive the most innovative
     results.
     Tracing business goals through impacts enables a higher potential for
     breakthroughs that will result in differentiating innovations.
     The domain-driven approach requires the prominent and consistent
     involvement of business experts working with software developers.
     Expert is not a title, and business expertise can be gained through roles
     such as product sponsors, customers, users, product champions, and so
     on.
     Domains are used to determine the whole business problem space.
     Subdomains are subparts of the domain with specific contextual scope.
     Each subdomain should align one-to-one with a business capability and
     a context of expertise, yet business capabilities will be extended over
     time, and corresponding subdomains will follow suit.

    Next, we dive deeper into finding and contextualizing business
boundaries of expertise with the help of a technique known as Domain-
Driven Design. This technique offers tools for both strategic and tactical
software development—those that address the problem space and help
transition to the solution space. It fits with the software innovation goals
previously discussed and assists with those that remain in this book.



References
[Agile-Manifesto-Principles] https://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html
[TOGAF] https://www.opengroup.org/togaf
[XP] http://www.extremeprogramming.org/rules/customer.html
[Zachman] https://www.zachman.com/about-the-zachman-framework
Chapter 5

Contextual Expertise


Chapter 4, “Reaching Domain-Driven Results,” established that contextual
divisions with boundaries are necessary to prevent confusion in
conversations with experts who use the same terminology but have different
definitions of those terms. As explained in the section, “Domains and
Subdomains,” there are generally multiple perspectives in a single problem
space domain. It might be said that different experts view the problem space
from different angles. This chapter provides concrete examples of the topics
that were discussed more abstractly in Chapter 4. This will clear up any
questions that might have been raised in the abstract view.



Bounded Context and Ubiquitous
Language
The software development approach known as Domain-Driven Design
(DDD) [Evans-DDD] addresses the contexts and communications discussed
so far in the book. DDD has a name for the specialized set of conversations
that take place regarding a relatively narrow sphere of knowledge, such as
those depicted in Figure 4.1. In Figure 4.1, they are labeled as Scope 4 with
the word Context or abbreviated as Ctx. In DDD, these conversations form
what is known as a Ubiquitous Language. This language exists within a
context, which is known as a Bounded Context.
    Yes, Figure 4.1 is abstract because the concepts can be applied to any
concrete domain. There are concrete examples of these concepts just ahead
in Figure 5.1 and in the section “Business Capabilities and Contexts.”




Figure 5.1 Bounded Contexts are named for their area of expertise and
language.


   The names Ubiquitous Language and Bounded Context might be
unfamiliar and seem mysterious, but there’s no need to get hung up on them.
They simply identify two of the concepts that have already been discussed
extensively. They give software developers applying DDD a means to share
a set of names that refer to specific design concepts that everyone involved
can use:

     Ubiquitous Language. The team-centric common set of terms and
     expressions spoken in a sphere of knowledge within a specialized
     business expertise. Often the motivation for creating a common
     language for the team is the diverse backgrounds of those involved in
     the project, who might think of some concepts by different names. Even
     so, the language primarily identifies with accuracy the meanings of
     various terms used in the team’s specific context. That’s why outside a
     given context, the same terms will tend to have at least slightly, if not
     vastly, different meanings. The word “ubiquitous” might be a bit
     misleading, as it is not meant to imply that this specialized language
     (definitions included) is known throughout the business organization.
     Rather, the language is known within a single team, but is considered
     ubiquitous in the sense that the terms and expressions from
     conversations become familiar to that team and permeate the artifacts
     produced by the team. This is any kind of software modeling, including
     what’s rendered into drawings and the source code model. They all
     “speak” the same language.
     Bounded Context. The context in which a single team speaks and
     models software using terms, expressions, and defined business rules
     that reflect a specialized, acquired business knowledge—a Ubiquitous
     Language. The terms and expressions are not only words, but have
     clear definitions. The context is bounded in the sense that conversations
     use clearly understood meanings that occur inside the boundary are not
     the property of teams on the outside, and the terms and meanings used
     by other business efforts outside don’t penetrate the team’s established
     boundary. In terms of modularization, think of a Bounded Context as a
     coarse-grained module. How the module is to be deployed is another
     matter. As described in Chapter 2, “Essential Strategic Learning
     Tools,” modules should be chosen first and deployment options as late
     as possible.

   Figure 4.1 shows five different Bounded Contexts, each with its own
specialized Ubiquitous Language. As a rule, a single Bounded Context is
owned by a single team. However, one team might own multiple Bounded
Contexts. Requiring that a Bounded Context be owned by a single team
ensures that conflicting goals and priorities among different teams do not
cause confusing conversations and mismatched concepts in a single language.


                            Finding Boundaries
   While participating in EventStorming sessions and using other
   discovery and learning tools, it might seem overly challenging to
   identify the correct Bounded Contexts. Finding the “correct” Bounded
   Contexts is itself a learning process, which means that being wrong so
   that you can eventually be right is an achievement. It’s also true that
   “correct” today may be not-so-correct in the future.
       Recall that the first driver of any kind of modularity is the
   cohesiveness of concepts, which is learned through the
   communication and experience. More specifically, the people who
   are involved in the conversations around solving a very specific
   problem can be different from the people who are required to
   participate in other problem-solving conversations. That’s because
   the expertise shifts along with the problem to be solved. If the right
   people aren’t present and must be called on later, their involvement
   might not take place within the same problem-solving conversation.
   When multiple experts are together but disagree on the “correctness”
   of some definitions and operations, they are probably all right. That
   being so, their multiple perspectives point a spotlight at different
   contexts. Look for business model boundaries around areas of
   expertise, indicating the various spheres of knowledge.


    The specialized Ubiquitous Language inside a strong boundary allows
separate teams to have the same terms for concepts that have slightly or
vastly different meanings, including their business rules. Consider, for
example, the term product. It can have various meanings, including
something that you can purchase, such as an insurance product; the result of
evaluating a mathematical multiplication expression; and the software that is
to be developed by using some project execution techniques. More typically,
a single business will use the word product with slightly different meanings.
In the insurance industry, it could well be that policy is a term used across
contexts, with each context hosting a different meaning.
    Trying to harmonize all the meanings of policy into a single software
component is fraught with problems. DDD avoids such problems by means
of a Bounded Context, which is employed to separate the various uses of the
term policy. In each Bounded Context, the term policy has a well-defined
meaning. The idea is to accept and embrace differences across a single
business enterprise as normal rather than anomalous.
    This strong boundary also allows teams to use different language terms
for concepts that are similar. This might be best illustrated by thinking about
multiple human languages where the same thing has completely different
names. For example, the English coverage is three different words in three
other languages: French, couverture; German, abdeckung; and Spanish,
cobertura. Consider a Bounded Context as a national border behind which a
national language is spoken. Although this analogy might seem a bit far-
fetched, it is quite true that different areas of a business use completely
different terms for overlapping concepts, where those terms have nuanced
meanings. The idea of an insurance policy might have the following names
across the business:

     Policy
     Coverage
     Contract
     Form

    Possibly not readily recognized is that when such differences exist within
the same organization, the different languages drive natural coarse-grained
decoupling when Bounded Contexts are used to separate these clear language
differences. In other words, these different terms will be used within
different areas of expertise. It’s important to watch for such situations and
separate them.
    How is it known when the correct term is used? In fact, in the preceding
examples, all four names used to refer to a policy are correct. Again, the
correctness is determined by the context in which the term is used, because
the four different areas of expertise are heralded by the contexts. Figure 5.1
draws attention to this point by referring to each of the five contexts from
Figure 4.1 by its context name.
    Each Bounded Context should be named according to its area of
expertise. Within that area, the use of every term is relative to the contextual
boundary:

     Intake Context. The Application for insurance is submitted by an
     Applicant.
     Risk Context. The Coverage contains data from the Application
     submitted to the Intake Context, which is used to calculate the risks
     associated with underwriting the policy. The dashed line points out the
     origin of the data used by Risk—that is, the data comes from Intake.
     How Risk receives the data is not necessarily indicated by the dashed
     line. Although the Application data originates with the Intake Context,
     after it is cleansed and augmented it next flows to the Underwriting
     Context, and then to the Risk Context.
     Underwriting Context. The Policy is the result of receiving the
     Application details, and then calculating the risk of the coverage and a
     premium rate. The rate calculation components are not shown here, but
     the rate may currently be calculated by means of an integration with a
     Big Ball of Mud legacy system.
     Claims Context. The Coverage is based on data from the Policy in the
     Underwriting Context. The Claims area might or might not hold this
     data persistently. It could be obtained just in time when a claim is filed.
     This Coverage is different from the Coverage in the Risk Context.
     Renewals Context. This Policy is based on the Underwriting Policy,
     but is not identical to it. What is needed to renew a Policy is minimal
     compared to what is needed to underwrite and manage the Policy in
     Underwriting. The new rate might be determined by reassessing risk
     (not shown in Figure 5.1), which would be based on any losses filed
     against the Claim Coverage (or lack thereof), and in turn have an
     impact on the premium of a renewal.

    Each of these contexts aligns one-to-one with the subdomain of the same
name. That is, the business capability concept represented by the subdomain
is implemented in the same-named Bounded Context.



Core Domain
A Core Domain is a subdomain within which a focused core strategic
business capability is developed. It is a top-tier differentiator where the
investment in radically new and innovative ideas are validated through
copious communication and experimentation, and then implemented using a
Bounded Context.
    A Core Domain is quite literally where a business vision is focused. This
is very much where the business must excel. In terms of Impact Mapping, the
actors, impacts, and deliverables that deliberately drive the business toward
a goal will be core. The best of business expertise and software developers
compose a core team. Hence, a Core Domain warrants an investment in
talent and time.
    In Figure 5.1, it’s likely that Underwriting starts out as a core initiative
because it is responsible for generating business. At first, human
underwriters will be responsible for much of the risk evaluation and
determining the premiums to match those evaluations. Yet, NuCoverage
knows that it must “beat the market” through risk management using machine
learning. The website that hosts the Intake and Underwriting interactions
with applicants gets the early core focus. All the while, the Risk context is
also being developed. At a future point when NuCoverage is confident about
taking risk management out of human hands and moving it into smart actuarial
mathematical models, the switch gets flipped and Intake and Underwriting
become less significant.
    This points to the fact that a single business might have multiple core
initiatives. Within a large system development effort, there might be only
initiatives, such as Underwriting and the back-office effort on Risk. Yet, the
actual number of those initiatives will be consistent with the level of
innovation required to reach a business goal. It’s not as if stating some
arbitrary limitation on the practical number of core initiatives is unhelpful.
As always, it depends. A key constraint is the talent already onboard and the
talent that can be recruited and put into core initiatives.
    Our use of the term talent here strongly implies that communication with
a scientific, experimental mindset is a must. The intelligence, creativity, and
drive of these people should be scary, and they will be available only in
exchange for compensation equal to their abilities. Innovation has a price
tag, kind of like the car driven by a Fortune 500 CEO. All the same, talent is
no excuse for arrogance and drama. The best people work in teams and know
they can’t do it all alone, because they understand their own limitations.


                       Beware of Maintenance Mode
   A Core Domain usually receives much attention and investment from
   the business at the inception of the project until the satisfying delivery
   is made supporting the defined strategic goal. The team is formed by
   including experienced senior developers, architects, and business
   experts who will carry out the work and achieve success.
       Most of the time, once the major milestones are achieved and the
   project deadline is met, the project transitions to maintenance mode.
   The experienced team is disbanded and a team of juniors are hired to
   patch bugs and add on any lacking features. Yet, the major
   breakthroughs in learning occur while the system is running in
   production for some time. All the while, feedback is gathered from
   platform monitoring tools, users, customers, and other stakeholders.
   Adjustments and improvements have to be made. A key problem in
   this stage is that the original knowledge acquired at the inception of
   the project has been lost with the disbanding of the experienced team
   members. The replacements do not have enough perspective, skills,
   or knowledge to make the right decisions and implementation choices.
       This is one reason why a well-architected and thoughtfully
   structured project becomes a Big Ball of Mud. It would be better to
   reject maintenance-mode thinking, keep the team together, and
   continue to invest over the project’s entire life cycle.


    Early on, a startup business might struggle to focus on one or a few things,
but it must learn where its business will earn revenues and how it will
succeed. Recalling the germination of an idea and how it was pitched for
venture funding can help the organization retain or regain focus. Adopting an
Objectives and Key Results (OKRs) process has taken some small startups
to valuations of hundreds of billions of dollars [Measure]. If it’s not careful,
though, a startup might be destined toward entropy—but at least it has the
advantage that it doesn’t begin in that position. This enables fast innovation.
    For a large enterprise, it might be less of a struggle to know what the core
focus should be, but the challenges will very likely lie in where and how that
focus should be realized. An established enterprise likely starts from a state
of entropy and must struggle to deal with not breaking its existing digital
assets. The discussion in the section “Context Mapping,” in Chapter 6,
“Mapping, Failing, and Succeeding—Choose Two,” can help the business
manage this condition.
    Further, a core modeling effort will very likely not remain core over a
very long time frame. New investments will continue with necessary new
innovations. What is core today might be a supporting part of a newer
initiative at some point in the future.



Supporting Subdomains, Generic
Subdomains, and Technical Mechanisms
A business can’t afford to invest everywhere to the same degree it does in a
Core Domain, nor does it need to. Although absolutely necessary to have,
many parts of a large system are neither interesting nor worthy of deep
investment. These less significant subdomains of a system are there to
support the overall function of the core parts.
   Such lesser domains tend to fall into two primary areas: supporting and
generic subdomains. We can also add to these another typical sideshow that
has little to do with the actual business: technical mechanisms.


Supporting Subdomains
A supporting subdomain is one that is necessary to provide support to the
functionality of a Core Domain, but does not deserve the steep investment
that should go into the core. A supporting subdomain likely does not consist
of a commercial software product offering that can be licensed, or for which
a subscription is available. If such a supporting subdomain does exist
commercially, it is very likely that it is highly configurable and customizable.
    Because a supporting subdomain might not be available for purchase, it
will almost certainly have to be custom developed. Yet, because it is not
core, a team should not run up exorbitant expenses in this supporting area of
the system. For one thing, the talent selected to work on this subdomain
should not be top-shelf. Although the subdomain talent will undoubtedly need
to communicate with the business experts, the necessary discussions might be
driven more by a core team because the core team knows what they need to
support their efforts.
    Another kind of a supporting subdomain is a legacy subsystem with a
business capability that can be reused. There will almost certainly be a need
to create an interface to the legacy operations that provides a better
integration experience than what might (or might not) already exist. Again,
the section “Context Mapping” in Chapter 6 addresses the means to deal with
this issue in several ways.
    As an example, two legacy supporting subdomains for NuCoverage are
risk management and premium rate calculations. Integration interfaces must
be developed for both because their use is currently internal to the legacy
system. In the long run, it will be best to break these assets out of the legacy
system and move them into contexts of their own to enable frequent changes
to them. This will happen sooner with risk management because it will
transition to a Core Domain.


Generic Subdomains
A generic subdomain is complex and requires a great deal of domain
expertise to develop, but one that is available through multiple commercial
closed source or open source products. Think of two or more products that
are compared side-by-side using feature lists with check boxes. For both
products, nearly every one of the dozens of check boxes are checked. Which
one should be selected? Perhaps the decision should be made based on
perceived reputational advantage, greater total number of customers for one
of the products, length of time on the market, or other semi-tangible or
intangible aspects.
    For NuCoverage, examples of generic subdomains might include
industry-standard risk models, policy document formatting and generation,
photo image scanning for applications and claims, bulk sales and marketing
email providers, customer relationship management, enterprise resource
planning, identity and access management, and the like.


Technical Mechanisms
Unfortunately, some of the lowest-level areas of software development tend
to attract the attention of developers because they are frequently more
technical in nature. Management must be careful not to allow the best talent
to become pigeonholed into these areas that might be entertaining in terms of
leading-edge technology, but do not yield much bang for the buck when it
comes to the business’s bottom line. The actual business aspects associated
with these tools—if there are any beyond data persistence and movement—
are less demanding of thoughtful modeling. The innovation is already present
in the mechanism.


                       Challenge Software Engineers

   Good engineers are motivated by challenges. If they are not
   challenged by the problem they are solving, they will look for
   challenges in the technology that they employ. The antidote is to
   supply real challenges so engineers do not have to seek out their own.


    In terms of the technology attractions, expect to see some of the latest in
cloud infrastructure and application programming interfaces (APIs),
deployment containers, databases, web user interface frameworks, network
communications, messaging, and anything that promises the potential for
large scale and high throughput. Although some doses of these mechanisms
that make data move and the enterprise tick are definitely called for, be
forewarned that these programmer magnets are not worthy of the undivided
attention that they commonly receive. Make business innovation challenges
greater than the appeal of leading-edge technology.



Business Capabilities and Contexts
Chapter 2 discussed the importance of organizing teams around business
capabilities and capturing critical design communication within the modules
separating business capabilities. The Bounded Context, for example, is a top-
level, coarse-grained module where a business capability is housed.
    Over the long term, the Bounded Context might not remain what it was
originally envisioned to be. Boundaries might change. For example, when
breaking up a Big Ball of Mud, the teams involved might find a business
capability known as Policyholder Accounts. This is where all policyholders
of any kind of policies are managed, and it makes sense that this capability
includes some knowledge of the kinds of policies they each hold.


              Business Capability as a Revenue Generator

   A business capability must be directly connected with at least one
   business goal. There should be no speculation about the need for a
   company to define a business capability. A business capability
   answers the “What?” question regarding the means by which the
   company will generate revenues. A substantive question with regard
   to a business capability is “How?” Impact Mapping, discussed in
   Chapter 2 in the section “Strategic Delivery on Purpose,” explains
   driving software deliverables starting with the question “Why?” By
   the time a team starts work on a business capability in a specific
   context of expertise, there should be no question “Why?” The “Why?”
   must be stated as a clear business goal, yet the deliverables are
   determined by asking “How?” Some impacts will change the behavior
   of “Who?” actors (e.g., customers and competition) to reach the
   “Why?” goal. This leaves no room for the contractor model to push
   for features and functionality that are not already identified by one or
   more Impact Mapping exercises. The impacts might change over time
   based on the success or failure of each, but the goal won’t change
   until the business decides that it’s no longer a necessary goal.


    One of the concepts held inside this module is digital policy documents
acknowledging rewards given to exemplary policyholders. Because car
insurance was the first business in which NuCoverage engaged, the one
supported reward is the Safe Driver Reward. It seemed logical to maintain
the Safe Driver Reward with mainstream policy information. Yet, over time
NuCoverage began to introduce new insurance products, including new kinds
of rewards. For example, health insurance products are associated with
Good Health Rewards, and similar rewards are offered with life insurance.
These rewards are meant not only to improve the driving and health of
individual policyholders, but also to lower the risk of auto accidents,
healthcare costs, and premature death as financial impacts on NuCoverage.
    As these rewards began to grow in number, clearly a new business
capability and a new area of expertise began to form. Now it makes sense to
break out the rewards from Policyholder Accounts into their own specific
coarse-grained module. The Reward Programs Context is the chosen name of
the new Bounded Context. Rewards-related conversations and learning
opportunities are addressed inside this context. At some point in the future, it
might be best to break specific rewards into their own Bounded Contexts.
    A well-designed microservice should encompass the business capability,
which means that a first good step is to consider a microservice as a
Bounded Context. This determines what you put inside the service—namely,
a modeled business capability that is reflected in a Ubiquitous Language.
The service should be autonomous, supporting a model as data and
operations with business rules. This approach should be used as extensively
as possible over a whole system solution, leaving no questions about where
the business capabilities are within the whole. Of course, this doesn’t mean
that every Big Ball of Mud can be replaced in the short term, but using
Context Mapping (described in more detail in Chapter 6) is a way to
fabricate an explicit surfacing of a subdomain.
    A Bounded Context containing a single business capability transcends
technology boundaries. If the architectural layers include a web user
interface, then some form of client code running as JavaScript will be
involved in expressing the Ubiquitous Language. Further, the primary
services will be implemented using a foundational runtime platform, such as
Java or .NET. Unsurprisingly, the model-based business capabilities might
use a polyglot of programming languages as well as runtime platforms to
capitalize on the specific technical advantages afforded by these supports.
    The enterprise business divisions, departments, or lines are not always a
good indication of where the business capabilities are found. Computing has
gradually had an increasing impact on business operations, where workflows
were previously driven by file cabinets and memos moving from desk to
desk. Now there’s much greater use of electronic folders, files, email, and
workflow routing. Yet, none of the previous or current business operations
and data access practices defined the capabilities of a business. Thus,
business capabilities should not be confused with business processes
(operational details ending in “ing,” such as pricing), which might
encompass multiple business capabilities to fully address a business
operation.
    To fully understand how to implement a business capability using #agile
requires an examination of the user working in their natural environment.
Otherwise, the team risks missing out on collecting important steps and
gestures within the daily workflow of users. Such an investigation will
almost certainly uncover pain points and workarounds that should be
addressed by improving the system. For example, suppose you observe a
user who has one or many sticky notes on their display, or a spreadsheet
containing usage instructions, to help them remember how to navigate to and
use important software features in the application. That points to a problem
that must be recognized and remedied. This is part of fully developing a
sphere of knowledge within each business capability.



Not Too Big, Not Too Small
The section “Are Microservices Good?” in Chapter 1, “Business Goals and
Digital Transformation,” established that Microservices are not about size
but rather about the purpose. The word “micro” is misleading in the way that
it implies some kind of size constraints. Yet, it should not convey those
connotations. Refer back to the discussion in Chapter 1 for more details.
    As far as Microservices or modularized Monoliths are concerned, the
same kinds of modularizations and design practices apply because these are
all focused on Bounded Contexts. Thus, you might instead ask: How large is
a Bounded Context? Although this is sort of the wrong question, the answer
is another question: How large is the Ubiquitous Language within the
context? In other words, size cannot be accurately measured as a standard
goal because it is highly contextual.
    A Bounded Context is the encapsulation of a business capability, and
each business capability must have a complete implementation. There
shouldn’t be any part of a given business capability left over or implemented
outside of its Bounded Context. The only design driving force for Bounded
Contexts should be the scope of the business capability and its Ubiquitous
Language, and not the size.


                        Nested Bounded Contexts?

   It’s not uncommon for this question to be raised. It’s uncertain if those
   asking this question actually understand what a Bounded Context is
   and how it is designed. Think about the implications provided in these
   three examples:

     1. If there were a context within a context, it would stand to reason
        that either the outer context or the inner context would “speak” a
        superset of both languages, and the other would “speak” a subset
        of them. It seems most likely that the outer context would “speak”
        the superset. The question is, to what end? This seems unwieldy,
        but might be viable to some. See the section “Shared Kernel” in
        Chapter 6, which describes what some might have in mind. Yet, a
        Shared Kernel is not generally meant to be used in this way.
     2. Another possibility is that the “inner” context is not nested at all,
        but separate (e.g., Microservice) and reachable only through the
        “outer” context. Encapsulation and detail hiding are well-known
        principles. For example, the Law of Demeter is known as the
        “law of least knowledge.” This seems more appropriate than the
        first example, but isn’t an earthshaking idea. It’s (a) one
        subsystem integrating with (b) another, that in turn integrates with
        (c) another, where (c) is unknown to (a). This is a common
        service composition.
     3. Perhaps the question is less about nested contexts than it is about
        a single context having inner components that “nest.” If this is the
        case, then the components in the context are simply multiple
        elements of the bounded language that have some visibility
        scoping. This is also a common pattern.

     There are likely other ideas about how nested contexts could
   work, which could be considered more or less useful.
    With these considerations in mind, a Bounded Context is typically not
tiny-tiny, as in 100 lines of code. And although it’s unlikely that a full
business capability could be implemented in 100 lines of any programming
language code, it could be, if that’s what it takes to implement it. Further, a
single Bounded Context on its own would be very unlikely to be a Monolith.
    It’s fair to conclude that a Bounded Context will tend to be smallish.
When that’s true, thinking of a Bounded Context as a Microservice is a good
enough place to start. If other drivers cause the corresponding business
capability to change in some way, such as being divided into multiple
business capabilities, then transform it into multiple Bounded Contexts
according to the drivers. A reason for this was demonstrated previously with
the growing number of policyholder rewards. Conversely, if there is a rate of
change, or technical scale and/or performance drivers, then respond to those
drivers. In these three cases, the deployments might change, but the logical
Bounded Context remains intact. Assuming that these drivers exist from the
start, but with no empirical evidence, will harm the system under design.
Making any necessary changes at the last responsible moment is #agile
thinking, and a better choice.



Summary
This chapter introduced Domain-Driven Design with a focus on two strategic
modeling artifacts, the Ubiquitous Language and the Bounded Context. The
specialized Bounded Context known as a Core Domain is where a strategic
business capability is developed. The chapter also offered views on different
kinds of business subdomains and how they connect to the business
capabilities and their Bounded Contexts.
   The most salient points are:

     A Ubiquitous Language represents the conversations that take place in a
     relatively narrow sphere of knowledge that is contextualized by a
     Bounded Context.
     Each business concept, the meanings of various terms, and the
     constraining business rules used in the specific language of a context
     are both accurate and unambiguous.
     Bounded Context delimits the applicability of its Ubiquitous Language.
     Each Bounded Context should be owned by a single team, but a team
     can own several Bounded Contexts.
     The Core Domain is where the business vision is focused and an
     investment in talent and time is made.
     The size of the Bounded Context should be delimited by the scope of
     the business capability and its Ubiquitous Language.

   Chapter 6 introduces tools to help map team relationships, collaboration,
and integrations between multiple contexts of expertise. The mapping types
address a broad range of inter-team situations, communication channels, and
ways to exchange information and request behavior from integration sources.



References
[Evans-DDD] Eric Evans. Domain-Driven Design: Tackling Complexity in
the Heart of Software. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2004.
[Measure] John Doerr. Measure What Matters: How Google, Bono, and
the Gates Foundation Rock the World with OKRs. New York: Portfolio,
2018.
Chapter 6

Mapping, Failing, and Succeeding
—Choose Two


In any project involving a Core Domain, it’s almost inconceivable that this
context of innovation would not need to integrate with any other systems or
subsystems, including Big Ball of Mud legacy systems. It’s even likely that
some other new supporting and generic subdomains will be implemented as
Bounded Contexts that a Core Domain must lean on for “remote”
functionality. Here, “remote” might refer to contextual modules in the same
Monolith that are segregated from the others but without a network between
them, or it might actually mean physically remote.
    This chapter starts with mapping team relationships and integrations
between multiple contexts of expertise. Later, we see a number of warnings
about poor modeling practices that cause failures. These are not the quick
failures that eventually result in good outcomes, so they must be avoided.
Next, we explore practices that tend to lead to success. Finally, we
demonstrate how to apply the experimentation and discovery tools within a
problem space and its solutions.



Context Mapping
The mappings between any two Bounded Contexts are known as Context
Maps. This section provides diagrams and explanations that effectively
describe the various kinds of mappings. Diagrams are great, but Context
Maps go beyond drawings. They help teams recognize the situations they face
and provide tools to spot and address specific modeling situations. The
primary roles of Context Maps are as follows:

     Cross-team communications
     Project thinking, learning, and planning
     Integration situation discovery and desired solutions

    Context Maps are recognized as real inter-team relationships and
implemented as source code integrations patterns. This section discusses
how any two Bounded Contexts can integrate with each other using Context
Maps.
    A Context Mapping between any two Bounded Contexts is represented in
a diagram as a line between the two contexts, as illustrated in Figure 6.1.
The line can have multiple meanings, including the kind of team
communication that exists or that must be established to succeed and the way
integration will be achieved.




Figure 6.1 A Context Mapping of two Bounded Contexts is represented
by the line between the contexts.


    In mapping the reality of which conditions currently exist, an effort is
made to assess the actual relationships and communications between teams
as the result of the organizational structure and politics. This realistic view
makes it clear that it might not be possible to change most of the dynamics,
but highlights where concerted efforts to improve could pay off.
    Before venturing into the individual Context Mapping types, consider a
few salient points about the various patterns. First, Context Maps are
initially useful for mapping what exists. There will almost always be some
preexisting systems, which will comprise subsystems with which the new
context must integrate. Show what those existing subsystems are, and
indicate the current relationship that the new context’s team has with each of
the teams in the external subsystems and their integration offerings. The
Context Mapping patterns are not mutually exclusive—they will tend to
overlap. For example, a Partnership could include the use of a Shared
Kernel and/or a Published Language. A team might seek some goals to
improve its mapping of situations from what exists to what would be most
useful. Sometimes that works.
    Now consider an overview of the different Context Mapping types:

     Partnership. Two teams work together as an interdependent unit to
     achieve closely aligned goals, which generally must be delivered in
     unison.
     Shared Kernel. Two or more teams share a small model of domain
     concepts that the teams agree upon. The agreement includes sharing the
     language of the small model. Each of the individual teams is free to
     design additional model elements that are specific to its language.
     Customer–Supplier Development. A team is in a customer position as
     an integrator with a supplier team. The customer is said to be
     downstream from the supplier because the supplier holds sway over
     what the customer’s integration mechanisms will have.
     Conformist. A downstream team must integrate with an upstream
     model, such as with Customer–Supplier Development. For any number
     of reasons, the downstream cannot translate the upstream model into its
     downstream language, but instead must conform to the upstream’s
     model and language.
     Anticorruption Layer. A downstream team must integrate with an
     upstream model, such as with Customer–Supplier Development. The
     downstream team translates the upstream model so that it fits into its
     own model and language.
     Open-Host Service. An open API is offered by a context’s team that
     provides a flexible means to exchange information between its context
     and others.
     Published Language. A standardized format with language-based type
     names and attributes is developed for exchanging information between
     two or more contexts. This language is published, meaning that it offers
     well-defined schemas including documents for query results, commands
     for operations, and events of outcomes.
     Separate Ways. A downstream team could integrate with an upstream
     model, such as with Customer–Supplier Development; however, to
     avoid that in exchange for limited benefits, it chooses to create its own
     one-off solution.

   Now let’s consider the details of each Context Mapping pattern.


Partnership
As is common with partnerships, there are two parties involved in this one.
Some partnerships involve more individuals or organizations, but generally
we think of a partnership as being only two-sided. In the discussion of this
Context Mapping type, let’s limit a Partnership mapping to being one that
occurs between two teams.
    Each team owns its own Bounded Context, but of course these must work
together in some constructive and mutually beneficial way. In Figure 6.2, the
tight inter-team dependencies are depicted by the thick line between the two
Bounded Contexts. Thus, the point of the Partnership is largely centered on
the relationship between the teams, but there is also the possibility that they
understand each other’s languages more than would normally be the case.




Figure 6.2 Two teams responsible for different Bounded Contexts may
require a Partnership.
    It’s often true that two teams have aligned goals and neither one can
succeed without the other. They must align their efforts and communication
closely with those shared goals, which means they must coordinate a lot in
terms of supporting features, integrations, testing, and timelines. For
instance, if the teams depend on each other, then they likely share some sort
of model and the two ultimate deployments cannot go live separately. At
least one must be deployed shortly before the other, or both together.
    Now, in terms of autonomy, this isn’t the best idea; actually, it’s not a
good idea at all. But sometimes it’s necessary. For the sake of building team
autonomy into the organizational culture and structure, a Partnership might be
only a short-term measure to accomplish a strategic initiative. Indeed,
maintaining this relationship over the long term might be stressful for the
operations of both teams and autonomy won’t be possible. In some of the
upcoming concrete examples we present in this chapter, it’s clear that
maintaining a high-contact Partnership over the long haul is unnecessary.
    It’s less of a burden when the two teams are actually just subteams
creating subdomains within the same single team’s responsibilities. In other
words, a team of seven might have all seven team members working on a
Core Domain, but then split off two or three members to create a Supporting
Subdomain because it seems best to cleanly separate a model that isn’t really
a core part of the strategy. Or perhaps it is core, but the experts involved and
the pace of change between the two efforts are far different because they are
driven by different strategic priorities.
    As an example, consider the Risk subdomain team. The Risk team is to
become more focused on actuarial tasks through machine learning. This team
gradually realizes that they have also, by default, inherited the job of
calculating policy premium rates. After all, the rates are very closely tied to
the outcomes of the risk determinations. The team understands that although
this is a necessary part of the business, and possibly even core in its own
right, the actuarial risk-based algorithms are driven by different business
experts and change at a different pace than the rate calculations do.
    Undoubtedly, the actuarial outcomes will produce disparate data types
over time, but the Risk team doesn’t want to take on the added burden of
designing a standard information exchange specification for the rate
calculations to consume. The Risk team would prefer that this standard be
developed by a team that is focusing more intently on the premium rate
needs. It might be that a separated Rate team would even implement the
standard.
    Creating a separation between the two contexts (Risk and Rate) means
that there must be two teams. Even so, the two teams must work closely
together for two reasons:

     The information exchange standard must be specified by the Rate team
     but approved by the Risk team, so it requires ongoing coordination.
     Both the Risk and Rate products must be ready for release at the same
     time.

    It won’t be a good idea to maintain this Partnership over the long haul, so
the two teams will address breaking their close ties in the future when less
coordination is necessary. They’ll rely on other Context Mapping patterns for
that.


Shared Kernel
A Shared Kernel is a mapping in which it is possible to share a small model
among two or more Bounded Contexts—a sharing that is actually embraced
as part of each consuming context’s Ubiquitous Language. A Shared Kernel is
both an inter-team relationship and a technical, code-centric relationship.
    Inter-team communication is key here; otherwise, it’s less likely that any
teams involved would know one team already possesses a model that could
be shared, or even be aware of the need and potential to share. Alternatively,
two or more teams might need to recognize that there will be shared concepts
between contexts in a large system, and understand that they should form a
bit of a standard around it. The complexity and precision of the model in this
scenario are high enough that not sharing it would be worse for all potential
beneficiaries.
    As an example, perhaps a given system or even several subsystems
within an entire organization require a standard money type. Programmers
who do not understand how monetary calculations and exchanges between
currencies should be handled can cause some really big problems with
money—even legal problems. Because most monetary schemes employ a
decimal point to indicate a fraction of the whole denomination, it’s common
for programmers to think that floating-point numbers are the best type to use.
Actually doing so would cause monetary losses and/or gains that would
eventually cause large financial discrepancies. Floating-point values are the
worst way to model money within a given business. First, the practice of
rounding is fraught with peril for both single- and double-precision floating-
point numbers. If decimal precision is needed for financial calculations, then
using a “big decimal” type offers precision to a few billion decimal places.
Second, a monetary value is often best treated as a whole integer without a
decimal point, scaling, or rounding. In this case, there is an implied and
visual formatting decimal point placed so many digits from the right in the
whole string of digits. Currency conversions and support for multiple
currencies also come into play here.
    If a system doesn’t provide a shared money type with the versatility and
correctness required to meet financial standards, as seen in the Monetary
Shared Kernel in Figure 6.3, everyone involved should go home and rethink
their life.




Figure 6.3 A Shared Kernel named Monetary includes Money and
other monetary types.


   Note that Figure 6.3 does not indicate that Monetary is a separate
Bounded Context. It is not—but it is also not just a library. Monetary is a
portion of a model that at least two teams agree to share. To make this point
clearer, a Money object or record is not persisted by the Monetary model.
Rather, the Bounded Contexts that share and consume the Monetary model
are responsible for persisting Money values in their own separate storages.
That is, Underwriting persists any Money values in its owned data storage,
and Risk persists any Money instances in its separately owned data storage.
    Such shared models are important in other domains as well. For example,
consider equities trading that supports fixed bid prices for buy trades by
collecting share prices across several sell orders, which together average
out to the fixed price of the buy. This model concept is sometimes referred to
as a “quote bar.” It could be part of a Shared Kernel that provides common
trading components in a model that is consumed by various specialty trading
subdomains.
    Another potential problem arises with the use of national or international
coding standards. For instance, the medical and healthcare domains use ICD-
10 codes, which are recognized in nearly 30 nations for billing and
reimbursement collection purposes. More than 100 nations use ICD-10
codes for reporting statistics on causes of death. These kinds of standards
form natural Shared Kernel models.
    One common mistake is to consider some kinds of information (such as
events) exchanged between Bounded Contexts to be a Shared Kernel. This is
not typically the case because often an event, when received by a consuming
Bounded Context, is translated into a command or a query at the outer
boundary. When this kind of translation occurs, the specific external event
type is never known at the heart of the consuming Bounded Context—that is,
in its domain model. Performing a translation from an external language to
the local language means that the external language is not consumed as an
acceptable language for the local context. Because it is not part of the local
context’s Ubiquitous Language, it is not shared between two contexts.
    The local domain model treats a truly shared type, such as money, as if it
were part of its Ubiquitous Language. If an external event were permitted to
have meaning in the local domain model, then it might be considered part of
a Shared Kernel. That’s actually not a good practice because it creates a
strong coupling between the producer and the consumer of such events.
Translating from the external event to an internal command is a better choice.


Customer–Supplier Development
Consider the dynamics involved when there is a high degree of autonomy
between teams:

     There are two teams.
     One team is considered upstream.
     The other team is considered downstream.
     The downstream team needs integration support from the upstream.
     The upstream team holds sway over what the downstream team gets.

This relationship provides autonomy for the upstream team. The downstream
team can also achieve a high degree of autonomy, but they still have a
dependency on the upstream. The downstream remains in a favorable
situation only as long as the upstream provides the necessary integration
features for this team. The downstream might need only what the upstream
already provides, which would leave each team in a good position to remain
on their own pace. Yet, the opposite could be true if the upstream doesn’t
have and can’t/won’t provide what the downstream needs. It might also be
that the downstream team’s voice is big enough and their demands
sufficiently impactful on the upstream that it sets the upstream team back on
their heels with respect to their own planned feature releases. The
relationship might even have negative enough consequences that the
downstream pressure causes the upstream team to cut corners, which results
in making their own model brittle. Given a significant measure of these
consequences applied to both sides, the efforts of the two teams could be
derailed unless care is taken to help them work together. In fact, this kind of
political clout could actually serve to flip the upstream and downstream
relationships altogether.
    For example, suppose that in an effort to remain autonomous, the
upstream team intends to make rapid progress on their own model. However,
these achievements might come at the expense of the downstream. That
would happen if the upstream changed in a way that no longer supported the
downstream, such as breaking previously established information exchange
protocols and schemas. A typical case is when other pressures on the
upstream force incompatible changes for one or more previously dependent
downstream contexts. The regression first hurts the downstream team, but
without a doubt the upstream team will soon suffer as they must fix their
broken exchange contracts.
    Creating a formal Customer–Supplier Development relationship puts both
the upstream and downstream teams on more solid footing. The following is
necessary:
   Establish a formal relationship between the two teams that keeps
   each side honest in their communication and commitment toward
   support, and in being a customer that understands they are not the
   solitary pressure that their supplier, and possibly a former partner,
   faces.

    Although it is possible for the upstream to succeed independently of the
downstream, establishing a formal, named relationship tends to reinforce an
understanding that there must be agreement between the two teams, but not to
the extent of Partnership. Agreement is essential for overall success.
    This pattern might be more difficult to effect outside the same
organization. Yet even if the upstream team is entirely external as a separate
organization, they must still embrace the understanding that their customers
count and have a say. Although customers are not really always right, it helps
to acknowledge that they do pay the supplier real money, and that’s what
makes them “right.” Otherwise, customer retention will be impossible—and
so will job retention. The larger, more powerful, and more influential the
supplier, the less likely it is to exercise altruistic behavior—that is, unless
the customer is similarly larger, more powerful, more influential, and paying
a lot for the service.
    Having the upstream team establish API and information schema
standards for their offerings will help. Even so, the upstream supplier must
be willing to accept some responsibility to deliver on the requests of the
downstream customers, which further necessitates some negotiations on what
is to be delivered and when. Once these parameters are in place, measures
must be taken to ensure that the downstream customers will receive some
reliable stream of necessary support.
    The previous discussion of the Partnership relationship between Risk and
Rate determined that maintaining this interdependency over the long haul
would be stressful on the operations of both teams and autonomy would not
be possible. In time, as their synchronized releases lead to reliable stability,
it will be possible to transition out of the Partnership. It’s likely that the
teams can then establish a Customer–Supplier Development relationship
moving forward. Figure 6.4 depicts the Context Map for this relationship.
Figure 6.4 A Customer–Supplier Development relationship between
two teams.


    It might at first seem that the Rate Context would be upstream, because
under the Partnership it is responsible for specifying the information
exchange protocol and schema. Yet, even in that relationship Risk has the
power to accept or reject the specification. In actuality, there is already a bit
of Customer–Supplier Development relationship built into the Partnership,
albeit a small one because coordinating release priorities tends to overrule
taking a hard line on schema quality. The teams would like to establish a
more versatile specification that might better support future risk
determinations. At the same time, they know that attempting to achieve this
outcome will be less than fruitful, especially very early on. Thus, they decide
to push this effort off to the last responsible moment. The teams agree that a
second or third version of the contract will need to be developed later, at
which point they will have learned enough to better determine how a more
flexible schema might be established.


Conformist
A Conformist relationship is in force when at least two of a few conditions
exist. An upstream model is large and complex, and …

     A downstream team cannot afford to translate an upstream model,
     generally related to time, ability, and/or team bandwidth. Thus, they
     conform out of necessity.
     The downstream team will not realize any strategic advantage from
     trans-lating the upstream model. This might be a matter of determining
     that the downstream model can be sufficiently close to the upstream
     model; or the downstream solution might be temporary, so it would be
     wasteful to make the solution more elaborate.
     The downstream team can’t come up with a better model for their
     context.
     The design of the upstream integration information exchange schema is
     a one-to-one mapping of the upstream internal model structure, and
     changes to the internal model are reflected directly into the exchange
     schema (this is a poor upstream design).

In such cases, the downstream team decides to (or is forced to) conform
entirely to the upstream model. In other words, the downstream uses the
Ubiquitous Language of the upstream, and the structure or shape will be one-
to-one.
    One way to think about this pattern is by recognizing that the API of the
upstream is used to exchange information and perform operations, with no
attempt to more optimally adapt it to the local downstream model. If data
from the upstream must be manipulated in any way, or even persisted, and
later sent back to the upstream, it exists in the downstream much as it would
be in the upstream.
    As shown in Figure 6.5, the downstream Rate Context is a Conformist to
the upstream Risk Context’s Assessment Results model. This is because
premium rate calculations are based on risk assessments, and there is no
need to change that for rate calculations. The Rate Context team has a major
influence on the upstream Assessment Results model specification, which
makes consuming the exchange schema and conforming to the model language
and structure more than palatable.
Figure 6.5 A downstream Conformist consumes an upstream model as
is.


    There is no reason to translate the upstream, as doing so would be
unnecessary, time-consuming, and pretentious work that would also increase
risk. If translation was chosen as the preferred approach, every time that the
upstream Assessment Results model changed, the downstream model’s
translation layer would have to change as well. Of course, the Rate team will
have to react to the upstream changes to the Assessment Results model, but
because they have a strong influence on the specification, they can actually
plan ahead for the necessary consumer code modification(s).
    Ideally, each team’s context will be as cohesive as possible and as
decoupled as possible from the other contexts. Coupling and cohesion are
defined in terms of the amount of work it takes to change something
[StrucDesign]. If either of the two contexts don’t change that often, the
coupling is not really an issue. It is a good rule of thumb to consider the
frequency of changes and to prevent coupling if it will impact teams in a
negative way.
    It really makes no sense to translate in this particular case, but it is not
possible to make a blanket rule. Instead, those decisions should be made on a
case-by-case basis. Due consideration should be given to the compatibility
of the upstream Ubiquitous Language to the downstream consumer’s
Ubiquitous Language, but the other factors listed previously must also be
weighed. In addition, the following Context Mappings identify other
consequences of adopting a translation approach.


Anticorruption Layer
An Anticorruption Layer is the exact opposite of a Conformist. This pattern
takes a defensive integration perspective by making every effort to prevent
the upstream model from corrupting the downstream model. The downstream
is the implementer of the Anticorruption Layer because this team must take
responsibility for translating whatever is available in the upstream into the
language and structure of their consuming model. It is also possible that the
downstream will have to send data changes back upstream. When that takes
place, the downstream model must be translated back to what the upstream
understands.
    In many cases, the upstream system is a legacy Big Ball of Mud. If that’s
true, don’t expect the upstream to have a rich client-facing API and well-
defined information exchange schema. Integration with the upstream might
require being granted a user account for the upstream database and
performing ad hoc queries. Although this book is not meant to make
technology recommendations, it does seem appropriate to acknowledge that
the introduction of GraphQL represents a game-changer for such jobs. Yet,
we shouldn’t consider the existence of GraphQL an excuse to design
integrations in a substandard way that requires its use.
    Even if the upstream model does have a rich client-facing API and a
well-defined information exchange schema, the downstream team might still
decide to translate the upstream model to its own Ubiquitous Language.
Imposing one or many loanwords1 from the upstream context might not fit
well with the downstream Ubiquitous Language. The team might decide that
forming a calque2 is natural for some local terms, and/or that defining an
entirely different term might be even better. All of these options could be
mixed together as deemed appropriate. The translation decisions belong to
the downstream team.
1. A loanword is one or more words taken into a target language exactly as is from another language.
   For example, all languages other than French that use “déjà vu” are using a loanword.

2. A calque is composed of one or more words from one language that are transliterated into a target
   language. For example, the English “beer garden” calques the German “biergarten.”

    The point is not necessarily that the upstream model is a mess, which is
difficult to readily exchange information with, and that heroic feats must be
performed to translate it for downstream consumption. Rather, the salient
point is that if the downstream does not think and speak in terms of the
upstream, then a translation would be helpful and could even be appropriate
from the standpoint of downstream team time and abilities.
    Figure 6.6 depicts an Anticorruption Layer accessing a Big Ball of Mud
legacy system that has the current NuCoverage premium calculation rules.
This is done as a Risk Context team interim step, which will suffice until an
improved model can be fully implemented locally.
Figure 6.6 The Rate Context queries a legacy system for premium
calculation rules.


    The model shown in Figure 6.6 will be more versatile in terms of adding,
editing, removing, enabling, and disabling rules. These rules can, in turn, be
used for experimental A/B testing in production. Until that time, the Rate
Context team has put in place what they consider to be a fairly good
representation of their fully designed future model. Thus, they will translate
the upstream rules into their local model as a means of testing their
assumptions regarding the new local model. At the present time, it is less
important to have a versatile model when a working model is a necessity.


Open-Host Service
Sometimes teams have foreknowledge of the needs of current and future
integration clients and enough time to plan for them. At other times a team
might not know of any integration needs and then later get caught trying to
play catch-up. Creating an Open-Host Service can be the answer to both of
these situations.
    Think of an Open-Host Service as an API for exchanging information,
where some exchanges might require the API provider to support data
mutations from downstream onto their upstream model.
    Now, consider the following potential integration situations in which the
upstream team may find themselves. Let’s look at the Rate team as an
example.


Team Knows Early
During a lunch conversation, the team implementing a Rate Context learns
that at least one other downstream team will require access to their model.
The downstream team is interested in analytics around the calculated
premium rates. During the same lunch, the newly downstream analytics team
declaring their dependency suggests that another team, and possibly more,
will also be in need of the same kinds of integrations. The now (suddenly)
upstream team hasn’t interviewed the other teams, and is only aware of the
one. Should they go to the effort of providing an API for the single dependent
downstream team of which they currently are aware? Or should they just
provide a database user account for this team?


         Assertion: Sharing Access to a Database with Even One
                Downstream Client Is Never a Good Idea

   This approach gives deep access to the persistent data, and potentially
   creation and update rights. Imagine the damage that could be done
   with “willy-nilly” data mutations happening while the owning team
   remains blissfully unaware of them. The deep dependency also makes
   changing the database schema later very difficult for the upstream, or
   very impactful to the downstream, or both. In time, it might become
   difficult to know who is and who isn’t dependent on the database, and
   often that’s a lesson learned the hard way. Once the system is running
   in production, performance can decrease and, even worse, deadlocks
   on different tables can bring the whole system to a grinding halt. As a
   rule of thumb, using shared resources tends to hide coupling where
   instead it should be explicitly modeled. For these and other reasons,
   sharing direct access to a persistence mechanism is a really bad idea.


    The upstream Rate team could design an API that takes care of the single
downstream client, but without many bells and whistles. This might require
the downstream analytics team to take on a bit of overhead to translate the
consumed model on their own from less than optimal exchanges with the
upstream API. At least for now it seems to be a read-only API, meaning it’s
simply query-based.
    If the upstream Rate team were to interview the other potential
downstream clients, they could make a better determination of the broader
needs. If they get an affirmative answer from one or more clients, it could be
worth putting more effort into the development of the API, especially if the
other teams need to exchange information beyond queries. The Rate team
conducts some interviews and learns that now at least three teams, including
analytics, will need API access, and the other two teams will need to push
new and changed information back to the Rate Context.


The Team Is Surprised
One of the worst situations faced by teams expected to provide open
integrations occurs when they are surprised by requirements that show up
late. This problem might be caused by the organization’s poor communication
structure. Recall Conway’s Law: The systems produced by an organization
will reflect its communication structures. Now think of what happens when
communication happens latently and the teams that declare their
dependencies need the support in short order. The reality is exactly the sad
scene anyone would expect. The outcome of the API will reflect the
condensed timeline available to implement it. If properly handled, the debt
will be recorded and paid. More realistically, if additional teams pile on
with similar “oh, BTW” requests for support, the situation will only get
worse before it gets better.
    Although visible efforts are sometimes made to improve the
organizational communication channels, some organizations are too large and
complicated to entirely prevent this unhappy situation, at least in the short
run. No organization should accept this status quo, because there are ways to
break through the silence and walls between teams. Address these barriers
early for the good of the teams, projects, and company. Consider
implementing weekly lightning (10- to 15-minute) talks across teams
working on the same system. Between four and six teams can present their
progress in one hour. These meetings must be attended by all parties
involved, and the presentations must not consist of fluff or focus on bragging
rights. Instead, the teams must share what they have of value, where they are
struggling, and what they need.
    Another approach is to incorporate an engineering discipline into the
system by identifying responsible engineers on each team who must
collaborate with a chief engineer to ensure integrations are planned and
correctly synchronized. The chief engineer will employ what are known as
integrating events or sync and stabilize events—the result of forming
purposeful organizational communication structures. These events are
planned at intervals and tracked to confirm that all integrating teams deliver
subsets of new functionality with working integrations across subsystems.
Good integrating events will bring out hidden problems and interactions, as
well as places where suboptimization is killing the organization’s overall
ability to succeed with this new product. If there are problems in meeting
team schedules, the responsible engineer must communicate with the chief
engineer as early as these issues become known, but at the latest they should
surface at integrating events. This kind of engineering-focused approach is
not project management, but rather a matter of engineers working together to
meet technical milestones that align with and deliver on business goals.
    Suppose the surprise happened to the Rate team because the lunch date
got canceled due to a production problem—this situation, even in a
relatively small organization, could easily occur. In the previous scenario, it
was only serendipity that allowed the Rate team to learn about the Analytics
team requiring information exchange. Likewise, it was only by happenstance
that the Rate team got a hint that other teams would eventually require
dependencies. If the lunch is rescheduled for the following week, the work
topic could be preempted by the goings on at the French Open, the
Champions League, the WNBA, or that awesome Oceansize album. And,
then, surprise!
    The major problem in not making time to handle these unplanned bad
situations is that the other teams might be forced to go their separate ways, or
even integrate with a legacy Big Ball of Mud that might be falling behind the
curve as it is replaced, for example, by the new Rate Context. It will also
take a lot of effort to integrate with the legacy system and maintain the
wishful thinking that what is exchanged will still be relevant after weeks and
months, and possibly even years. There’s no way that the Rate team can force
integration by delaying the schedule of the other team, even if communication
was foiled.
    The best that the Rate team can do in the short term is offer to provide
some not-so-good access to the downstream. Perhaps opening a set of
REpresentational State Transfer (REST) resources would make this solution
more acceptable to both teams and enable the time crunch to be met. It might
be possible to enlist the help of the downstream team, and that team might
indeed have to incur some pain for their latent communication. In fact,
probably even a limited API on the modernized Rate Context will be much
better to work with than the crufty legacy system.
    Still, all of these troublesome situations can be largely avoided by
introducing an engineering discipline such as the ones noted here.


Service API
In both of the preceding scenarios, the Rate team and their dependents end up
in the same place—all parties face pressure from the outside. With more time
to think, plan, and implement, the Rate team would stand on more solid
ground. Even so, delivery is the only practical choice, so the team plows
forward.
    After discovering that three teams will depend on Rate, the challenges
seem to lie less with the complexity of the API itself than with the
information exchange schemas involved. Because the premium rate rules and
calculations will ultimately be altered, perhaps even multiple times per day,
and the constant flux in the number of new rules might be substantial, the
information exchange schemas will be a moving target. The next section,
“Published Language,” describes dealing with this challenge in more detail.
    One consideration is that some information might best be made available
as a stream of events that have occurred in the upstream Rate Context.
Because all three dependents are interested in some subset of the changes
that occur in the upstream, the Rate team can make part of the query API a
way for the downstream to “subscribe” to the total number of happenings in
the Rate Context that they are willing to share. This query API would likely
be offered as REST resources. The Risk team might instead place the events
on a pub-sub topic.
    There are advantages to both strategies. As outlined in Chapter 2,
“Essential Strategic Learning Tools,” the organization can use Architecture
Decision Records (ADRs) to outline the possible decisions; in this case,
there are two. Integration tests can be used to demonstrate the options. The
familiarity of downstream teams with either approach might be the deciding
factor, but not necessarily. When the decision is made, include it in the ADR.
    The Rate team must keep in mind that their event stream might not carry
the full payloads that consumers need. If so, the API must support queries
that provide deeper information views than the events carry, or perhaps the
events themselves should carry richer payloads. One problem with query-
backs is the challenges associated with making available the data versions
that the events reference. The data now considered current in the upstream
could have transitioned one or more times since the event that causes the
eventual query-back could be processed by the downstream. Mitigating this
scenario might require the upstream to maintain snapshot versions of the
potentially queried data. Alternatively, as previously indicated, the events
could be designed to carry a large enough payload about the state at the time
of the event to negate the query-back. As another possibility, the downstream
might have to understand how to deal with query-back results that no longer
contain what happened before the current state. The Rate Context provides
the Rate Calculated event to consuming downstream contexts, as Figure 6.7
illustrates.
Figure 6.7 An Open-Host Service with multiple downstream consumers.


    It might not have been expected that Underwriting is downstream,
because it is upstream from Risk, and Rate calculates the premium based on
the Risk’s Assessment Results. Yet, it’s understandable that Underwriting
must consume the calculated premium somehow. If Underwriting doesn’t
subscribe from a downstream position, it would have to perform some pretty
strange gyrations to obtain the premium. Importantly, the Rate Calculated
event must carry an identity that correlates to the original Underwriting
Application or some other type of entity that caused the risk to be assessed
and the rate to be calculated. Expectedly, the Analytics Context also
consumes the event. Likewise, the Agents Context consumes the event, giving
WellBank and other agents the opportunity to see the processing activity
shortly after each step happens.
    The remainder of the API should be designed with a minimalist mindset,
providing only what is absolutely necessary. This API can be offered as
REST resources or via asynchronous messaging. It seems almost silly to
consider Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP)–based remote procedure
calls (RPC) in contemporary system design, but they are still available for
use, and will likely exist in some legacy systems. If RPCs are desired today,
normally gRPC would be used rather than SOAP. More to the point, the API
should be built up over time as downstream clients drive the functionality
and information exchange schemas. This can be achieved by means of
Consumer-Driven Contracts [Consumer-Driven-Contracts], which are
drawn up as consumers express their needs. When this approach is used, the
contracts can be tailored for each consumer. It’s also possible that all
consumers might be given the superset of all information determined by the
merger of all consumer needs.
   The chapters in Part III cover the styles of API designs in more detail.
Next, we discuss the other half of the API—that is, how will the information
be exchanged?


Published Language
A Bounded Context is often the source of information needed by one or more
other collaborating Bounded Contexts in a common system solution, and even
by outside systems. If the format of the information is difficult to understand,
then its consumption will be tricky and error prone. To avoid this
predicament and enhance the exchangeability of pertinent information,
organizations can employ a standardized strong schema. In domain-driven
terms, this is known as a Published Language. A Published Language can take
a few forms, as outlined in Table 6.1.


Table 6.1 Published Language Schemas from International to Single
Enterprise Services
Type                    Example         Consequences
Type                   Example          Consequences
Industry-wide strong   Health Level     HL7 is a strong schema in terms
schema defined by an   7 (HL7)          of supporting definite record
international or       digital          types, but it is weak in the
national working       healthcare       definition of fields within each
group supported by a   exchange         record type. This can result in the
governing              standard: It     schema being misused and
organization           may be a         potentially requiring
                       requirement      interpretation by a business entity
                       for all          using it, which might be different
                       subdomains in    from the use by other
                       a whole-         organizations. Even with HL7,
                       system           inter-organization digital
                       solution, and    healthcare exchanges may require
                       for those        translation or retooling of data
                       across           generation and parsing.
                       systems, and
                       between
                       organizations,
                       to exchange
                       healthcare
                       clinical and
                       administrative
                       information
                       using HL7.
Type   Example          Consequences
       GS1 global       There is a well-defined standard,
       data             even within each record type, but
       identification   it can require a large number of
       standards.       records to define a very small
       This is the      dataset. In one ecommerce usage
       origin of the    example, between 300 and 350
       barcode and      record types were required to
       other            correctly define a dataset of
       standards        fewer than 20 total lines of
       around B2B       product order information.
       information      Creating the source code
       exchange,        implementation of the standard,
       including        the producer output writers, and
       ecommerce.       the consumer input readers was a
                        time-consuming experience. This
                        emphasizes the downsides to the
                        “canonical data model” pattern in
                        which an attempt is to make a
                        one-size-fits-all standard. This
                        approach causes bloat because it
                        attempts to define the superset of
                        all possible needs across a broad
                        number of industries.
Type   Example       Consequences
       ICD-10 is the This is a large, but clear and
       10th revision straightforward, set of medical
       of the         codings.
       International
       Statistical
       Classification
       of Diseases
       and Related
       Health
       Problems, a
       medical
       classification
       list developed
       by the World
       Health
       Organization.
Type                  Example          Consequences
Organizational        These            Provides flexibility in the
internal standard     standards are    definition, and clear direction for
governed by           defined by       outside integrations. However,
principals within a   each             this approach can add
specific business     organization     unnecessary overhead to
entity                on a case-by-    exchanges inside the
                      case basis.      organization’s enterprise of
                      External         systems because inter-system and
                      businesses       inter-context exchanges might be
                      integrating      required to provide more
                      with the         information than is practical or
                      standard-        even possible.
                      defining
                      organization
                      might be (or
                      are) required
                      to use the
                      standard.
                      Possibly even
                      internal
                      systems must
                      exchange
                      information
                      using the same
                      standards.
Type                   Example         Consequences
Contextual/subdomain Each Bounded      Provides optimal information
standard             Context can       exchange schema definitions for
                     define its own    each subdomain à la the Bounded
                     digital           Context. It might be difficult for a
                     exchange          single Bounded Context that
                     standard.         requires integrations with several
                     Every other       other Bounded Contexts to deal
                     Bounded           with all the different schemas.
                     Context,          Yet, having many integrations
                     subdomain,        might point to other problems.
                     and whole-        Further, the context/subdomain
                     system            standard might be insufficient for
                     solution must     integrations external to the
                     use the strong    organization’s enterprise. Even
                     schemas           so, the individual schema
                     defined by        standards can be used more
                     each given        globally by entering them into the
                     Bounded           superset of those defined for
                     Context.          inter-organization exchanges.


    The international schema standards listed in Table 6.1 are only a small
representation of those available throughout various industries. There are
obvious trade-offs when using such standards, but one important thing to note
is that using the beefy canonical models has a definite disadvantage for
internal enterprise use. These models are not only more difficult to adhere to,
but also carry a lot higher transport overhead. If the enterprise is on the
cloud, this will have an impact on cost.
    Figure 6.8 shows three Published Language examples within
NuCoverage. The Risk Context has its own Published Language, with one
element being the event named Risk Assessed. The Rate Context has a
different Published Language, with one element being Rate Calculated. The
Risk Assessed event has an impact on Rate, and the Rate Calculated event is
consumed by the Underwriting Context. In turn, the Underwriting Context
builds a Quote from one or more Rate Calculated events and emits a Quote
Generated event for each completed Quote.




Figure 6.8 The Risk, Rate, and Underwriting provide their own
Published Languages.


    One way to maintain an international, national, and organization-defined
Published Language and make it available to consumers is by means of a
schema registry. A worthy schema registry supports business contextual
schemas of any number, each with multiple versions, and provides for
appropriate compatibility checks between versions. One such schema
registry is available as part of the open source, reactive VLINGO XOOM in
its Schemata tool [VLINGO-XOOM].


Separate Ways
When a team might integrate with another Bounded Context but the cost is
likely to be higher than the potential benefits gained, that team might decide
to go their Separate Ways. Teams that go their Separate Ways create their
own one-off solutions, or make simpler modeling decisions that help them
make short work of the problem they face.
    It’s possible that a given Bounded Context might have no integrations at
all with other contexts. However, this pattern can be applied on a case-by-
case basis. In other words, the team under discussion might integrate with
one or more Bounded Contexts, but not with others.
    The downside to taking this route appears when the solution chosen
creates significant silos of data and/or domain expertise expressed in
software that are roughly duplicates of other areas of a system. Some amount
of duplication is not always bad, but too much is too much. Don’t Repeat
Yourself (DRY) is an adage that applies to knowledge, not code. Creating
large silos of duplicate data and repeating knowledge by way of expertise
codified in multiple contexts is not the desired effect of the Separate Ways
pattern.



Topography Modeling
While participating in an EventStorming session, it might seem difficult to
find boundaries. As previously advised, participants should think in terms of
business capabilities and recognize communication drivers among experts.
These are the best ways to organize boundaries and the best places to start.
More refinement will happen as the business grows and changes, and new
business capabilities become essential.
    Another tool that can help define boundaries and clarify how the
boundaries will work together is the topographic approach. Topography can
mean a few things. According to the Merriam-Webster dictionary, its
definitions include these:

  1. a: The art or practice of graphic delineation in detail usually on maps or
     charts of natural and man-made features of a place or region especially
     in a way to show their relative positions and elevations.
    b: Topographical surveying.

  2. a: The configuration of a surface including its relief and the position of
     its natural and man-made features.

    b: The physical or natural features of an object or entity and their
    structural relationships.

All of these definitions are applicable using this approach.
   Yes, the communication within a Bounded Context helps teams understand
what belongs inside, but the communication and mapping between Bounded
Contexts further inform the contexts themselves. These elements include
Context Maps, but grasping the actual flow of detailed information exchange
schemas by means of enhanced visual mapping models helps even more.
Modeling with topography is a way to better understand the shape and
character of your system. Figure 6.9 provides a template for Topography
Modeling.
Figure 6.9 Topography Modeling template diagram.
   Several areas of the template in Figure 6.9 can be filled in with
information (see Table 6.2). The resulting models can be placed on a table
top or on a wall in the order of processing flow, similar to an EventStorming
timeline. The template provides teams with a number of placeholders that
can be used to show more context than is given at a single point in an
EventStorming timeline. Additional placeholder areas can be added to any
part of the modeling map as needed. This template purposely omits
architectural details that, although necessary for runtime operations, serve
only to obfuscate the more important parts of the model.


Table 6.2 Topography Modeling Template Areas and Descriptions
Area Type       Description
Experts         Write the names of the business experts who contribute
                to the sphere of knowledge of the communication
                context.
Type            The subdomain type: Core, Supporting, or Generic.
Description     A brief summary of the context’s purpose.
Context         Write the name of the communication context (i.e., the
                Bounded Context’s name) on the line above.
Subdomain       Write the name of the subdomain of this context. The
1:1             context and the subdomain should have a one-to-one
                relationship. If the names conflict with each other, there
                is a problem with subdomain alignment. If there tend to
                be multiple subdomains, there might be a problem with
                model focus.
Business       Write the name of the business capability provided by
Capability 1:1 this context. The context and the business capability
               should have a one-to-one relationship. If the names
               conflict with one another, there is a problem with
               business capability alignment. If there tend to be
               multiple business capabilities, there is a problem with
               model focus.
Area Type      Description
Arrows, left   Incoming integration and collaboration points available,
side           and which contexts use them. Name the Context
               Mapping type and the Bounded Context using it, if
               known. Known collaborators will be partners or
               upstream contexts; downstream will be unknown.
Arrows, right Outgoing integration and collaboration with other
side          contexts. Name the Context Mapping type and the target
              Bounded Context, if known. A known target might be a
              partner or an upstream context; downstream will be
              unknown.
Commands       Prominent commands that are dispatched to the domain
               model.
Entities       Prominent entities in the domain model to which the
               Commands are directed.
Outgoing       Prominent events emitted by the Entities.
Events
Incoming       Prominent events received by the Bounded Context
Events         through the left-side arrows representing integration
               points.
Policies       Any business rules to be applied to the Incoming Events
               or the Commands being dispatched to the domain model.
Views/Queries Prominent query model views onto which model
              changes must be projected to ensure the related queries
              will provide viewable data.
Opportunities Any opportunities revealed by team learning that must
              be exploited.
Problems       Any problems revealed by team learning that must be
               addressed.
    Using paper and pen to simulate the processing flow of the system being
designed promotes continued additional conversation drivers that can lead to
deep insights into the software’s inner workings. Are there missing business
capabilities that are needed for complete functionality through collaboration
and integration? Do there seem to be areas warranting refinement or areas
needing further clarification? Making changes with pen and paper is a lot
faster and cheaper means to fail fast, learn, and reboot.
    Every team involved in the integrations can carry away copies of their
context(s) and the surrounding contextual topographies that collaborate. Each
opportunity to discover and learn leads to confidence and a chance to
innovate.



Ways to Fail and Succeed
Failure can lead to good because of the learning opportunities it produces.
That kind of controlled failure is based on a scientific approach using
experimentation and ultimately leads to success. Although learning can come
from the failures discussed in this section, these are not the kind of failures
that can help the organization in the short term. Instead, these kinds of failures
can and should be avoided. They relate to misusing the domain-driven tools,
and often lead to overall failure to meet the business goals.
    Failure when applying a domain-driven approach is generally related to
several different mistakes, all of which might be at play, or possibly just a
few of the most insidious ones. Consider the following common pitfalls:

  1. No strategic focus. Disregarding the strategic discovery and learning
     opportunities is missing the point of the domain-driven approach. It will
     also lead to software development as usual, with all the problems
     already discussed, because business experts will not be involved and
     developers will create a divide of tangled components as before. The
     developers imagine that following some technical ideas from the
     domain-driven approach is all that is needed, but not applying strategic
     learning is a big mistake.
  2. Doing too much too soon. Using strategic discovery, but only at a
     cursory level as an excuse to start coding, is fraught with problems. It’s
   roughly the same as not using strategic design at all, although some
   boundaries might be discovered that are appropriate in the short term.
   Even so, problems will occur when trying to apply Bounded Contexts
   with distributed computing before the teams have a good reason to, or
   when trying to understand the strategic goals and solve business
   problems using single-process modularity first. Such a bias will likely
   lead to over-engineered technical approaches, putting too much
   emphasis on the solution rather than on the strategy. A domain-driven
   approach is about discovery, learning, and innovation.
3. Tight coupling and temporal dependencies everywhere. Especially
   when things move too quickly, too little attention is given to upstream
   and downstream dependencies between Bounded Contexts. Often this is
   also due to the style of integration used. For example, REST and RPCs
   can lead to very tight coupling, both in API dependencies and
   temporally.3 Making an effort to disentangle data type dependencies is
   rarely even considered. Frequently, this neglect leads to nearly every
   integration becoming a Conformist to upstream contexts. Generally,
   when using REST and RPCs, there is a sense that the network doesn’t
   exist between two services, even though it does. When the network is
   unstable, even for a short period of time, that can wreak havoc on
   integrations, causing cascading failures across a whole system. Even
   when using messaging and events, the coupling can still be a liability
   rather than an asset when there is no effort to decouple the data types
   between contexts.
  3. Temporal coupling is harmful because one distributed service will fail when another completes
     more slowly than expected or tolerable.

4. Replicating data broadly. Every single piece of data has a system of
   record—that is, an original source and an authority over the data. When
   any single piece of data is replicated and stored in another location
   other than its source, there is a risk of losing the source and authority
   over it. Over time, those employees who understand that the data copy
   should not be used for conclusive decision making might leave the
   project, or new employees working on their own might make a wrong
   assumption about ownership, use the data inappropriately, and possibly
   even provide a copy of it to others. This can lead to serious problems.
  5. Technical failures. There are a few different varieties of these failures:

      a.Producing quick fixes to bugs or model disparity can lead to
       progressive distortion of the Ubiquitous Language.

      b.Developers may pursue highly abstract type hierarchies upfront in an
       effort to open the door to unknown future needs, which rarely prove
       correct in the long run. In general, abstractions adopted in the name of
       code reuse or even emphasis on concrete reused goals will lead to
       unwanted baggage at best, and potentially extensive rework.

      c.Assigning insufficiently skilled developers to the project will lead to
       near certain failure.

      d.Not recognizing or recording debt due to business modeling
       knowledge gaps, or lack of follow-through to pay the recognized and
       recorded debt, is another technical failure.

    Most of these major project failures—from which it might be impossible
to recover—have already been addressed in one way or another in this book.
The saddest part is that they are all avoidable. With the assistance of one or
two domain-driven experts to get a project or program effort under way, and
with some guidance over each month of the projects, teams can be both
brought up to speed and helped to grow and mature. The following are ways
to succeed:

  1. Understand the business goals. All stakeholders must keep clearly in
     mind the business goals to be achieved through a domain-driven effort.
     Understand that current knowledge is all that is available, and new
     knowledge can change the project direction.
  2. Use strategic learning tools. Once business goals are firmly
     established in everyone’s mind, dig into the problem space domain by
     building teams with good organizational communication structures that
     stand up to Conway’s Law, by using Impact Mapping, EventStorming,
     Context Mapping, and Topography Modeling. Everything is an
     experiment until it isn’t. Don’t be discouraged if that time never arrives.
   Failing in small ways, and doing so rapidly and inexpensively, is
   discovering and learning at its best.
3. Take time to digest learnings. Don’t be in too big a hurry to start
   developing concrete solutions. Code should be written very early, but
   with the intent to experiment, leading to discovery and learning.
   Sometimes it can take a few days for the context boundaries to settle,
   and even when these seem correct, at least minor adjustments will likely
   be necessary. Sometimes the boundaries are correct but some concepts
   and data are misappropriated. Be willing to move some concepts
   around to different Bounded Contexts, and recognize when concepts
   have become more clearly identified with their rightful ownership. This
   can happen even a few days or more into the project. These kinds of
   concept and data migrations seem to require more time to settle on when
   working on legacy modernization and large enterprise digital
   transformations.
4. Adopt loose coupling and temporal decoupling techniques. The less
   one Bounded Context knows about another Bounded Context, the better.
   The less one Bounded Context accepts another Bounded Context’s API,
   information, and internal structure into its own, the better. The less one
   Bounded Context depends on another Bounded Context’s ability to
   complete a task within a given time frame, the better. The less one
   Bounded Context depends on another Bounded Context to provide
   information in any order relative to any others, the better. Loose
   coupling and temporal decoupling are our friends.
5. Respect data origins and authorities. Stakeholders must learn to avoid
   replicating data outside its authority and access it for single-use
   operations. Chapter 5, “Contextual Expertise,” provides ways to access
   data from disparate services while respecting the original sources.
6. Use appropriate tactical tools. This book is light on detailed
   implementation techniques, but the authors provide a follow-on
   technical book, Implementing Strategic Monoliths and Microservices
   (Vernon & Jaskuła, Addison-Wesley, forthcoming), on deep
   implementation patterns and practices. In brief, avoid technical tools
   that are unnecessary for the context and that tend to lead to more
   expensive designs without justification for them.
    Champion simplicity in the strategic and tactical tools and approaches
used to wrangle with the already complex business domain at hand. Winning
strategies guide teams toward delivering on business goals that lead to the
ultimate business aspiration: richly rewarding innovations.



Applying the Tools
The section “Applying the Tools” in Chapter 3, “Events-First
Experimentation and Discovery,” depicts a recording of an EventStorming
session in which NuCoverage discovers a problematic issue: Applicants are
dropping out of the application process before it is completed. One
opportunity that the team has identified to address this problem is to use
machine learning algorithms to assess the risk and calculate the rate;
however, it was not clear to the NuCoverage team how machine learning
would fit into the overall application processing. They decided to hold
another EventStorming session closer to the design level to help them with
this specific challenge. After some intensive discussions between team
members and business experts, the design of the new application process
started to take form.
    Recall from Chapter 3 that the current application process is constantly
exchanging messages between the Risk Context’s assessment and the Rate
Context’s premium calculations so that it can obtain the most accurate
projected premium quote to present to the applicant in real time as they
progress through the application form. This feeds into the ongoing
application information gathering effort by evaluating whether the applicant
must answer additional questions. All this dynamicity is used in an effort to
simultaneously keep the current projected premium quote before the
applicant and allow NuCoverage to assess risk more precisely and
(re)calculate an up-to-date premium. Unfortunately, it has produced a long
and cumbersome application process that the team will attempt to simplify
by introducing machine learning algorithms.
    The new application process requires a bare minimum of data from the
application form, with nearly zero complexity demanded of the applicant.
The complexity will instead be encapsulated in the machine learning risk
assessment and premium price calculation models. What stands out as a
result of this discovery and learning iteration is that to achieve the team’s
goal, a specific business process is needed to handle interactions between
the application forms, risk assessment, and premium rate calculation. The
team decided to name it the Application Premium Process. In Figure 6.10,
this process is shown on a purple (or lilac or mulberry) sticky note. Once the
application form is complete, the Application Submitted event occurs. It is
handled by the Application Premium Process, which guides the subsequent
next steps. The team continues iterating on the EventStorming session in an
effort to discover what the individual processing steps will be.




Figure 6.10 The team identified the Application Premium Process.


    The risk assessment based on machine learning algorithms is quite
complex. This process will need to access several external data sources and
handle complex algorithm calibration steps. As illustrated in Figure 6.11, the
NuCoverage team thought it would be best to model the assessment as a Risk
Assessor stateless domain service, as described in Chapter 7, “Modeling
Domain Concepts.” It starts the risk assessment step upon receiving the
Assess Risk command from Application Premium Process. The outcome of
the risk assessment is captured in an Assessment Result aggregate, and the
Risk Assessed event is emitted. This event is handled by the Application
Premium Process, which will cause the next processing step.
Figure 6.11 Design of the risk assessment step with machine learning.


    The next step started by the Application Premium Process triggers the
premium rate calculations by issuing Calculate Rate command. The rate
calculation processing is likewise a complex step because any number of
different calculation rules could apply based on the assessment results, risk
weights, and other criteria defined by the specific agent’s business experts.
Yet, the calculation step itself is stateless. When these considerations were
taken into account, designing the Rate Calculator as a domain service
seemed the best option (Figure 6.12). It can change in the future, but given
the current knowledge, a domain service is the right choice. After the rate
has been calculated, a Rate Calculated event is emitted that contains the
calculated Premium as its payload. This event is handled by the Application
Premium Process, which will again cause the next step.
Figure 6.12 Design of the premium rate calculation step.


    Following the previous steps, a quote can be provided to the applicant.
The Application Premium Process further drives the application process by
issuing the Record Premium command. This command results in a Policy
Quote being generated for the applicant, and presented in the UI. Figure 6.13
illustrates this process.




Figure 6.13 Final step of storing a premium for and issuing a policy
quote.


    The team decided to review the entire process design once again, with
the intention of identifying the different contexts in play for the application-
to-quote processing. As indicated by Figure 6.14, the team employed pink
stickies placed over the various steps to identify the contexts involved
across the timeline. This timeline is the entire result of the EventStorming
session. Currently, everybody is happy with the outcome, but they all realize
that there is even more to learn.
Figure 6.14 The new application process as a result of the
EventStorming session.


    The identified Bounded Contexts playing a role in the application process
are Underwriting, Risk, and Rate. The Underwriting Context is responsible
for gathering application form data at the beginning of the process and
issuing a policy quote at the end. It makes sense that the Application
Premium Process driving all the steps of the application lives in the
Underwriting Context. The Risk Context assesses risks with the help of its
associated machine learning algorithms. The Rate Context calculates the
premium rates using the appropriate standard rules and those applicable to
the specific agent.
    As the final step of the design session, the team decided to use Context
Mapping to indicate relationships between the different contexts and how
integrations will work, making these explicit. Figure 6.15 shows this
mapping.
Figure 6.15 Context Mappings between Underwriting, Risk, and Rate.


    In the “Partnership” section earlier in this chapter, we noted that when the
Risk team realized they had by default inherited rate calculations, that
assignment seemed problematic to them given their already intense tasks
ahead. This realization influenced the decision to split the original Risk team
into two teams to manage the separate contexts, Risk and Rate. Thus, a total
of three NuCoverage teams will work on the end-to-end application-to-quote
processing. Each of the three teams will work on the Underwriting, Risk, and
Rate contexts, respectively. Initially, a pragmatic decision determined that
Risk and Rate should work within a Partnership relationship. These two
teams’ goals are interdependent, at least in the early stages of
implementation, and the overall quoting cannot be accomplished without the
success of both. In fact, significant calibration is required between the
assessed risk and rate calculation models. It would be unnecessarily difficult
to synchronize their designs if the two teams were not committed to a
Partnership relationship. As previously explained, a Partnership need not be
maintained over the long term. At some point, the Partnership is likely to
become a bottleneck, blocking one or both teams from making progress
independent of each other as the business moves forward with unrelated
priorities.
    The teams considered designing a Published Language that would be
shared between the Underwriting, Risk, and Rate contexts. This proposed
language would include the commands and events necessary to drive the
processing. Ultimately, though, it was determined that a single Published
Language would be unnecessary because the Application Premium Process
will manage cross-context dependencies, whether upstream–downstream,
peer-to-peer, or whatever else might be necessary. A Schema Registry will
be used to maintain loose coupling even within the Application Premium
Process that is implemented inside the Underwriting Context.
    The Underwriting Context is downstream to Risk and Rate because they
depend on the assessed risk and calculated premium rate. These are
decidedly Customer–Supplier relationships. The Underwriting team must
synchronize with the Risk and Rate team to implement the application-to-
quote process as a whole. Both the Risk and Rate contexts will define their
own limited, but independent Published Languages, which the Application
Premium Process will use. The Underwriting Context must communicate the
application data to Risk Context, but the application data must be formatted
according to the Risk Published Language. In contrast, the Rate Context
communicates its Rate Calculated and Premium model elements to the
Underwriting as its own Published Language. These considerations help
normalize those exchanges and provide for the highly desired loose coupling
between the contexts.



Summary
This chapter promoted the use of Context Maps to identify relationships
between any two teams and their respective Bounded Contexts. Context
Mapping helps teams recognize the situations they face and provides tools to
recognize and address specific modeling challenges that result in whole-
system solutions. Using a topographic approach to Context Mapping assists
in defining boundaries and specifying how various Bounded Contexts work
together. Warnings were offered about the common pitfalls of misusing the
domain-driven tools, which can lead to costly, overall failure. These
warnings transitioned to useful guidance for succeeding with proper use of
the same tools.
    Follow these guiding principles:

     Discover the actual existing inter-team relationships by applying
     Context Maps to each integration point, and (possibly) attempt to work
     out better circumstances by improving a given relationship and means
     of integration.
     Correctly apply the appropriate Context Mapping options, such as
     Partnership, Customer–Supplier Development, Conformist,
     Anticorruption Layer, Open-Host Service, and Published Language, to
     current and future modeling situations.
     Topography modeling is a means of understanding the shape and
     character of your system and grasping the flow of detailed information
     exchange between Bounded Contexts.
     Carefully avoid misusing the domain-driven tools. Doing so can lead to
     failure of entire projects and, in turn, to failure to meet business goals.
     Most domain-driven pitfalls can be avoided. Engage and retain a
     domain-driven expert to help launch and keep the system architecture
     and development on track.

   Chapter 7, “Modeling Domain Concepts,” introduces the tactical domain-
driven modeling tools, which are used to express a sphere of knowledge in
source code free of confusion that results from ambiguity.



References
[Consumer-Driven-Contracts]
https://martinfowler.com/articles/consumerDrivenContracts.html
[StrucDesign] W. P. Stevens, G. J. Myers, and L. L. Constantine. “Structured
Design.” IBM Systems Journal 13, no. 2 (1974): 115–139.
[VLINGO-XOOM] https://github.com/vlingo and https://vlingo.io
Chapter 7

Modeling Domain Concepts


Many projects could benefit from carefully crafted domain models, but don’t.
Oftentimes the lack of thoughtful modeling is due to the concepts of a
business being perceived as data. After all, we are constantly reminded that
“data is the most important asset of the business.” Given the strong affinity
for big and fast-moving data, it might seem difficult to argue against this
reasoning. But even if you assign the highest importance to data, that data
means nothing without smart people who learn how to process it to the point
of extracting the greatest possible value from it.
    This is where tactical modeling comes in. Once you have a fairly good
understanding of the strategic direction to be taken, more focus can be given
to the implementation. When the implementation of the business model is
primarily based on data, the outcome is mostly composed of the following
elements:

     Big nouns are the modules. When there’s a data-centric focus, the
     modules generally take on characteristics of data manipulation tools
     rather than business drivers: factories, entities, data access objects or
     “repositories,” data transfer objects, data services, and data mappers.
     Medium-sized nouns are entities, business-centric services, and data
     manipulation tools. These were all listed in the previous point.
     Small nouns are the fields, attributes, or properties of the entities or
     other data-centric tools. Think of the detailed parts of any data object—
     those are small nouns.
    During their training and consulting engagements, the authors enjoy asking
others to describe their day from the time they awoke until the present time of
that same day, but only with the use of nouns. Although perhaps expecting to
hear several in the group speak up and rattle off “alarm, bathroom, closet,
clothes, kitchen,” and the like, it might be surprising that most have difficulty
even getting started. That’s because people don’t think in nouns.
    Instead, people think in concepts that, when communicated to other
people, must be described by means of expressiveness. To do so, they need
word forms and figures of speech that include nouns, but go far beyond them.
When software is implemented without people making these efforts, it leaves
software in a state of confusion. Each reader of source code must interpret
the meaning from hundreds or thousands of big, medium-sized, and small
nouns. This approach is so complex and fraught with peril that projects
regularly fail as a result. It is simply impossible to keep in mind every single
noun, or even a small number of them, and their impacts on all the many
others. Clarity, narrow meaning, and clear behavioral intentions are vital.
    This chapter highlights the importance of modeling business concepts
using rich expressions, and augmenting the data and business rules with
language that conveys the best ways for the business work that is done with
the software to be carried out. Doing so will convey explicit meaning. Other
guidance is available on these topics, such as the books Implementing
Domain-Driven Design [IDDD] and the quick-start guide Domain-Driven
Design Distilled [DDD-Distilled]. Here we consider the tools in less detail,
but with enough information provided to understand the concepts.



Entities
An entity is used when modeling a conceptual whole that is an individual
thing. Giving an entity individuality is done through generating and assigning
it a unique identity. Its uniqueness must be achieved within the scope of the
entity’s life cycle. If the entity is considered a top-level concept within a
modeling context, it must be assigned a globally unique identity. If an entity is
held inside a parent entity, the child must be uniquely identified only within
its parent. Note that it’s the combination of the entity’s module name, concept
name, and generated identity that collectively make a given entity instance
unique.
   In the following, two entities are both assigned identity value 1, but they
are globally unique because of their different module names and concept
names:
Click here to view code image
com.nucoverage.underwriting.model.application.Application : 1
com.nucoverage.rate.model.rate.PremiumRate : 1

    An entity can also be mutable (modifiable), and an object-based entity is
very likely to be mutable, but that alone does not qualify it as an entity.
That’s because an entity can be immutable instead. Its uniqueness is the key
to an entity being an entity, an individual thing in the model. In Figure 7.1, the
Application is an entity and applicationId holds its unique identity.
Figure 7.1 An Entity and Value Object that compose an Aggregate as a
transactional boundary.



Value Objects
A Value Object is a modeled concept with one or more data attributes or
properties that together compose a whole value; thus, it is a constant, an
immutable state. Unlike an Entity, which has a unique identity, a Value
Object’s identity is not meant to be unique. It can be said that a value has no
identity, but it does have a concept of identity. A value’s identity is
determined by its type name and all of its composed attributes/properties
together; that is, its full state identifies each value. In the case of values,
uniqueness of identity is not expected. Two values with the same identity are
equal. Whether or not value identity makes sense to you, what’s most
important to understand is that equality between two or more values is quite
common.
    An example of a value is the integer 1. Two integer values of 1 are equal,
and there can be many, many values of 1 in a single software process.
Another example value is the text string "one". In some modern programming
languages, the integer value 1 is a scalar, one of the basic single-value types.
Other scalars include long, boolean, and char/character. Depending on the
source of its definition, a string might or might not be considered a scalar.
Yet, that’s not important: A string is generally modeled as an array of char
and its functional behavior provides useful, side-effect-free operations.
    Other value types in Figure 7.1 include ApplicationId (indicated by the
applicationId instance variable) and Progress. Progress tracks the
progression of workflow processing steps carried out on the parent
Application entity. As each step is completed, Progress is used to capture
each individual step along with those that have already occurred. To achieve
this tracking, the current state of Progress is not altered. Rather, the current
state of the previous steps, if any, is combined with the new step to form a
new Progress state. This maintains the value immutability constraint.
    The logic of a value being immutable can be reasoned on when
considering the value 1. The value 1 cannot be altered; it is always the value
1. It would make no sense if the value 1 could be altered to be the value 3 or
10 instead. This is not a discussion about an integer variable, such as total,
that can hold the value 1. Of course, a mutable variable total itself can be
changed—for example, by assigning it to hold the value 1 and later to hold
the value 3 and then, later still, the value 10. The difference is that while the
variable total can be changed, the immutable value that it holds, such as 1,
is constant. Although a Progress state is more complex than an integer, it is
designed with the same immutability constraint. A Progress state cannot be
altered, but it can be used to derive a new value of type Progress.



Aggregates
Generally, some business rules will require certain data within a single
parent object to remain consistent throughout the parent object’s lifetime.
Given that there is the parent object A, this is accomplished by placing
behavior on A that simultaneously changes the data items that are managed
within its consistency boundary. This kind of behavioral operation is known
as atomicity; that is, the operation changes an entire subset of A’s
consistency-constrained data atomically. To maintain the consistency in a
database, we can use an atomic translation. An atomic database translation is
meant to create isolation around the data being persisted, similar to A’s
atomic behavioral operation, such that the data will always be written to disk
without any interruption or change outside of the isolation area.
    In a domain modeling context, an Aggregate is used to maintain a parent
object’s transactional boundary around its data. An Aggregate is modeled
with at least one Entity, and that Entity holds zero or more other entities and
at least one Value Object. It composes a whole domain concept. The outer
Entity, referred to as the root, must have a global unique identity. That’s why
an Aggregate must hold at least one value, its unique identity. All other rules
of an Entity hold for an Aggregate.
    In Figure 7.2, PolicyQuote is the root entity that manages the concept’s
transactional boundary. The transactional boundary is needed because when
an Aggregate is persisted to the database, all business state consistency rules
must be met when the atomic database transaction commits. Whether we’re
using a relational database or a key–value store, the full state of a single
Aggregate is atomically persisted. The same might not be possible for two or
more such entity states, which emphasizes the need to think in terms of
Aggregate transactional boundaries.
Figure 7.2 A Domain Service is responsible for guiding a small
business process.



Domain Services
Sometimes a modeling situation calls for an operation to apply business rules
that are not practical to implement as a member of the type on which it
operates. This will be the case when the operation must supply more
behavior than a typical instance method should, when the operation cuts
across two or more instances or the same type, and when the operation must
use instances of two or more different types. In such a modeling situation, use
a Domain Service. A Domain Service provides one or more operations that
don’t obviously belong on an Entity or a Value Object as would normally be
expected, and the service itself owns no operational state as does an Entity
or Value Object.
    Figure 7.2 shows the Domain Service named QuoteGenerator. It is
responsible for accepting one parameter value named PremiumRates,
translating it to one or more QuoteLine instances (which comprise a specific
coverage and premium), and recording each on the PolicyQuote Aggregate.
Note that when the final QuoteLine is recorded, the QuoteGenerated event is
emitted.
   An important difference between an Application Service and a Domain
Service is that an Application Service must not contain business logic, while
a Domain Service always does. If an Application Service is used to
coordinate this use case, it would manage the transaction. Either way, the
Domain Service would never do that.



Functional Behavior
Many approaches to domain modeling exist, but to date the object-oriented
paradigm has completely dominated. There are ways,1 however, of
expressing domain behavior using pure functions rather than mutable objects.
The section “Functional Core with Imperative Shell,” in Chapter 8,
“Foundation Architecture,” discusses the benefits of leveraging the
Functional Core approach, which emphasizes using pure functions for
domain models. The result is that the code is more predictable, more easily
tested, and easier to reason about. While it is easier to express functional
behaviors in purely functional language, the good news is that there is no
need to switch away from an object-oriented language to a functional one,
because functional fundamentals can be used with practically any
programming language. Contemporary object-oriented languages, such as
Java and C#, incorporate functional constructs that enable functional
programming even beyond the fundamentals. Although they don’t have all the
features of a full functional language,2 implementing a domain model with
functional behavior is readily achievable with such languages.
1. Some people would say “better ways” to highlight the fact that the recent hype around the functional
   programming paradigm might make object-oriented programming appear to be outdated. However,
   the authors stress that each programming paradigm has its strengths and weaknesses, and that no
   single paradigm excels in every use case.

2. Functional programming features have been added to several object-oriented languages as new
   versions have streamed out to the market. This has resulted in multiparadigm languages, which make
   it easier to switch from object-oriented programming to functional programming, and back. Questions
   remain about how effective mixing paradigms in a language is, and whether it in some way hinders
   the expression of the business software model under development.
    Domain modeling using the Domain-Driven Design approach works well
with models expressed as functional behavior. Eric Evans, in his book
Domain-Driven Design [DDD-Evans], stresses the importance of using
“side-effect-free functions” to avoid unwanted and unintended consequences
of calling an arbitrarily deep nesting of side-effect-generating operations. In
fact, Value Objects, as described above, are an example of one way to
implement functional behavior. When side effects are not avoided, the results
cannot be predicted without a deep understanding of the implementation of
each operation. When the complexity of side effects is unbounded, the
solution becomes brittle because its quality cannot be ensured. The only way
to avoid such pitfalls is by simplifying the code, which might include
employing at least some functional behavior. Functional behavior tends to be
useful with less effort. (There are plenty of examples of poorly written code
in both paradigms, so don’t expect any silver bullets delivered with a
functional programming language.)
    Consider an example of quoting a policy based on the risk and rate. The
NuCoverage team working on the Underwriting Context has decided to use a
functional behavior approach when modeling PolicyQuote:
Click here to view code image
public record PolicyQuote
{
    int QuoteId;
    int ApplicantId;
    List<QuoteLine> QuoteLines;
}

In this example, the PolicyQuote is modeled as an immutable record.
Immutability describes the means of creating the record such that its state
cannot be changed. This has at least two benefits:

     PolicyQuote    instances can be passed to different functions without any
     fear that a function will modify their state. The unpredictability
     associated with mutable objects is eliminated.
     Instances can be shared in concurrent environments across threads
     because their immutable nature negates locking and the potential for
     deadlocks.
Even though these points might not be the main decision drivers for the
NuCoverage team, it is helpful to understand that these benefits are available
for free when immutability is designed in.
    Defining immutable structures for domain concepts is the first step when
employing functional behavior. Following this, NuCoverage must define the
concrete behaviors with pure functions. One of those operations is recording
QuoteLine instances to be composed by PolicyQuote. With the traditional
OOP approach, a RecordQuoteLine operation would be invoked on a
PolicyQuote instance, with its internal state being mutated to record the new
QuoteLine. With the functional behavior approach, this kind of behavior is
not permitted because PolicyQuote is immutable and once instantiated cannot
be changed. But there is another approach, which does not require any
mutation at all. The RecordQuoteLine operation can be implemented as a
pure function:
Click here to view code image
public Tuple<PolicyQuote, List<DomainEvent>> RecordQuoteLine(
  PolicyQuote policyQuote,
  QuoteLine quoteLine)
{
  var newPolicyQuote =
        PolicyQuote.WithNewQuoteLine(policyQuote, quoteLine);

    var quoteLineRecorded =
          QuoteLineRecorded.Using(quoteId, applicantId, quoteLine);

    return Tuple.From(newPolicyQuote, quoteLineRecorded);
}

In this example, RecordQuoteLine is defined as a pure function: Every time
the function is called with the same values, it yields the same result. This is
meant to work similarly to the pure mathematical function, where the function
power = x * x will always yield 4, if 2 is passed as an input parameter. The
RecordQuoteLine function simply returns a tuple3 composed of the new
instance of PolicyQuote with a new QuoteLine appended to the new instance
of the current collection of quote lines, along with a QuoteLineRecorded
domain event.
3. A tuple represents a composition of two or more arbitrary types as a whole. Here, PolicyQuote
   and List<DomainEvent> are addressed as a single whole. Tuples are frequently used in
 functional programming because a function may return only one type of result. A tuple is a single
 value that holds multiple values.

    Note that the input parameter policyQuote is never mutated. The primary
advantage of this approach is that the RecordQuoteLine function has
improved the predictability and testability of its behavior. There is no need
to look into the implementation of this function, as there cannot be any
observable side effect or unintended mutation of the current application state.
    Another important benefit of the functional paradigm is that pure functions
can be readily composed if the output type of the function to be composed
matches the input type of the function composing it. The mechanics are
beyond the scope of this book, but are provided in a follow-on
implementation book, Implementing Strategic Monoliths and Microservices
(Vernon & Jaskuła, Addison-Wesley, forthcoming).
    The main takeaway of functional behavior is that it simplifies the surface
of the abstractions used in the model, improving their predictability and
testability. Given the capabilities of modern object-oriented languages and
the benefits they offer, there is a strong incentive to use them. At least
initially, attempt functional programming using the “Functional Core with
Imperative Shell” approach.



Applying the Tools
Domain modeling is one of the best places to experiment, and is exemplified
by the rapid event-based learning described in Chapter 3, “Events-First
Experimentation and Discovery.” Experiments should be quickly performed,
using names and behavioral expressions that best describe the business
concepts being modeled. This can be done with sticky notes, with virtual
whiteboards and other collaborative drawing tools, and—of course—in
source code. These tools are applied in the remaining chapters of this book.
    Many examples of these modeling techniques can be found in the books
Implementing Domain-Driven Design [IDDD] and the quick-start guide
Domain-Driven Design Distilled [DDD-Distilled].
Summary
This chapter introduced Domain-Driven Design tactical modeling tools, such
as Entities, Value Objects, and Aggregates. The appropriate use of these
tools depends on the modeling situations that they are intended to handle.
Another modeling tool, functional behavior, is used to express domain model
behavior using pure functions rather than mutable objects.
   The primary messages within the chapter are as follows:

     Use an Entity when modeling a conceptual whole that is a uniquely
     identified individual thing and has a stateful life cycle.
     A Value Object encapsulates data attributes/properties that together
     compose a whole value, and provides side-effect-free behavior. Value
     Objects are immutable and make no attempt to identify themselves
     uniquely, but only by the whole value of their type and all combined
     attributes/properties.
     Aggregates model a whole concept that can be composed of one or
     more Entities and/or Value Objects, where a parent Entity represents a
     transactional consistency boundary.
     Use a Domain Service to model a business operation that is itself
     stateless and that would be misplaced if included as behavior on an
     Entity or Value Object.
     Functional behavior houses business rules in pure function, but doesn’t
     require the use of a pure functional programming language. In other
     words, a contemporary object-oriented language, such as Java or C#,
     can be used to implement pure functions.

   This concludes Part II. We now transition to Part III, “Events-First
Architecture,” which discusses software architectural styles and patterns that
offer pragmatic purpose rather than technical intrigue.



References
[DDD-Distilled] Vaughn Vernon. Domain-Driven Design Distilled. Boston,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 2016.
[DDD-Evans] Eric Evans. Domain-Driven Design: Tackling Complexity in
the Heart of Software. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2004.
[IDDD] Vaughn Vernon. Implementing Domain-Driven Design. Boston,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 2013.
Part III

Events-First Architecture



Executive Summary

This part of the book introduces the software architecture styles and
mechanics that lead to highly versatile and adaptable applications and
services. It does take on a more technical slant, but the illustrative diagrams
and explanations should be palatable for many who do not regularly practice
software development. At a minimum, it is recommended that executives and
other senior management have a fundamental understanding of making good
software architecture decisions, which help practitioners avoid the bad ones.
Armed with this knowledge, feel free to converse with software architects
and developers, and inquire about the choices they’ve made. Challenge them
about these decisions, which must stand up to the test of time and relentless
change.



Chapter 8: Foundation Architecture
Every software architecture must start somewhere, and this chapter provides
the building blocks to begin such an effort. As expected, some foundational
principles must be set and followed to make a software architecture flexible
enough to host any number of decisions made early, mid-term, and late in the
software development life cycle.

     You must understand which software architecture styles and decisions
     are commonly used, and which ones fit more narrowly defined system-
     building situations.
     Using the Ports and Adapters style can establish the most flexible
     architecture possible, and leave openings for early and late decisions
     as needed. Further, consider four options that can be used inside the
     Ports and Adapters style, depending on the specific context being
     constructed.
     Consider using modularization to address contextual divisions for both
     Monoliths and Microservices, and for hybrids of both.
     Gain a primary understanding of REST, a widely used Web style of
     browser-to-server communication, while discovering that REST is
     much more versatile than most developers think.
     Grasp the critical nature of supporting architectural requirements that
     are not driven by user feature–based functionality: security, privacy,
     performance, scalability, resilience, and complexity.



Chapter 9: Message- and Event-Driven
Architectures
There are numerous reasons to use message-based and event-driven
architectures. Depending on familiar request–response introduces multiple
points of failure, including ones that are notorious for causing cascading
outages. The nature of distributed systems that operate over networks, as
well as in cloud and multi-cloud environments, calls for tolerating latency,
whose scale is unpredictable at any given time. It would be better for
systems and subsystems to embrace latency, by designing architectures that
deal gracefully with it. That is exactly what messaging infrastructure
supports, and messaging is the way the events are generally offered for
consumption. This approach all but erases concerns over network latency,
and makes it possible to deliver more responsive systems because the
message-based foundation underpins and supports elastic and resilient
subsystems and their internal runtime components.

     A common use case in a large system is for multiple business
     capabilities to share in a step-by-step workflow, taking it from start to
     finish. For example, when an applicant requests an insurance policy,
     (1) their application must be validated for correct and full data. Next,
     (2) a risk assessment must be performed on the application. If the risks
     are acceptable, (3) a premium rate must be calculated. At that point, (4)
     a quote is generated, and (5) the applicant is given the opportunity to
     accept it. If the offer is accepted, then (6) the policy is underwritten.
     All of the steps must be managed by the system, and this chapter
     explains two options that can be used to do so: choreography and
     orchestration.
     Choreography is a process in which the decision to fulfill a given
     workflow step is left up to the individual subsystems. Each contextual
     subsystem must understand the stimulus, such as an event notification,
     that signals that a given step must happen next. Choreography is best
     reserved for simpler process workflows with few required steps.
     Orchestration is a process in which a central control mechanism guides
     the workflows steps by commanding each one to take place when and
     as directed. Orchestration is most useful when a process includes
     several or many complex steps, such as the policy underwriting
     workflow.
     Doing the simplest thing that could possibly work is generally the best
     choice. One such thing is to feed events to interested subsystems
     through a Web-based request–response procedure. This technique uses
     event logs stored in disk files similar to Web server static content (e.g.,
     HTML pages and images), which are served to clients one log at a time
     upon request. It’s based on the scale and performance of the Web. The
     fact that the server might not be available from time to time is generally
     not problematic. Clients already assume latency exists between things
     that have happened on the server subsystem and one or more steps
     required in reaction on the client subsystem to bring them into harmony.
     An architectural technique is introduced as a means to track all data
     changes in a subsystem, such that audit trails of the changes are
     maintained over the subsystem’s life cycle. This approach is generally
     most useful when government or industry regulations demand proof of
     which data changed and when that change happened.
     Sometimes it’s helpful to treat the data that changes on user command
     differently than the data that the same user views to make decisions
     about which data changes should be commanded. This is the case when
     the shape and content of the data that users view is a richer aggregation
     of information than the more limited data that changes on command.
     This architecture technique creates a division between the two kinds of
     data, so that each side can be custom optimized for how it is used.

     There is no need to be a software architect to appreciate the simple
power packed into the architecture guidance offered in the chapters in Part
III. Every executive and other senior managers who invest in software
innovation as a competitive differentiator must be conversant with the
architectural decisions being made on their behalf. Part III provides a highly
approachable treatment of this topic for executives and software
professionals alike.
Chapter 8

Foundation Architecture


It seems that every book that discusses software architecture in any way
attempts to define software architecture. Some examples from other sources
follow.

   The software architecture of a program or computing system is the
   structure or structures of the system, which comprise software
   elements, the externally visible properties of those elements, and the
   relations among them. [Software Architecture in Practice]
       The fundamental organization of a system embodied in its
   components, their relationships to each other, and to the environment,
   and the principles guiding its design and evolution. [ISO 47010]
       All architecture is design, but not all design is architecture.
   Architecture represents the significant design decisions that shape the
   form and function of a system, where significant is measured by the
   cost of change. Every software-intensive system has an architecture:
   some are intentional; a few are accidental; most are emergent. All
   meaningful architecture springs from a living, vibrant process of
   deliberation, design, and decision.
                                                             —Grady Booch

    Okay, these are good. There are probably some ideas that are implied, but
not explicitly stated. Maybe another attempt is worthwhile. The following is
the authors’ attempt to freshen the older definitions. This one reflects what
this book discusses, and has been used for several years.
   There are at least three major sets of statements that help define
   software architecture. (1) Architecture is the result of team
   communication that leads to a shared understanding of business goals,
   how to balance the goals of various stakeholders, and how to
   understand and address the quality attributes–related impactful
   features; that is, there cannot be effective architecture without a
   purpose, and purpose cannot be well understood without socializing
   intent through communication. (2) The architectural intent is captured
   and articulated as a set of current and future decisions for the whole
   system and individual services by specifying purposeful flexibility
   and constraints that support the software’s initial and ongoing
   development. (3) The architectural intent and decisions are spoken,
   rendered into visual form—graphical and/or textual—and expressed
   in software artifacts that have modular structure and well-defined
   component-to-component protocols.

Note that there’s a lot of communication going on within all three parts of this
definition, and it seems to be communication that is lacking in the more
traditional definitions. Sound architecture cannot be developed in a vacuum.
No part of the definition suggests specific tooling or formats, which should be
chosen by the teams involved. That’s all part of socializing the software’s
intent through communication, and the best way to capture and articulate that
intent should be determined by those who create it. Accepting feedback is an
invaluable skill to be developed.
    The authors also recommend reading another book in the Vaughn Vernon
Signature Series—namely, Continuous Architecture in Practice by Murat
Erder, Pierre Pureur, and Eoin Woods. It provides in-depth advice on how to
apply a continuous approach to software architecture and contains in-depth
guidance for addressing key quality attributes and cross-cutting concerns,
such as security, performance, scalability, resilience, data, and emerging
technologies, all illustrated using a start-to-finish case study [Continuous-
Architecture].
    It’s not uncommon for software architecture to be thrown under the bus,
dismissed as some sort of formal and useless rite of common programmers
seeking a higher pay grade. There are indeed overengineered architectures,
but those come from the immature. Here’s the point:

   If you think that good architecture is expensive, try bad architecture.
                                                    —Brian Foote [BBoM]

    You can pay for architecture now, or you can pay for it later. The authors
suggest now would be best. All the same, there is no need for good
architecture to be expensive. This chapter backs up that claim and throws
overengineered architectures under the bus.
    We’ll consider a number of architectural styles and architecture patterns
that specifically support events-first systems. This is where the understanding
gained from previous chapters that feature business drivers now point toward
making wise decisions based on how the overall software architecture will
support the business goals. There is clearly a danger of selecting among a
broad collection of arbitrary architectural choices just because they seem
useful, or even cool, as if a potpourri of architecture decisions will
automatically produce benefits. Again, the purpose of architecture decisions
is to achieve the quality attribute requirements, such as flexibility, security,
performance, and scalability. Without those requirements, architecture
decisions are meaningless and often harmful. Deep details are out of scope
for the book, but are provided in our follow-on implementation book,
Implementing Strategic Monoliths and Microservices (Vernon & Jaskuła,
Addison-Wesley, forthcoming).
    Next up on our agenda are a selection of modern architecture options, each
of which is described in terms of its overall definition, but also qualified
according to its strengths and weaknesses. As with everything involved in
software development, the architectural decisions made by teams will tend to
have both positive and negative consequences.



Architectural Styles, Patterns, and Decision
Drivers
To reiterate, not every architecture style and pattern will suit any set of
arbitrary business, technical, scale, performance, or throughput constraints.
The specific set of constraints will drive a purposeful architecture. Likewise,
not every Bounded Context is equally important in terms of business strategic
goals, which has an important influence on architectural decisions.
    The architectures discussed here include those at both the system level and
the service/application level. A system-level architecture defines how
various subsystems work together to address the quality attributes related to
shared impactful features, including software collaboration and integration. A
service/application architecture defines how a single subsystem
(service/application) addresses the quality attributes related to its own
impactful features.
    Chapter 2, “Essential Strategic Learning Tools,” discussed Architecture
Decision Records (ADRs) as a means to determine the business and technical
drivers around each decision made regarding software architecture. ADRs
are used by teams to help explain why various styles and patterns are helpful,
but they also highlight the potential negative consequences of applying those
choices in a given solution.


Ports and Adapters (Hexagonal)
One of the most versatile architecture styles is Ports and Adapters, also
known as Hexagonal. This style inherits concepts from the traditional Layers
architecture [POSA1], but it emphasizes different strengths and has much less
overhead. Some of the highlighted strengths are based on contemporary
software drivers, such as tests and loose coupling.

   Allow an application to equally be driven by users, programs,
   automated tests, or batch scripts, and to be developed and tested in
   isolation from its eventual run-time devices and databases.
   [PortsAdapters]

    Sometimes problems are encountered due to the fundamental differences
between the external devices and other mechanisms used to interact with a
software service or application. These mechanisms might be a browser, a
mobile phone or tablet, another service or application, a streaming or
messaging mechanism, batch processing, tests, or other computing resources.
The service or application should not be exposed directly to the interactions
with the outside world because that will interfere with the technology-
independent business logic and processing.
    To sidestep the potential problems of coupling the service or application
to various kinds of input–output devices and mechanisms, create a layer of
adapters between the two sets of concerns. As Figure 8.1 illustrates, the Ports
and Adapters architecture style defines such a separation by considering one
part of the architecture as the outside and the other as the inside. On the
outside left are a number of driver types, also called primary actors: HTTP,
externally called procedures or functions, and flowing streams or messages.
On the outside right are a number of driven types, also called secondary
actors: payment gateways, databases, procedure or function outward calls,
and flowing streams of messages. The locations of the ports are shown by the
bold border around the inside circular Application area.




Figure 8.1 Ports and Adapters architecture, also known as Hexagonal,
Clean, and Onion.1
1. Some consider Onion architecture to be closer to Layers, which does not distinguish the outside and
   inside in terms of adapters. Some consider Onion to be synonymous with Layers. Rather than have
   several thousand people complain about the omission of Onion, it is mentioned here, along with a
   potential caveat (or at least a specific nuance).


   Note
   The outside-left driver actors send input requests or notifications. The
   outside-right driven actors are driven by the application inside to fulfill
   use cases: Some are bidirectional, providing both requests and
   responses; others receive one-way notifications. The outside-left
   adapters are needed to adapt incoming requests or notifications to data
   types that the Application can consume to carry out its supported use
   cases. The Application uses adapters on the outside right to persist and
   query, as well as to deliver notifications. Only the outside left is aware
   of the existence of use cases on the inside. The outside-right driven
   actors are oblivious to use cases.


    Figure 8.1 does not contain an exhaustive set of incoming and outgoing
adapter types. Any given adapter type is not limited to creating a single
instance. The adapters shown are those typically used by services and
applications. There need not be a single database type or instance, for
example, or a single stream source and sink, or one messaging topic. The
elements in Figure 8.1 are only representative of the large number of
possibilities.
    Some of the distinct advantages of Ports and Adapters are as follows:

       Each of the two main layers can be tested in isolation; that is, any
       adapter can be tested without the need for a specific application
       implementation, and the application may be tested without any given
       adapter implementation.
       All device adapters can be backed by both mocks/fakes and with actual
       mechanisms. (This does not mean that the concrete adapters aren’t
       tested, because they always are. Rather, mocks/fakes are used to test
       units that are dependent on the adapters.)
       Each actual mechanism might have multiple types (e.g., Postgres,
       MariaDB, HSQLDB, AWS DynamoDB, Google Cloud Bigtable, or
       Azure Cosmos DB).
     New adapter types can be introduced as needed without big upfront
     architecture/design; that is, the team can employ an #agile and emergent
     architectural design.
     Multiple outside adapters can use the same inside Application layer
     facilities.
     The application remains completely isolated from the device-level
     technology details.

    There can also be disadvantages, depending on decisions regarding
integration with external mechanisms:

     The use of data mappers, such as object-relational mapping tools, might
     cause complexity. However, this disadvantage is due to the choice of
     persistence integration, not because Ports and Adapters itself forces
     these choices.
     The domain model can make use of integrations with remote services
     and applications through an interface. The interface implementation can
     leak underlying implementation details, such as exceptions and errors
     caused by network and service failures. This can be avoided by a few
     means, including those discussed in this chapter and Chapter 9. For
     example, using Functional Core with Imperative Shell keeps the domain
     model entirely isolated from external remote integrations. The
     Imperative Shell must do all integration work separately and not involve
     the Functional Core. The Functional Core provides only pure, side-
     effect-free functions.
     Other disadvantages may include additional complexity by requiring
     more layers; creation and maintenance cost; and lack of guidance on
     organizing code (directories and layers). The authors have not
     experienced these claims in the least, and wonder if those who cite these
     so-called problems have read the literature and understand Ports and
     Adapters at all. Experience has shown us that a basic, well-structured
     architecture can be constructed in a matter of minutes, with far fewer
     layers than a typical N-tier application requires. The chosen mechanisms
     and related adapters can increase the system’s complexity, but those
     have nothing to do with the architecture style. Such a system would have
     at least the same complexity without the use of a Ports and Adapters
     architecture.
    The Ports and Adapters architecture isolates the inside Application layer
from the details of device input–output. The Application is focused solely on
business-driven use cases. Multiple outside-left adapter types may effectively
reuse Application ports to perform operations rather than a separate port type
being required for every adapter type.
    This architectural design can employ the Dependency Inversion Principle
[SOLID], in which the infrastructure becomes dependent on the Application,
rather than the Application being dependent on the infrastructure. The
Application can steer clear of concrete device dependencies because any
such dependencies on the outside-right secondary actor types are managed
through adapter interfaces. The adapter interfaces are provided to the
Application by means of its service constructors/initializers or possibly
container-based dependency injection.
    Adapters should adhere to the Single Responsibility Principle [SOLID],
meaning that a single adapter should focus on adapting input–output that it is
designated to support and no more. No adapter should depend on another
adapter.
    Some have claimed that Ports and Adapters is an unnecessarily
heavyweight style of architecture, but frankly this criticism is both unfounded
and unsubstantiated when one considers the facts. As Figure 8.1 illustrates, a
Ports and Adapters software architecture includes exactly the number and
kinds of adapters needed for a given input and output port—no more, no less.
There are also only two primary layers.
    Certainly any architecture style and pattern can suffer from
overengineering. Don’t expect Ports and Adapters to, on its own, prevent such
poorly executed implementations. As Figure 8.2 shows, the nature of the
Application inside is quite versatile; that is, the pattern doesn’t define how
the Application inside should work. What is more, not even one of the four
natures shown is at all complex, although each has its advantages (as
described in the sections that follow).
Figure 8.2 Ports and Adapters architecture with varying Application
types.


Service Layer with Transaction Scripts
A Service Layer is described as follows:

   Defines an application’s boundary and its set of available operations
   from the perspective of interfacing client layers [i.e., port adapters]. It
   encapsulates the application’s business logic, controlling transactions
   and coordinating responses in the implementation of its operations.
   [Fowler-PEAA]

   A Service Layer supplies application-specific services, typically known
as Application Services, as depicted in the first two variants, from left to
right, in Figure 8.2. At the top left of this figure is a Service Layer composed
of only Application Services. This example uses some form of Transaction
Scripts, Active Record, or Data Access Objects [Fowler-PEAA]. These three
patterns are used for Create-Read-Update-Delete (CRUD) operations without
incurring the overhead of a domain model. They are all useful when the
Bounded Context is mainly focused on data collection and performs simple
creates and updates, and occasional deletes. There is no business-driven
complexity. In terms of Cynefin—as explained in Chapter 2, in the section
“Using Cynefin to Make Decisions”—this is clear/obvious/simple. The
primary work lies in using the Application Services for writing and reading,
with possible encapsulation of data accesses to and from a database, but any
such access encapsulation is purposely kept trivial.


Service Layer with Domain Model
In the top-right Service Layer in Figure 8.2, the Application Services are
accompanied by a domain model at the heart of the software below the
Application Layer. A domain model is used when (as described in Chapter 7)
domain2 complexity needs to be solved in an innovative, core, differentiating
business software initiative. In the system depicted in Figure 8.2, the
Application Services are used to manage the use case coordination and
database usage, including transactions.3
2. Here again, domain means a sphere of knowledge.

3. Use cases and transactions may be managed by other means, such as in the adapters, negating the
   Service Layer. Even so, you should be careful not to place too many responsibilities on adapters.


Domain Model of Actors
The Actor Model is a form of message-driven object model that provides
specialized and well-insulated capabilities in a highly concurrent and
scalable compute environment, as further described in Chapter 9, “Message-
and Event-Driven Architectures.”4 The incoming adapters dispatch directly
into the domain model objects. Although there are no Application Services,
the domain model might provide actor-based Domain Services.
4. This is different from the Service Layer with Domain Model because the underlying actor platform is
   designed to take this burden off of application developers, rather than to move it elsewhere in the
   team’s code.

   This implementation of Ports and Adapters provides the simplest and most
concise rendering of this architecture style, packing tremendous power into a
small form factor.5 An actor, by design, is physically isolated from other
actors—which emphasizes even more strongly the sound distinction between
business logic and infrastructure concerns.
5. Although typically a hardware term, form factor seems appropriate here because individual actors in
   an Actor Model have been referred to as tiny computers.


Functional Core with Imperative Shell
Functional Core with Imperative Shell bridges the gap between Ports and
Adapters and Functional Programming. Although inspired by functional
programming principles, Functional Core is readily applicable even with
programming paradigms that are not purely functional. For example, the
fundamental strengths of functional programming can be achieved with object-
oriented programming languages such as Java and C#. The idea behind this
approach is to write pure functional code for the domain model, while moving
the side effects6 of imperative code to the surrounding environment, known as
the Imperative Shell. The Functional Core is thus predictable, more easily
testable, and used where it counts most.
6. A side effect is the modification of some state variable value(s) outside its local environment; in other
   words, the operation has an observable effect besides returning a value (the main effect) to the
   invoker of the operation. For example, execution of an I/O operation such as a network call or
   database call is a side effect.

    The predictability comes from the fact that a pure function always returns
the same result for the same input and never causes observable side effects.
Likewise, pure functions are easier to test, because the focus is on meaningful
inputs and outputs. There is no need to create mocks or stubs, so no
knowledge of unit test internals is needed. Actually, avoiding mocks
altogether is one of the goals of Functional Core with Imperative Shell.
    Another advantage is that this approach decreases the risk of leaking
technical concerns when domain code calls a side-effectful domain service
through an interface. For example, error handling can be problematic. Using a
REST-over-HTTP endpoint can result in not just expected kinds of errors,
such as 404 Resource Not Found, but also unexpected errors, such as network
failures. Error-handling logic can be challenging to test and, unless extreme
caution is used, can propagate throughout the whole of the domain model.
Deep details of this issue are beyond the scope of this book but are provided
in the follow-on implementation book.


Ports and Adapters Architecture Nature Comparison
Table 8.1 compares the four natures described here and outlines how they
differ in usefulness, complexity, model isolation, evolvability, quality
attributes, and testability.


Table 8.1 Comparison of Different Architectural Approaches to Domain
Model Implementation and Their Impacts
                      Service               Service Layer Domain Model Functional
                      Layer with            with Domain of Actors      Core with
                      Transaction           Model                      Imperative
                      Scripts                                          Shell
Isolated     No; focused                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes
domain model on data
             updates
                 Service          Service Layer Domain Model Functional
                 Layer with       with Domain of Actors      Core with
                 Transaction      Model                      Imperative
                 Scripts                                     Shell
Business         Low; not      High                 High               High
complexity       many or no
                 business
                 rules, mainly
                 data focused
Domain           Low technical    Domain model      Domain model       Domain
model            overhead, but    is well           is very well       model is
isolation from   the domain       isolated from     isolated from      very well
infrastructure   model is not     infrastructure    infrastructure     isolated from
                 present, so it   but requires      concerns.          infrastructure
                 involves         constant effort   Isolation is       concerns
                 mainly data      to keep the       embedded in        because it is
                 access           isolation free    the underlying     based on
                 encapsulation.   of                Actor Model        pure
                 Very close to    infrastructure    implementation,    functions.
                 infrastructure   concerns. It      which helps to     This design
                 concerns,        may require       maintain           prevents
                 which pose a     application       domain models      pure
                 risk for long-   services for      while keeping      functions
                 term             coordination.     them free of any   from
                 maintenance.                       infrastructure     interacting
                                                    concerns.          with
                                                                       infrastructure
                                                                       and directly
                                                                       causing side
                                                                       effects,
                                                                       which is
                                                                       guaranteed to
                                                                       keep the
                                                                       domain
                                                                       model
                                                                       isolated.
               Service           Service Layer Domain Model Functional
               Layer with        with Domain of Actors      Core with
               Transaction       Model                      Imperative
               Scripts                                      Shell
Evolvability   Low. The lack     Medium to          Very high. It is   Very high. It
               of a domain       high. Depends      very simple to     is very
               model makes       on how the         add business       simple to
               it difficult to   domain model       behavior.          add new
               evolve            is kept isolated                      business
               toward more       from other                            behavior.
               complex           infrastructural
               business          concerns.
               scenarios.
Scalability, Very low.           Low to high. It    Very high. The     High. The
performance,                     may require        Actor Model        domain
and                              implementation     implementation     model is
concurrency                      of technical       guarantees the     based on
                                 code around        scalability,       pure
                                 the domain         performance,       functions,
                                 model to keep      and                which means
                                 up with            concurrency out    it is
                                 scalability and    of the box.        concurrency
                                 concurrency                           enabled.
                                 requirements.                         However,
                                 The domain                            the
                                 model itself is                       Imperative
                                 not geared                            Shell code
                                 toward                                may require
                                 concurrency so                        some
                                 the surrounding                       tenacity to
                                 code has to                           make it more
                                 take care of it.                      scalable and
                                                                       performant.
                Service          Service Layer Domain Model Functional
                Layer with       with Domain of Actors      Core with
                Transaction      Model                      Imperative
                Scripts                                     Shell
Testability     Low. May be      High. Domain High. Every        High. The
                difficult        model is well aspect is         domain
                based on how     isolated, so it testable.       model is
                infrastructure   is simple to                    very simple
                concerns are     test.                           to test.
                managed.                                         However,
                                                                 the
                                                                 Imperative
                                                                 Shell is not
                                                                 easily tested
                                                                 except
                                                                 through
                                                                 integration
                                                                 tests.



Modularization
The importance of modularity has already been established, and we’ve even
provided a few examples of it. This section applies an architectural focus to
modularization. Figure 8.3 provides an example of a modular Monolith.
Figure 8.3 Monolith container with five Bounded Contexts as modules.


    The container itself is not necessarily special in its own right. It’s just a
way to deploy a body of executable software. It might be a Docker container,
and might even have a Kubernetes Pod around it for a co-located, co-
scheduled, and shared runtime context. Yet, the focus in the Monolith
container is on the five major modules inside. Each of these modules
represents a Bounded Context. As previously noted, a Monolith is a great
place to start early in software architecture development, and possibly even a
long-term solution.
    The fact that the five modules are deployed together in a single container
is not an excuse for the Bounded Context modules to be tightly coupled or to
have any strong, infiltrating dependencies between them. That is absolutely
not acceptable, in the same way that it is unacceptable to have such
dependencies between Microservices. The loose coupling between Bounded
Contexts can be achieved using Context Maps, like those described in
Chapter 6, “Mapping, Failing, and Succeeding—Choose Two.” Figure 8.3
indicates the formation of Published Languages among the contexts.
Moreover, the related events might be communicated across contexts using an
asynchronous messaging mechanism, which is practical even in a Monolithic
solution, but a lightweight choice rather than heavyweight component.
    Inside each of the five Bounded Context modules are internal modules
specific to the respective Ubiquitous Language. Each internal module shown
encompasses cohesive model components, with no dependencies on other
modules, or perhaps acyclic ones.
    Over time, it is observed that two of the major modules, Risk and Rate,
have a tendency to change at a pace that is significantly faster than the rate of
change for the other three modules; the Risk and Rate modules also changes in
ways that are different from each other. As a result of this observation, the
teams determine that it would be best to split the Risk and Rate modules off
into two independent Microservices. Figure 8.4 shows the outcome. The
solution has now become three outer containers, which have a similar or
identical nature as the original Monolith container. Possibly each is a Docker
container, and each of those might have a respective Kubernetes Pod
containing it.
Figure 8.4 A Monolith container and two Microservice containers with
five total Bounded Contexts.


    The three separate containers have a network in between them, which
introduces the challenges associated with distributed systems. Even so, if
care was taken early on in the process of creating the original Monolithic
architecture, having a messaging mechanism between modularized contexts
should have forced each message publisher and subscriber to design around
concerns related to nondeterministic latency, unsequenced order, and
multiplicity of deliveries. As previously stated, the original introduction of a
messaging mechanism for the Monolith could be lightweight, but now this
would be replaced with a more robust mechanism. There will likely be some
challenges beyond these when a cloud network and other infrastructure are
involved, but they should not be major surprises—unlike when networks are
perceived as a “free lunch.”
    All of the aforementioned rate-of-change and nondeterministic messaging
drivers demonstrate that the system architecture serves a purpose, rather than
the system becoming the host of an architecture that meets the desires and
curiosities of its architects.


REST Request–Response
The REST architecture style and pattern supports requests and responses
generated during the exchange of application resources. The exchanges of
application state generally use non-native representations (e.g., digital data is
rendered in a text-based format). The industry-standard implementation of
REST is HTTP, which is not only a network transport protocol but also a
protocol for exchanging and modifying information. HTTP even supports
application workflows by means of hypermedia, meaning that links to related
data are embedded in the resource exchanges. The requests are made using
verb-based methods, four of which are considered the bare minimum: POST,
GET, PUT, and DELETE. These methods are meant to operate on full entity-
based resources.
    REST is most often used for client–server communication, such as
between a browser and a server. REST is often considered useful only for
Create-Read-Update-Delete (CRUD) applications, but it is actually far more
versatile. For example, this architecture style can be used to provide
integration between Bounded Contexts. This chapter discusses the browser-
to-server use case. Chapter 9 focuses on integration between Bounded
Contexts.
    Although only four methods are considered the minimum, as mentioned
earlier and shown in Table 8.2, the authors promote the use of the fifth verb
method, PATCH. This method supports partial updates—which allow for
pinpointing the specific changes made to an entity-based resource. With
PATCH, the CRUD acronym is extended to CRUUD; there is now a second
Update option that is implemented for partial entity changes only.
Table 8.2 Including PATCH for Partial Updates Forms CRUUD Rather
Than CRUD
POST                         Create
GET                          Read
PUT                          Update
PATCH                        Update, Partial
DELETE                       Delete


    In a PUT-based update, the intention is to replace the entire entity state.
When doing so, if only a small portion of the entity is actually modified, it is
difficult for the server-side application to determine what specific update
occurred. If the use case implementation is to produce an event-based
outcome, it’s overly complicated to identify what the fine-grained event
should be. This results in events being very coarse-grained. When the entire
state of the entity is packed into a single event, and that event is named, for
example, Application Updated, both everything and nothing are
communicated at the same time. The consumer of the event must perform some
sort of difference comparison based on an older state; otherwise, it might
apply the full state in a destructive or error-inducing way.
    As indicated by Figure 8.5, cumbersome state modification determination
is not the case when using PATCH. With a partial update, it is straightforward
to determine what the fine-grained event-based outcome is for the use case,
because it is clear exactly what changed. A key advantage of the architecture
shown in Figure 8.5 is that subsequent risk reassessment and rate
recalculation can be performed more quickly because only the limited amount
of data changed is precisely communicated by a specific event.
Figure 8.5 Performing CRUUD partial updates makes pinpointing event
types and their content simple.


   Note
   Something similar to PATCH can be accomplished using PUT, but the
   submitted entity must indicate what in the full payload has changed.
   Using PUT reduces the number of exposed URIs that are required by
   PATCH,7 and it may be considered a way to reduce the client’s
   awareness of additional URIs. Yet, if the team is employing the ideas of
   HATEOAS,8 there is no need for the client to hard-code access to
   resources.


7. PUT creates overhead: The full entity payload must cross the network twice; the client must
   understand how to indicate a partially changed entity; and the server must know how to dispatch by
   means of the indicator.

8. Hypertext As The Engine Of Application State (HATEOAS): This acronym, which many don’t know
   how to pronounce, represents the idea that once a client uses GET on a top-level, “minted” URI, all
   other resources are available through links provided in the response payload. This continually guides
   the client through everything the service/application makes available to that client.
Chapter 9 discusses how REST supports message- and event-driven
architectures.



Quality Attributes
The foundation architecture includes quality attributes. Among the many
possible quality attributes, we have chosen to discuss here a subset that we
consider to be the most salient: Security, Privacy, Performance, Scalability,
Resilience, and Complexity. The sections that follow discuss the trade-offs
involved in each of these.

  Note
  Readers interested in learning more about addressing quality attributes
  can refer to Continuous Architecture in Practice [Continuous-
  Architecture], a book in the Vaughn Vernon Signature Series.



Security
Nowadays, it is difficult to imagine a company not handling at least a part of
its business activities using online technologies. Exposing the business
enterprise to even partially open access can be dangerous, though. Whether it
relies on a publicly accessible website, HTTP APIs, or diverse integration
endpoints with partners reaching in through private networks or VPNs, open
access poses multiple threats to business security.
    For example, data might be stolen or corrupted. General computing
resources running day-to-day operations might be infected with viruses and
compromised. There is also the possibility that various attacks and
infiltrations might require considerable time to detect, and might even go
unnoticed until severe damage is done. In the worst of cases, the damage
might bring the whole business down. Such potential threats can cause
security team members to “sleep with one eye open.”
    Consider one of the most devastating cyber-attacks ever [CyberAttack].
Within hours of its first appearance, the malware known as NotPetya wormed
its way beyond a small Ukrainian software business to countless devices
around the world. It paralyzed global shipping corporations, including FedEx,
TNT Express, and Maersk, for several weeks, causing more than $10 billion
in damages. Not every cyber-attack has such extensive penetration or such
dramatic consequences, but according to data collected by Juniper Research
[Juniper] and Forbes, cyber-crimes accounted for $2 trillion in losses in
2019 alone. Further, it is estimated that total losses could reach three times
that number sometime in 2021. The University of Maryland found recently that
a cyber-attack takes place every 39 seconds, while security firm McAfee
reported 480 new high-tech threats are introduced every minute. According to
one research reference, a large percentage of data breaches are caused by
application security problems, rather than by infrastructure [Verizon-SEC].
    That it is essential to develop systems with thoroughly designed security
features might be the understatement of a decade. Security must be a design
goal [Secure-By-Design] and it must be complete [Agile-SEC]. Otherwise, a
breach of business assets might lead to extreme financial losses and damage
to a firm’s reputation via headline news. Far too often, security is
implemented or strengthened only as an afterthought, leading to exposure of
the system to would-be attackers through unknown gaps.
    Note that Microservices have different attack surfaces that can make
threats more serious due to the myriad opportunities for exploiting them.
These opportunities are generally due to the services’ distributed state,
network access, and distributed security mechanisms. A Monolithic
architecture can use an in-process security context that is naturally available
to the whole application. In contrast, because Microservices are composed of
multiple distributed services, the security context has to be passed from one
service to another.
    The most prominent example of inter-service security dependencies is
seen with establishing and verifying user identity. In a Monolithic system,
user identity can be established once when a user signs in, and remains
available to every module until the user finally signs out. When architecting a
Microservice-based system, it is inconceivable that users be required to sign
in to every service that is required to fulfill the business system’s operations.
    When working within the constraints of a Microservices architecture, it
can be quite challenging to correctly implement viable security. This leads to
legitimate fears of getting it wrong amidst the challenges and unknowns
related to which aspects might be vulnerable. Yet, companies have a wealth
of industry standards and tools on which they can rely. Modern application
developers must implement at least two aspects of security:

     Authentication: The process of verifying the identity of a human or
     another software component attempting to access a Monolith or
     Microservice. The main goal is to verify the user’s credentials, such as
     a user identity and password, or a secret key that provides access to an
     API. Many different kinds of authentication protocols exist, but the most
     commonly used is OpenID Connect, which employs Access Tokens
     (JWT) as proof of authentication.
     Authorization: The process of verifying that the authenticated user is
     allowed to perform a requested operation in a specific business context
     and on specific data. Most of the time, this involves a combination of
     role-based security along with associated access control lists (ACLs) or
     permissions, which support fine-grained authorization. The former
     grants broad permission for legitimate users to access certain high-level
     business functionality. The latter grants authentic users authorized access
     to specific operations on specialized components by ensuring each plays
     the necessary user role and has the required permissions to do so.

    Modern authentication and authorization protocols rely heavily on the use
of security access and bearer tokens, and system security architectures should
require tokens to be included in specific HTTP, RPC, and messaging requests.
Access/bearer tokens are highly secure and are retrieved through
authentication. A token carries enough information to prove user authenticity
and authority to use a given service offering. Tokens might expire after a
standard time frame but can be renewed through regeneration. The
regeneration ensures that appropriate access is still available to the user
while preventing attackers from breaking the token’s secret encoding by
limiting its lifetime. That’s accomplished by making the security mechanisms’
cryptography a moving target.
    The following practices can be incorporated very early on in the
development process to design systems with security as a central concern:

     Design for security: Security must not be an afterthought, as that
     lackadaisical approach results in designs that are brittle, are fragile, and
     lack optimal security.
     Use HTTPS by default: Transport Layer Security (TLS) is designed to
     ensure privacy and data integrity between computer applications.
     HTTPS requires a certificate. Certificates can be generated through a
     cloud provider. A certificate grants permissions to use encrypted
     communication via the Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), and also
     authenticates the identity of the certificate’s holder.
     Encrypt and protect secrets: Applications will likely have secrets that
     they use for communication. These secrets might be an API key, or a
     client secret, or credentials for basic authentication. All of these secrets
     should be encrypted and should be stored and managed by third-party
     cloud services. The Azure Key Vault is one example of a key manager.
     Security checks as part of the deployment pipeline9: Static
     Application Security Testing (SAST) tools are designed to analyze
     source code or compiled versions of code to help find security flaws.
     Proactively use these SAST tools to uncover flaws through invaluable,
     immediate feedback; don’t rely on late discovery of vulnerabilities.
     9. These techniques are helpful and good to use, but tools are lacking, which can make it
        challenging to accomplish the intended aims fully. SAST reveals only limited types of security
        flaws. Thus, it is necessary to perform a number of other security tests, both automated and
        manual.

     Don’t create your own security mechanisms or crypto code: Not
     everyone is a security expert. Rely on external tools and libraries that
     are battle tested through use by many thousands of developers, systems,
     and individual services.

    There are many other points to consider when implementing systems and
individual services, whether using Monoliths, Microservices, or both
together. Taking into account the points outlined here will certainly contribute
to improved security. The follow-on book provides detailed information on
architecting and implementing security.


Privacy
Disk storage has become very inexpensive. That being so, many businesses
desire to capture and store as much information as possible, even when that
information has undetermined value and may potentially be discarded later.
Data has become known as the most valuable business asset, so incurring the
limited expense of storing data, even though it potentially has no value seems,
worthwhile. Useful knowledge about customers, competitors, and markets can
be gained through crunching huge amounts of data by means of machine
learning (ML) algorithms that yield opportunities to transform data into
business intelligence. In this effort, businesses always collect some data that
could be used to derive information about individual humans. Although
potentially valuable, care must be taken when storing and processing such
personal information.
    Storing copious amounts of data about individuals can be a double-edged
sword. One downside is that snatching vast amounts of personal information,
or even small amounts of high-value personal information, is often the aim of
those who launch security attacks. Indeed, theft of sensitive data is one of the
greatest motivations of malicious individuals. One can cite many examples of
credit card numbers being stolen, even from tech giants such as Apple.
Storing the bare minimum of data required for a business to operate
eliminates this security threat, since it reduces the business’s value as a target.
    In some countries, governmental policies define how personal data can be
collected, stored, and used. The most well-known policy is the “General Data
Protection Regulation’’ [GDPR]. Its primary aim is to give individuals
control over their personal data. GDPR guarantees individuals the right to
erase any of their personal data, such as their email address, government-
issued identity, IP address, name, street address, date of birth, age, and
gender. This law is aimed at all businesses operating within the territories of
countries that belong to the European Union (EU), but other personal data
protection policies have been established in other countries outside the EU. In
all such cases, businesses functioning within the jurisdiction of the policies
must comply if they want to operate within those markets.
    Figure 8.6 illustrates how events that must reference privacy data can do
so from a distance, so that the events remain unchanged and the privacy data
exists only until it must be deleted.
Figure 8.6 Store the bare minimum of anonymized and separated
private data that can be deleted.


   In addition to the elements illustrated in Figure 8.6, additional procedures
can be considered that will save a lot of work when taking into account data
related to personal privacy. Consider the following as the minimum steps
needed:

     Store the bare minimum of private data. The less data that is stored
     that could be personally identifiable, the less work the business must
     undertake to comply with privacy protection policies, such as GDPR.
     Individuals within the EU territory can at any time request that their
     personal data be deleted, and businesses are required to comply. This
     reduces the threat that those individuals’ sensitive data will be stolen.
     Involve the legal team. Work with the legal team on privacy
     requirements and understand the privacy policy under which users will
     be signing up.
     Understand the purpose. Make sure the purpose of storing every piece
     of data is well understood.
     Have a retention plan. Ensure there is a well-defined data retention
     policy and implement it.
     Know which data is identifiable and destroyable. There must be an
     established way to find and delete all privacy data relating to a specific
     individual on demand, per GDPR requirements.
     Anonymize and separate private data. Some data cannot be easily
     deleted, or it might be necessary to retain for legal, auditing, or
     historical reasons. When using Event Sourcing, for example, some
     Domain Events might tend to contain user information that is protected
     by a private data protection policy. In such cases, it is advisable to
     design data privacy as an application feature rather than considering it to
     be a patch. All personal data that is obligatory to store for a long time
     must be anonymized, and no personal information can be derived from
     what is anonymized. To correlate anonymized data with streaming data,
     such as Domain Events, replace the actual user personal data with a
     global unique identity, such as a universally unique identifier (UUID)
     token. The unique identity points to a highly secure storage record. All
     records holding private data can then be scrubbed upon request. It might
     be that the unique identity will continue to exist, but will point to data
     devoid of sensitive information. All that remains is data without any
     meaningful user information.

    People everywhere are demanding freedom from uninvited intrusion and
surveillance. Systems should be designed for privacy, even in countries, such
as the United States, where privacy laws are a tough sell [WP-Privacy]. This
is even more so the case when US and other non-EU businesses expect to
succeed in markets beyond their national borders.
    Transparency in how businesses collect, manage, and protect private data
is vital to building trust and accountability with customers and partners who
expect privacy. Unfortunately, many companies have learned the importance
of privacy the hard way. Ensuring their data privacy demonstrates that the
company is operating in the best interests of its customers. To be successful in
that endeavor, data protection processes and procedures must be considered
fundamental to the design of systems architectures.


Performance
The most salient aspect of performance is latency. With Microservices, the
fact that the physical network is involved in the communication between
services increases latency. Marshalling and unmarshalling data as well as
sending bytes over the network takes time. The speed of light is very fast. No
matter how quickly data is transmitted, relatively short distances require time
for light to travel over a fiber network. Light travels at top speed in a vacuum,
and fiber-optic networks aren’t vacuums. Consider the example round-trip
times in Table 8.3 [Fiber-Latency].


Table 8.3 Routes on Optical Fiber with Round-Trip Times in
Milliseconds
Route                                       Optical Fiber Round-Trip
New York to San Francisco                                  42 ms
New York to London                                         56 ms
New York to Sydney                                        160 ms


   Further, a few or several milliseconds (i.e., less than one second) at
observable human scale are indivisible and thus seemingly nonexistent.
Computers operate on a much tighter time scale, one characterized by
extremely small fractions of a second. It’s common to measure computer
operations in nanoseconds, where one nanosecond is one billionth of a
second. To better visualize how latency affects processing, we can express
computing time at the human scale. Brendan Gregg, in the book Systems
Performance: Enterprise and the Cloud [SysPerformance], scaled the
relative time of various computer operations by making a single CPU cycle
equivalent to one second. As Table 8.4 illustrates, the results were stunning.


Table 8.4 Computing Time with Nanoseconds Scaled Up to Seconds
Event                                         Actual        Human-Scale
                                             Latency          Latency
One CPU cycle                                    0.4 ns            1 s
Level 1 cache access                             0.9 ns            2 s
Level 2 cache access                             2.8 ns            7 s
Level 3 cache access                             28 ns             1 min
Event                                         Actual      Human-Scale
                                             Latency        Latency
Main memory access (DDR DIMM)                 ~100 ns          4 min
Intel Optane memory access                     <10 μs          7 hr
NVMe SSD I/O                                   ~25 μs         17 hr
SSD I/O                                    50–150 μs      1.5–4 days
Rotational disk I/O                           1–10 ms       1–9 months
Internet operation: San Francisco to            65 ms          5 years
New York City
Internet operation: San Francisco to           141 ms         11 years
Hong Kong


    Network operations, shown at the bottom of Table 8.4, when expressed as
human-scale latencies, require years to complete. That’s because there are
many billions of nanoseconds in 65 milliseconds and 141 milliseconds.
    It is inaccurate to say that the latency of every network operation between
Microservices accumulates linearly. Assuming asynchronous messaging is
used for at least some inter-service communications, all of those
asynchronous message requests run in parallel. With the publish–subscribe
(i.e., fanout) pattern, one message sent by a producer can be delivered to a
virtually unlimited number of consumers.
    Latency can also be mitigated by services keeping copies of data from
other services locally, thereby eliminating the network operations needed to
constantly retrieve that specific data. Yet, when non-owners cache data, other
problems can occur, such as when the data becomes stale. What happens
when the service that caches non-owned data acts upon that data after it
becomes stale? It depends on the data in use and whether the service contracts
are based on accuracy, assuming someone realizes the need to think of that
point during contract negotiations. Some service contracts can be fuzzy,
whereas others must be precise. Problems can be avoided by evicting stale
data, refreshing it on a just-in-time basis, or not caching data that has a high
sensitivity to time and service demands for the sake of accuracy.
    Total latency is reduced as more operations execute simultaneously.
Executing in parallel all operations that are required to solve a given problem
yields the completed result in the amount of time required for the slowest of
all those parallel operations. The Monolith has no network latency, other than
what’s required for database access and a possible messaging mechanism,
because all normal operations are in-process. Even in a perfectly
parallelizable world, Monoliths will still be faster and have higher
throughput, especially for workloads that cannot be easily scaled to multiple
machines.
    Additionally, performance is closely related to scalability. One affects the
other in an opposite way; that is, they have an inverse relationship.


Scalability
Before delving into the scalability property of Monolithic and Microservices
architectures, it’s helpful to consider the potential demand on computing
resources. Given:

     Both a Monolith and a set of Microservices are assigned the same work
     Each Microservice is:
     – Run in a Docker container
     – Orchestrated by cluster management tools such as Kubernetes
     – Uses log aggregation and monitoring

    Even without digging through and surfacing exact figures, it is safe to
assume that the way Microservices are run will require some processing
overhead not required by a Monolith. Despite that, Microservices are capable
of providing smarter resource usage. Because the cluster manager can
allocate specific computing resources based on demand for use of specific
components, the overall resource utilization can be much lower for the
Microservices that are less heavily used. With Monoliths, the opposite is true.
Because a small portion of the overall Monolith code requires the greatest
number of resources, demand-based scaling carries a disproportionate cost.
Thus, Microservices can independently scale the resource-intensive parts of
the code, while every instance of a Monolith must have access to the peak
number of resources demanded by its most resource-intensive part.
    Although Monoliths are not easily scaled, there are ways around that
limitation. As explained in the section “Serverless and Function as a
Service,” in Chapter 9, it’s possible to deploy a cloud-native modular
Monolith as serverless10 and reap all the benefits of infinite scale for the least
possible financial cost on the cloud. Although that approach isn’t free, it is
attainable. The system must be well designed and meet a few cloud-native
design requirements. In fact, running both modular Monoliths and
Microservices in a serverless fashion yields equal benefits.
10. We don’t mean to suggest that a legacy Big Ball of Mud would be deployed as a serverless entity.
    The Monolith spoken of here would be designed to be serverless, with a cloud-native nature. The key
    benefit of deploying a well-designed Monolith as serverless is the decreased operational complexity,
    which would be incurred if the system were instead designed as hundreds of small Function as a
    Service (FaaS) components. There will be some size limitations to serverless solutions, however. At
    the time of this book’s writing, an AWS Lambda must run in 10 GB of memory. This is a lesser
    limitation than the previous 3 GB.



Resilience: Reliability and Fault Tolerance
Resilience is a software quality that is resistant to cascading failure when
small components inevitably fail. There is a big difference between a
modularized Monolith and a Big Ball of Mud Monolith. The modularized
Monolith can be designed with reliability and fault tolerance in mind,
similarly to Microservices, but with less technical overhead. Running in the
same process doesn’t require complex mechanisms to guarantee reliability. In
contrast, the Big Ball of Mud Monolith is unreliable because testing the
application thoroughly is very difficult, and quality tests rarely exist. The lack
of extensive tests means that bugs can easily make their way into production.
It is generally quite difficult to augment a Big Ball of Mud Monolith with
effective reliability measures as an afterthought. These points have been well
established, and obviously this book’s concern and focus is on architecting,
designing, and developing modularized Monoliths.
     Microservices are also difficult to test extensively because each
individual service might interact with and/or depend on functionality
provided by other Microservices. Making these work well together by testing
their collaboration and integration is a challenging undertaking. It’s not
unusual for defects to be found in production rather than during testing.
    As previously established, operations that occur inside modular Monoliths
are in-process and direct. Any network failure cannot impede such operations
because the network is not involved. Even if network operations are
guaranteed to be 99.9%11 reliable, 0.1% of the time there will be issues. An
uptime Service Level Agreement (SLA) of 99.9% means that the system will
be down 8.77 hours per year, 43.83 minutes per month, 10.08 minutes per
week, and 1.44 minutes every single day. It should be abundantly obvious that
the more nines in the availability criterion, the better. Nonetheless, a full-day
outage that falls outside the SLA, as an unexpected anomaly, will certainly
have the greatest impact of all. Using the network less rather than more has a
very big advantage.
11. Availability is usually expressed as a percentage of uptime in a given year within the SLA. It is
    usually expressed as “N nines,” such as 99.9%, or “three nines”
    (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High_availability).

   Even if a modularized Monolith has much to offer, unlike Microservices, it
cannot easily guarantee fault isolation. If an unhandled exception occurs in
one module—or worse yet, an unrecoverable exception such as an out-of-
memory condition due to a memory leak—it can potentially crash the whole
process that is running all services. With Microservices, just one service is
lost when it crashes, but only if attention is given to the measures noted in the
section “Mental Preparation with Resolve,” in Chapter 11, “Monolith to
Microservices Like a Boss.” As stated there, failure supervision can prevent
widespread system crashes.
   Microservices should be designed with network and other kinds of failure
in mind. When a service experiences a network outage or a full crash, the
resource manager (e.g., Kubernetes or a cloud-provider–specific program)
can rapidly bring the service down and spin up another service instance.
   Another way to ensure fault tolerance is through the purposeful creation of
chaos as a test. Netflix developed a test tool, ChaosMonkey, which randomly
terminates a service so as to ensure that fault tolerance is properly achieved
[ChaosMonkey]. The assertions for proper recovery include (1) a new
service instance replaces the downed service; (2) network calls are rerouted;
and (3) the overall architecture is reliable and continues to run as expected.


Complexity
Whole-system complexity embodies a number of challenging aspects. It stems
from the complexity of deployments, the complexity of code under
development, the complexity of running the whole system in production, and
the ongoing challenge of monitoring and observing the system. From the
perspective of the codebase, the Monolith application code is often kept in a
single repository, known as a mono-repo. The inter-module communication
between services is easier to trace with this setup, and with the help of an
integrated development environment (IDE) static analysis, the processing
flow can be quickly discovered.
    We don’t mean to imply that Microservices cannot make use of the mono-
repo12 feature. On a practical level, though, Microservices may be built by
mixing languages and technologies, which increases the overall system
complexity. Additionally, dealing with different libraries and frameworks,
and different versions of each across services, is quite complex.
12. A mono-repo is a single source code revision tracking repository that holds all the source code for
    potentially many projects in a large system. For more information, see
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monorepo.

    Deployments and auto-scalability of the system can be very complex as
well. Monoliths are simple to deploy because they are self-contained and the
company likely has decades of accumulated experience in deploying business
software to a single machine. Scaling Monoliths is a matter of spinning up a
new instance of one deployment unit. By comparison, deployments and
scalability are much more complex with Microservices. Deployments to
different computer nodes can be quite complex to coordinate, and tools used
for scaling, such as Kubernetes, require real expertise.
    And then there’s the challenge of running the system in production. Logging
and monitoring may be less or more complex depending on the use of
Monoliths or Microservices, respectively. When running a Monolith in
production, there is generally only one or a few log files to search and
inspect, making debugging issues much less complex. It’s a different story
with Microservices: Tracking an issue might involve checking multiple, even
many, log files. Not only is it necessary to find all the relevant log output, but
it’s also critical to aggregate and merge all of the logs in the correct order of
operational occurrence. Often, tools such as Elasticsearch are used to
aggregate and find all the relevant log output across services.
Applying the Tools
Architecture decisions should not be pushed abruptly into concrete. It might
be too early, and the team might not know enough, for a sound decision to be
made on any given architectural concern. It’s never wrong to wait until the
decision is actually required, rather than making decisions based on
speculation. Making a decision without a confirmation of need is
irresponsible and potentially harmful. Recall that all decisions should be
made at the last responsible moment.
    Part IV of this book demonstrates the application of the specific
architectures and patterns discussed in Part III.


                                 Modules First

   A fair question is, would it make sense to promote the internal modules
   (Intake, Processing, Policy, Renewals) to top-level modules of their
   own? That’s a possibility to consider in time, and there might be
   advantages to doing so. But let’s fall back on the earlier advice that in
   essence asserts, “The team doesn’t yet have enough information to
   accept that decision.” It would be irresponsible to go there now. Future
   conversations might lead in that direction, but jumping to a conclusion
   now doesn’t make sense.




Summary
This chapter began by reviewing some of the many definitions of software
architecture, then proposed a fresh definition with new insights. A number of
architectural styles and architecture patterns were considered that specifically
support events-first systems. In particular, the Ports and Adapters (Hexagonal)
architectural style can be adapted to high-level architecture decisions,
supporting variety at lower levels. A significant benefit of Ports and Adapters
is its support for just-in-time decisions. It is a sound and versatile architecture
on which to base additional architecture decisions and their respective
implementations. In summary, the chapter made the following key points:

     Ports and Adapters can be expressed in several ways, including Service
     Layer with Transaction Scripts; Service Layer with a Domain Model;
     compressed layers with a Domain Model of Actors; and Functional
     Core with Imperative Shell.
     Modularization is key to adaptive architectures, where Monoliths lead
     to a blend of both Monolith and Microservices, or to entirely
     Microservices, depending on the purpose served.
     The REST architecture is often used for limited CRUD applications, but
     can be extended to domain-driven and event-driven architectures by
     using CRUUD-based partial updates.
     The purpose of architecture decisions is to achieve quality attribute
     requirements, such as flexibility, security, privacy, performance,
     scalability, and resilience, while reducing complexity.
     Not every architecture style and pattern is suitable for all system and
     subsystem constraints.
     Some architecture decisions meant to address certain quality attributes
     can work against others, requiring trade-offs to be made.



References
[Agile-SEC] Laura Bell, Rich Smith, Michael Brunton-Spall, and Jim Bird.
Agile Application Security: Enabling Security in a Continuous Delivery
Pipeline. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2017.
[BBoM] http://laputan.org/mud/
[ChaosMonkey] https://github.com/netflix/chaosmonkey
[Continuous-Architecture] Murat Erder, Pierre Pureur, and Eoin Woods.
Continuous Architecture in Practice. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2021.
[CyberAttack] https://www.wired.com/story/notpetya-cyberattack-ukraine-
russia-code-crashed-the-world/
[Fiber-Latency] https://hpbn.co/primer-on-latency-and-bandwidth/
[GDPR] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Data_Protection_Regulation
[ISO 47010] ISO 47010; was IEEE Standard 1471;
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_1471
[PortsAdapters] https://alistair.cockburn.us/hexagonal-architecture/
[POSA1] Frank Buschmann, Regine Meunier, Hans Rohnert, Peter
Sommerlad, and Michael Stal. Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture
Volume 1: A System of Patterns. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 1996.
[Secure-By-Design] https://www.manning.com/books/secure-by-design
[Software Architecture in Practice] Len Bass, Paul Clements, and Rick
Kazman. Software Architecture in Practice, 3rd ed. Boston, MA: Addison-
Wesley, 2013.
[SOLID] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID
[SysPerformance] Brendan Gregg. Systems Performance: Enterprise and
the Cloud, 2nd ed. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2021.
[Verizon-SEC] https://enterprise.verizon.com/resources/reports/dbir/
[VLINGO-XOOM] https://vlingo.io
[WP-Privacy] Washington Post.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/paloma/the-cybersecurity-
202/2018/05/25/the-cybersecurity-202-why-a-privacy-law-like-gdpr-would-
be-a-tough-sell-in-the-u-s/5b07038b1b326b492dd07e83/
Chapter 9

Message- and Event-Driven
Architectures


A message-driven architecture is one that emphasizes sending and receiving
messages as playing a prominent role throughout the system. In general,
message-driven architectures have been chosen less often compared to
REpresentational State Transfer (REST) and remote procedure calls (RPC).
This is because REST and RPC seem more similar to general-purpose
programming language paradigms than does messaging; the former
approaches provide abstractions that give the impression of procedure calls
and method invocations, with which many programmers are already familiar.
    Yet, REST and RPC are brittle mechanisms in comparison to general-
purpose programming languages. It’s highly unlikely that a procedure call or
method invocation will fail due to brittle mechanisms within a programming
language. With the REST-over-HTTP and RPC approaches, it is very likely
that failures will occur due to network and remote service failures. When
failure does occur, the temporal coupling between one remote service and
another will tend to cause a complete failure of the client service. The more
remote services or subsystems that are involved in the given use case, the
worse the problem can become. As Leslie Lamport, a distributed systems
expert, described it:

   A distributed system is one that prevents you from working because
   of the failure of a machine that you had never heard of.
   That sort of cascading failure tends to be avoided when systems use
asynchronous messaging, because the requests and responses are all
temporally decoupled. Figure 9.1 highlights the relaxed temporal
dependencies across subsystems involved in a choreographed event-driven
process. To be clear, events capturing and communicating business interests
are (generally) a form of message, and message-driven processes are a
superset of event-driven processes.1




Figure 9.1 Event-driven choreography: events over a message bus
translated to commands.
1. Some use a strict definition of a message, specifying that it must be directly sent peer-to-peer from
   sender to receiver. They may also constrain events to only those sent via pub-sub. The authors hold
   the opinion that this is an overly limiting perspective. The next section discusses using poll-based
   REST as a means to read event logs. Although many consumers might read such a feed of events, it
   is not the same as the push model of pub-sub. Of course, anyone can hold an opinion, so neither view
   is necessarily wrong.



                    Choreographed and Orchestrated Processes

    These are two primary styles of process management: choreography
    and orchestration. Choreography comprises a decentralized style of
    process where, for example, events are published using messaging,
    and each subsystem context must determine whether the event is
    relevant to it, and if so, apply the event to its state. One or more
    events emitted in response by the subsystem in context will be
    relevant to one or more other subsystems. Choreography is relatively
    simple to understand and is most practical when processes have only
    a few steps. One disadvantage of this process management style is that
    when the process stalls somewhere, it can be difficult to determine
    where it went wrong and why. Another disadvantage is that event
    dependencies become coupled to subsystems that don’t own the
    events, and must be subjectively interpreted and applied to their own
    purpose. And, of course, dependencies on events can become quite
    tangled as system and process complexities increase.
        Orchestration, in contrast, features a centralized style of process
    manager (i.e., Saga) that receives events emitted by any number of
    subsystems involved in the process, and then creates command
    messages that drive subsequent steps of the process to relevant
    subsystems. The advantages of using orchestrated processes include
    reduced dependencies across subsystems involved in a given process
    because the orchestrator takes on the entire responsibility of
    translating from event to command. The orchestrator can be a central
    point of failure, but that’s generally not a significant concern given the
    scalability and failover strategies common to well-designed
    distributed systems. Typically, an orchestrator is designed and
    implemented by the team most interested in its ultimate outcome. They
    might become a blocker when changes are made across subsystems
   involved in the process that must be applied inside the orchestrator.
   An orchestrator might be too complex for controlling processes with
   less complexity. The orchestrator must not become a dungeon for
   business logic; it must be used only to drive steps of the process.


    The overall system works by means of the events that occur in a given
subsystem being made available to other subsystems via a message bus.
Message-driven architecture is also a Reactive architecture because the
components, as seen in Figure 9.1, are passive until message stimuli occur,
and then the appropriate components react to those stimuli. In contrast,
imperative code drives responses by means of REST and RPC procedure
calls or method invocations. Reactive is defined as having four primary
characteristics: responsive, resilient, elastic, and message-driven
[Reactive].
    In Figure 9.1, the six steps executed across three subsystem contexts
(Underwriting, Risk, and Rate) collectively provide the calculated rate
needed to quote a policy premium for an applicant over the Web. The
Underwriting subsystem context is blissfully unaware of the details involved
in reaching the result. At some time in the future after the Application
Submitted event occurs, Underwriting will be informed that a quotable
premium rate is available.
    The desired Underwriting outcome could require 2 seconds or 12
seconds to achieve. There is no failure in Underwriting because of the
infrastructure being preconfigured to time out after 5 seconds, which would
hold sway over the response to a REST request. It’s not that 12 seconds is an
acceptable long-term Service Level Agreement (SLA)—but it is perfectly
acceptable in the face of full failure of the Risk or Rate subsystem, followed
by full recovery on a different cloud infrastructure, and possibly even in
another region. Neither ordinary REST nor RPC would survive that pathway.
    Note a detail of the process in Figure 9.1 that’s due to the nature of
choreography: Events sent on the message bus must be translated by the
receiver so that the internal stimulus is cast in the language of the consuming
context. The event Application Submitted means nothing to Risk—but it does
after it’s translated to Assess Risk. The same goes for Risk Assessed in the
context of Rate: When translated to Calculate Rate, it makes perfect sense
because a rate can be determined from an Assessment Result that’s available
as part of the Risk Assessed event.
    While message bus communication is typically used for collaborative
computing across subsystem contexts, it’s not a practical fit for message-
driven communication within a single subsystem context. As Figure 9.2
illustrates, the individual components within a subsystem context might be
implemented as actors that function in an Actor Model runtime. Every actor
component is message-driven, such that actors are Reactive. When one actor
wants another actor to do something, it sends a message to the other actor
that will be delivered asynchronously. Although each message delivery
executes asynchronously, the flow shown in Figure 9.2 functions in sequence
according to the step numbers.
Figure 9.2 Reactive architecture inside a subsystem context is achieved
by using the Actor Model.


    In Figure 9.2, every individual actor is represented by a circular element
(as opposed to rectangular ones that represent plain objects). The message
sending between actors can be different from that based on the message bus.
For example, steps 1 and 2 indicate that the Message Bridge actor, a driver
adapter, receives an Application Submitted event message from the message
bus and adapts it to a message sent on to the Risk Assessor actor. What
appears to be a normal method invocation is not one typically used in object-
to-object communication. This method invocation packs the intent of the
invocation into an object-based message that is enqueued in the Risk
Assessor actor’s mailbox. The assessRisk(facts) message will be
delivered as an actual method invocation on the Risk Assessor actor
implementation as soon as possible.
    The nature of the Actor Model ensures that all computer processors are
used all the time, making for highly efficient compute solutions that drive
down the monetary cost of operations on both on-premises and cloud
infrastructures. This is accomplished by the Actor Model runtime using the
compute node’s limited number of threads, along with scheduling and
dispatching that are performed cooperatively by all actors. The limited
number of threads must be distributed across any number of actors. Each
actor that has an available message in its mailbox is scheduled to run when a
thread becomes available for it, and will (typically) handle only a single
pending message while using that thread. Any remaining messages available
to the actor are scheduled to be delivered after the current one completes.
    This highlights another benefit of the Actor Model. Every actor will
handle only one message at a time, meaning that actors are individually
single-threaded, although many actors handling messages simultaneously
over a short period of time mean that the overall runtime model is massively
concurrent. The fact that each actor is single-threaded means that it need not
protect its internal state data from use by two or more threads entering
simultaneously. State protection is further strengthened by the rule that actors
must not ever share the mutable internal state.
    The types of use cases highlighted in Figure 9.2 and throughout this book
are specifically supported by VLINGO XOOM, a free and open source
(FOSS) Reactive toolset based on the Actor Model for Monolith and
Microservices architectures [VLINGO-XOOM].



Message- and Event-Based REST
As discussed in Chapter 8, REST can be used for integration across Bounded
Contexts, but how does REST support message- and event-driven
architectures? Although most people don’t think of REST in terms of
messaging, that’s actually its specialty. The HTTP specification refers to
every request and response in terms of messages. Thus, REST is by
definition a message-driven architecture, and events are a distinct type of
message. The trick is to turn the requests for event consumption into
asynchronous operations. It’s these techniques that are not as well known as
are typical Web application patterns.
    But why would anyone want to serve messages, and specifically events,
to consumers by means of REST? A few reasons include that the Web is
highly scalable, developers everywhere understand the ideas behind the Web
and HTTP, and serving static content is quite fast (and cacheable on the
server and client). Developers in general tend to be unfamiliar with message
buses and brokers, or at least less familiar with them than with HTTP. Being
uncomfortable with message buses and brokers should not prevent the use of
message- and event-driven architectures.


Event Logs
As a basic rule of thumb, every event persistently stored must be immutable;
that is, it must never be changed. A second and related rule is that if an event
is in error, rather than patching its persistent state, there must be a
compensating event that is persisted later and eventually “fixes” the data in
error when consumers apply the event over top of the data that they produced
before the error was known. In other words, if consumers have already
consumed an event in error, changing it later will not help those consumers.
They should never start over and apply all events again from the beginning—
that would likely lead to disaster. Carry these rules forward when
considering the following points.
    As events occur in a subsystem context, they should be collected
persistently in the order in which they occurred. From the sequence of
events, a series of event logs might be created, either virtually or physically.
Figure 9.3 provides a depiction of these logs.




Figure 9.3 Event logs starting with 1–20 and continuing to nearly 1
million total events.


    This can be done by using a formal database (as opposed to a flat file or
directories of flat files) that supports a reliable sequence number that is
assigned to each event and then incremented. Relational databases support
this process through a feature known as sequences or with another feature
called auto-increment columns. The event logs are created logically by
determining a maximum number of entries in the individual logs and then
creating a virtual moving window to serve each log dynamically.
    Some negative trade-offs with a relational database include somewhat
slow event log serving compared to purpose-built log databases. If a vast
number of events is stored, the disk space used to maintain them over the
long term could be problematic; however, if the system uses cloud-enabled
relational databases, that concern will likely never become an actual
problem. Even so, it might make sense to create a virtual array of tables,
where each table will hold only a maximum number of events and excess
events will then spill over into the next logical table. There is also the risk
that users might be tempted to modify an existing event in the database,
which must never be done. Because the logs are records of past occurrences,
it would be incorrect to patch an event.
    A good relational database and a developer with advanced skills in its
use can not only support many millions of database rows in a single table,
but also enable fast retrieval by means of correct key indexing. Although this
statement is true, the viewpoint it expresses assumes that many millions of
rows in a single database table are enough. In reality, some systems produce
many millions or even billions of events every single day. If a relational
database still makes sense under these conditions, a virtual array of tables
can help. It might also seem obvious that such a system could use a highly
scalable NoSQL database instead. That would also solve a set of problems,
but it wouldn’t work well to insert new events using a monotonically
increasing integer key. Doing so generally greatly hampers the
sharding/hashing algorithms employed by such databases.
    There are other ways to handle this situation. As pictured in Figure 9.3,
maintaining event logs can be accomplished by writing a series of flat files
to a normal disk that are servable REST resources. After each log file is
written, the content would be available as static content. The static flat files
can be replicated to a few or many servers, just as would be done when
scaling typical website content.
    A possible downside to this approach is the need for a flat-file structure
that specifies not only how many events should be written into a single log
flat file, but also how the files will be laid out on disk. Operating systems
place limits on the number of files that can be held in a given directory. Even
when a system is capable of storing a very great number of files in a single
directory, these limits will slow access. An approach similar to the
hierarchies used by email servers can make flat file access very fast.
    The positive trade-off with a relational database is that the sheer number
of flat files and directory layouts will offer little temptation to patch the
contents. If that is not a deterrent, then secure access to the filesystem can be.
    Whatever choice is made, there are several ways for the events to be
consumed using REST, as described in the sections that follow.
Subscriber Polling
Subscribers can use simple polling of the log resources:
GET   /streams/{name}/1-20
GET   /streams/{name}/21-40
GET   /streams/{name}/41-60
GET   /streams/{name}/61-80
GET   /streams/{name}/81-100
GET   /streams/{name}/101-120

In this example, the {name} placeholder is replaced with the name of the
stream being read, such as underwriting or, even more generally, policy-
marketplace. The former would serve only Underwriting-specific events,
while the latter would provide a full stream of all events over the various
subsystem contexts, including Underwriting, Risk, and Rate.
    The disadvantage is that if subscriber polling is not implemented
correctly, clients will constantly request the next log, which is not yet
available, and those requests could cause a lot of network traffic. Requests
must also be limited to reasonably sized logs. This can be enforced by
making the resource identities fixed ranges, with the next and previous logs
referenced by hypermedia links in response headers. Caching techniques and
timed read intervals can be established using response header metadata to
smooth out request swamping. Additionally, even a partial log can be served
by using a generic minted URI:
GET /streams/policy-marketplace/current

The current resource is the means to consume the most recent event log
resource. If the current log—for example, 101-120—is beyond the previous
event logs that have not yet been read by a given client, an HTTP response
header will provide the link to navigate to the previous log, which would be
read and applied before the current log. This backward navigation would
continue until the client’s most recently applied event is read. From that
point, all events not yet applied are applied, which would include navigating
forward until the current log is reached. Once again, caching plays into this
approach by preventing pre-read but not yet applied logs from being reread
from the server, even when they are explicitly requested by means of a
redundant GET operation. This is explained in more detail in Implementing
Domain-Driven Design [IDDD], and in our own follow-on book,
Implementing Strategic Monoliths and Microservices (Vernon & Jaskuła,
Addison-Wesley, forthcoming).


Server-Sent Events
Although Server-Sent Events (SSE) are well known as support for server-to-
browser event feeds, that is not the intended usage here. The problem with
browser usage is that not all browsers support the SSE specification. Even
so, SSE is a worthy integration option between the events producer and its
non-browser, services/applications clients that need to receive the events.
    The specification for SSE states that a client should request a long-lived
connection to the server for a subscription. Upon subscribing, the client may
specify the identifier of the last event that it successfully applied. In such a
case, the client would have previously been subscribed but disconnected at
some point within the stream:
Click here to view code image
GET /streams/policy-marketplace
…
Last-Event-ID: 102470

As implied by providing its current starting position, the client is responsible
for maintaining its current position in the stream.
    As a result of subscribing, the events available will stream from the
beginning or from the position of the Last-Event-ID and continue until the
client unsubscribes or otherwise disconnects. The following is the format
that is approved by the SSE specification, though actual applications might
contain more or fewer fields. Each event is followed by a blank line:
id: 102470
event: RiskAssessed
data: { “name” : “value”, … }

…
id: 102480
event: RateCalculated
data: { “name” : “value”, … }
…

    To unsubscribe from the stream, the client sends the following message:
Click here to view code image
DELETE /streams/policy-marketplace

When this message is sent, the subscription is terminated, the server sends a
200 OK response, and the server closes its end of the channel. After receiving
its 200 OK response, the client should also close the channel.



Event-Driven and Process Management
Earlier sections in this chapter clarified the ideas behind event-driven
process management where the focus is on choreographed processes.
Choreography requires the Bounded Contexts participating in a process to
understand the events from one or more other contexts, and to interpret those
events based on their local meaning. Here, the focus shifts to orchestration2
[Conductor], putting a central component in charge of driving the process
from start to finish.3
2. Netflix found it was harder to scale choreography-based processes in the face of its growing business
   needs and complexities. A choreographed pub-sub model worked for the simplest of the flows, but
   quickly showed its limits. For that reason, Netflix has created its own orchestration framework called
   Conductor.

3. It is possible that a process might never end because ongoing streams of messages—whether events,
   commands, queries and their results, or something else—might never end. Here, start-to-finish
   processes are used for practical purposes, but be aware that there are no limitations imposed by this
   style.

    In Figure 9.4, the process manager named Application Premium Process
is responsible for driving the outcome of a fully constructed quote to an
applicant who has submitted an application, the steps for which are
described in the list that follows.
 1. The event ApplicationSubmitted has occurred as a result of the
    Aggregate type Application being created from the applicant’s
    submitted application document. For the sake of brevity, the
    Application instance creation is not shown. The process begins when
    the process manager sees the ApplicationSubmitted event.
 2. The ApplicationSubmitted event is translated to a command named
    AssessRisk and enqueued on the message bus.
 3. The AssessRisk command is delivered to the Risk Context, where it is
    dispatched to the Domain Service named RiskAssessor. Below the
    RiskAssessor are processing details (not shown in Figure 9.4).
 4. Once the risk has been assessed, the RiskAssessed event is emitted and
    enqueued on the message bus.
 5. The RiskAssessed event is delivered to the process manager.
 6. The RiskAssessed event is translated to the CalculateRate command
    and enqueued on the message bus.
 7. The CalculateRate command is delivered to the Rate Context, where it
    is dispatched to the Domain Service named RateCalculator. Below the
    RateCalculator are processing details (not shown in Figure 9.4).
 8. Once the rate has been calculated, the RateCalculated event is emitted
    and enqueued on the message bus.
 9. The RateCalculated event is delivered to the process manager.
10. The RateCalculated event is translated to the GenerateQuote command
    and dispatched locally and directly to the Domain Service named
    QuoteGenerator. The QuoteGenerator is responsible for interpreting the
    PremiumRates to QuoteLines and dispatched to the Aggregate named
    PremiumQuote (see Chapter 7, “Modeling Domain Concepts,” and
    Chapter 8, “Foundation Architecture,” for more details). When the final
    QuoteLine is recorded, the QuoteGenerated event is emitted and stored
    in the database.
11. Once an event is stored in the database, it can be enqueued on the
    message bus—and this is true for the QuoteGenerated event. In the case
    of the Application Premium Process, the receipt of the QuoteGenerated
    event marks the end of the process.
Figure 9.4 Orchestration: commands are sent on the bus to drive
process results.


    Examining Figure 9.4, it might appear that an attempt to enqueue events
and commands on the message bus could fail, causing the overall failure of
the process. Consider, however, that all of the events and the commands
translated from them are first persisted into a database, and then placed on
the message bus, sometimes repeatedly until this effort succeeds. This
establishes an at-least-once delivery contract. Steps 10 and 11 highlight the
persistence first, enqueuing second sequence. However, going to that level of
detail on all steps illustrated in Figure 9.4 would detract from the main flow
and obscure the main points that should be gleaned from the example.
    With orchestrated processes, the process manager is responsible for
driving the process. This generally places the process itself downstream, so
that the collaborating contexts do not need to know anything about the
process details, only how to perform their core responsibilities.
    In the preceding example, the Application Premium Process is housed in
the Underwriting Context. This need not be the case, however, because the
process might be deployed separately. Yet, by default it makes sense for the
process to be deployed along with the Bounded Context components that
require the process to be accomplished. This design choice has been made
for the Application Premium Process, which is placed within the
Underwriting Context. Such a design tends to reduce the complexity of the
overall process.
    The question remains: Are the Application Premium Process and the
contexts involved deployed as a Monolith or as separate Microservices?
The use of a message bus, as seen in Figure 9.4, might seem to imply a
Microservices architecture. That’s possible, but not necessarily so:

     The message bus might be provided inside a Monolith using lightweight
     messaging, such as with ZeroMQ.
     The teams might have decided that the Monolith should have used more
     reliable messaging middleware or a cloud-based message bus (or
     message log) such as RabbitMQ, Kafka, IBM MQ, implementations of
     JMS, AWS SNS, AWS Kinesis, Google Cloud Pub/Sub, or Azure
     Message Bus.4 Choose whatever works best for your project
     requirements and SLAs.
    4. The number of possible messaging mechanisms is too large to present an exhaustive list here.
       The options identified here are among some better known by the authors and are generally
       used extensively.

     The solution might require using a Microservices architecture, or a
     blend of Monoliths and Microservices. Reliable messaging
     mechanisms, whether cloud-based or on premises, are the sound
     choices for these situations.

   As discussed in Chapter 6, the use of a schema registry reduces the
complexity of cross-context dependencies and translations into and out of
various Published Languages, which is required of the Application Premium
Process. One such FOSS schema registry is provided with VLINGO XOOM
—namely, Schemata [VLINGO-XOOM].



Event Sourcing
It’s become customary for software developers to store objects in a
relational database. With a domain-driven approach, it’s generally a matter
of persisting the state of whole Aggregates that way. Tools called object-
relational mappers are available to help with this task. Of late, several
relational databases have innovated around storing objects that are serialized
as JSON, which is a good trade-off for addressing the common impedance5
of the competing forces of the object and relational models. For one thing, a
serialized JSON object can be queried in much the same way as relational
columns by means of specialized SQL extensions.
5. Many architects and developers are familiar with these impedances, so this chapter doesn’t offer
   exhaustive descriptions of them. They generally relate to the desire to structure an object for some
   modeling advantage, which then runs up against the limits of object-relational mapping tools and/or
   databases. In such cases, the object-relational mapping tools and databases win, and the object
   modeler loses.

    Yet, there is an alternative, rather radically different approach to object
persistence that emphasizes the opposite: Don’t store objects; store records
of their changes instead. This practice, known as Event Sourcing,6 requires
the records of changes to the Aggregate state to be captured in events.
6. There are more event-driven patterns than the ones described in this book. Extensive descriptions are
   provided in our follow-on book, Implementing Strategic Monoliths and Microservices (Vernon &
   Jaskuła, Addison-Wesley, forthcoming).

    It’s helpful to reference Figure 9.5 for the discussion that follows.
Figure 9.5 Event Sourcing is used to persist Aggregate state and to
reconstitute it.


    The ideas behind Event Sourcing are fairly simple. When a command
handled by an Aggregate causes its state to change, the change is represented
by at least one event. The one or more events representing the change are
fine-grained; that is, they represent the minimal state required to capture the
essence of the change. These events are stored in a database that can
maintain the order in which the events occurred for a specific Aggregate.
The ordered collection of events is known as the Aggregate’s stream. Every
time that a change to the Aggregate occurs and one or more events are
emitted, it represents a different version of the stream and the stream length
grows.
    Assuming the Aggregate instance under discussion goes out of scope and
is garbage collected by the runtime, if its subsequent use then becomes
necessary, the Aggregate instance must be reconstituted. As expected, its
state must once again reflect all changes from its first event to its most recent
changes. This is accomplished by reading the Aggregate’s stream from the
database in the order in which the events originally occurred, and then
reapplying them one-by-one to the Aggregate. In this way, the Aggregate state
is gradually modified to reflect the change that each event represented.
    This approach sounds both powerful and simple, and so far it is. Yet, you
must wield this sword carefully, because it can also inflict pain.


                       Straightforward Except When …

   The challenges arise not with the initial use of Event Sourcing, but
   primarily for a few other reasons:

         When significant design changes occur in one or more Aggregate
         types
         When there is an error in an event in an Aggregate stream
         When reconstituting the state of an Aggregate that has a large
         stream of events
         When complex data views must be assembled from the events

       Handling design changes involves producing streams that
   represent either a dividing of one stream or a merging of two or more
   streams.
       An error in an event in one Aggregate instance stream must be
   patched. And by “patch,” we mean not patching the existing event data
   in the database, but rather adding a new event, possibly of a different
   type used only for the patch. This is intended to cause an
   interpretation that compensates for the error in the reconstituted
   Aggregate state previously affected, as well as for any downstream
   consumers of the previous error-containing event. Given an error in
   one Aggregate instance stream of a given type, there’s a good chance
   that the same error exists in all instances of that Aggregate type, or at
   least many of them. The issue is with the code that produced the
   event. Thus, the code must be fixed and the streams must be patched
   as described.
       When an Aggregate’s state is constituted by a large event stream,
   the performance when reconstituting its state can be enhanced by
   employing state snapshots. Such snapshots are taken of the full
   Aggregate state at specific version intervals, such as every 100, 200,
   or any number of versions that achieves acceptable performance.
   When the stream is read for the purpose of reconstituting the
   Aggregate state, the snapshot is read first, and then only the events
   that were emitted following the snapshot version are read and applied
   to the state in that order.
       When using Event Sourcing, you should assume that Command
   Query Responsibility Segregation (CQRS; described in the next
   section) will nearly always be needed. CQRS is used to project
   events emitted by Aggregates into views that are queried and
   rendered on user interfaces, or that are consumed for other
   informational needs.
       None of this is easy, but then again, bugs happen in all software,
   and migrations happen to a persistent state no matter which
   persistence approach is used or what the chosen database is. There
   are ways to reduce the pain. It is not within the scope of this book to
   provide deep guidance on using Event Sourcing, but you can find that
   information in our follow-on implementation book, Implementing
   Strategic Monoliths and Microservices (Vernon & Jaskuła, Addison-
   Wesley, forthcoming).


    When the potential pain of using Event Sourcing is understood, it tends to
cause a bit of wonderment as to why it would be employed in the first place.
There’s nothing wrong with that—it’s generally good to ask why. The worst
case arises when Event Sourcing is used without a clear understanding of
why and how,7 as this application is generally followed by regret and a
fixing of blame on Event Sourcing. All too often, architects and programmers
make technology and design choices based on intrigue rather than business-
driven purpose, and then get in way over their heads in accidental
complexity. In addition, architects and programmers are often influenced by
technology-driven frameworks and tools produced by vendors that try to
convince their market that Event Sourcing is the best way to implement
Microservices.8
7. Some of the loudest complaints about Event Sourcing that the authors have heard are the outcome of
   not understanding it, and thus not using it correctly.

8. The assumption that Microservices are good is a weak reason to use them. Microservices are good
   only when need informs purpose. Vendors who insist that Microservices are always good, and that
   Event Sourcing is the best way to implement Microservices, are misleading their customers, whether
   intentionally or not.

   Noting the pain ahead of the gain is an important warning sign for the
uninitiated, curious, and gullible.
   The good news is that there are very definite reasons to use Event
Sourcing. Next, we consider the possible gains while understanding that
these might require some pain—but that’s all part of the software patterns
and tools experience. They come with a package deal known as trade-offs
and consequences, and there are always positives and negatives with each
choice made. The point is, if the positives are necessary, then the negatives
are necessary, too. Now, consider what is gained from Event Sourcing:

   1. We can maintain an audit trail of every change that has occurred in the
      instances of every given Aggregate type that uses Event Sourcing. This
      might be required by or at least smart to use within specific industries.
   2. Event Sourcing can be compared with a general ledger employed in
      accounting. Changes are never made to existing entries. That is, only
      new entries are added to the ledger, and no entries are ever changed for
      correction. Problems caused by one or more previous entries are
      corrected by adding one or more new entries that compensate. This was
      described in the sidebar “Straightforward Except When ….”
   3. Event Sourcing is useful in addressing the complexities of specific
      business problems. For example, because events represent both what
      happens in the business domain and when they happen, event streams
      can be used for special time-based purposes.
   4. Besides using the event streams for persistence, we can apply them in
      many different ways, such as decision analytics, machine learning,
     “what if” studies, and similar knowledge-based projections.
  5. The audit trail as a “general ledger” doubles as a debugging tool.
     Developers can use the series of factual events as a means to consider
     every level of change, which can lead to insights into when and how
     bugs were introduced. This help is unavailable when object states are
     fully replaced by every new change.

   It might be appropriate for some Aggregate types in a Bounded Context to
use Event Sourcing, while others do not. Conversely, this mixed approach
would not be practical if a totally ordered stream of all changes to all
Aggregate types is important to the business.
   Although it has motivations in technical solutions, Event Sourcing should
be employed only for justifiable business reasons and avoided for others.
Considering this, only points 1–3 in the previous list of benefits from Event
Sourcing have business motivations. Points 4 and 5 do not, but are
advantageous when any of 1–3 are satisfied.



CQRS
Users of systems tend to view data differently than users who create and
modify data. The system user must often view a larger, more diverse, coarse-
grained dataset to make a decision. Once this decision is made, the operation
that the system user carries out is fine-grained and targeted. Consider the
following examples:

     Think of all the patient data that a doctor must view before prescribing
     a medication: the patient’s vital signs, past health conditions,
     treatments, and procedures; current and past mediations; allergies
     (including those to medications); and even the patient’s behavior and
     sentiments. Following this review, the doctor will record a medication,
     dosage, administration, duration, and number of refills, probably across
     a single row on a form.
     An underwriter must view data from a submitted application; all
     research, such as a property inspection or the applicant’s health
     examination; past claims of losses or health conditions; assessed risks;
     and the use of all this data to calculate a recommended quotable
     premium. After considering the entire set of information, the
     underwriter can click a button to either offer a quote for a policy or
     deny a policy to the applicant.

This puts the viewable model and the operational model at odds. The
available data structures are generally optimized around the operational
model rather than the viewable model. Under such circumstances, it can be
very complex and computationally expensive to assemble the viewable
dataset.
    The CQRS pattern can be used to address this challenge. As Figure 9.6
illustrates, this pattern calls for two models: one that is optimized for
command operations, and one that is optimized for queries that aggregate the
viewable dataset.




Figure 9.6 The Command and Query models form two possible
pathways.


   The pattern in Figure 9.6 works as follows:

  1. The user is presented with a view dataset from the query model as a
     form.
  2. The user makes a decision, fills in some data, and submits the form as a
     command.
  3. The command is carried out on the command model, and the data is
     persisted.
   4. The persisted command model changes are projected into the query
      model for as many viewable datasets as needed.
   5. Go back to step 1.

    Figure 9.6 shows storage for the Command model and the Query model as
two separate databases. Although such a design makes sense for large-scale
and high-throughput systems, it is not truly necessary. The model storage
might be only a virtual/logical separation, actually using a single database or
database schema. Given that the two models are physically one and that a
single transaction can manage multiple writes, this design implies that both
the Command model and the Query model could be transactionally
consistent. Maintaining transactional consistency saves developers the
headaches incurred when the two models are physically separated, but
eventually consistent.
    When using Event Sourcing, it is generally necessary to also use CQRS.
Otherwise, there is no way to query the Event Sourced Command model
other than by Aggregate unique identity, which makes any sophisticated
queries implemented to render broad viewable datasets either impossible or
extremely prohibitive. To overcome this limitation, events emitted from the
Event Sourced Command model are projected into the Query model.



Serverless and Function as a Service
Cloud-based serverless architectures are increasingly becoming a force in
the software industry. This trend reflects the simplicity and savings afforded
by serverless designs. The term “serverless” might seem a bit misleading
because the solution obviously requires computers.9 Yes, but the term is
actually being applied from the cloud subscriber-developer perspective.
Cloud vendors provision the servers, rather than the subscriber taking on this
responsibility. To cloud subscribers, then, there are no servers, only
available uptime.
9. As software professionals are constantly reminded, naming is hard, and software names are too
   quickly chiseled in stone. As with HATEOAS, perhaps consider “serverless” to be a glyph that
   represents a concept.
    To position serverless architectures more explicitly, some have used the
term Backend as a Service (BaaS). Yet, thinking only in terms of hosting the
application’s “backend” does not adequately describe the full benefits.
Serverless architecture is also Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), where
infrastructure is not limited to computer and network resources. More
specifically, infrastructure from this perspective includes all kinds of
software that application developers do not need to create and (sometimes)
subscribers do not need to even pay for. This is truly a leap forward in
regard to the age-old mantra, “Focus on the business.” The following are
some key benefits of using a serverless architecture:

     Users pay only for actual compute time, not for the well-known
     “always up” provisioned servers.
     The significant cost savings are generally hard to believe, but users can
     believe them anyway.
     Other than deciding on required cloud software components, planning
     is easier.
     The solutions use a plethora of hardware and cloud-native software
     infrastructure and mechanisms that are free or very low cost.
     Development is accelerated due to diminished infrastructure concerns.
     Businesses can deploy cloud-native modular Monoliths.
     Serverless architecture offers strong support for browser clients and
     mobile clients.
     Because they need to create less software, users can actually focus on
     the business solutions.

   The Ports and Adapters architecture discussed in Chapter 8, “Foundation
Architecture,” is still useful, and fits quite well with the serverless
approach. In fact, if it is carefully architected and designed, there is a good
chance that service and application packaging need not change. The greatly
reduced overhead in regard to dealing with infrastructure software has great
benefits, as previously described. The primary difference relates to how
service and application software is architected, designed, and run. The term
cloud-native refers to utilizing all purpose-built infrastructure, as well as
mechanisms such as databases and messaging, that are themselves designed
specifically for cloud computing.
    Consider the example of a browser-based REST request from a user. The
request arrives at an API gateway that is provided by the cloud vendor. The
gateway is configured to understand how to dispatch requests onto the
service or application. When the dispatch takes place, the cloud platform
determines whether the REST request handler (i.e., endpoint or adapter) and
its software dependencies are already running and currently available. If so,
the request is immediately dispatched to that request handler. If not, the cloud
platform spins up a server with the subscriber’s software running, and
dispatches it to the request handler. In either case, from that point onward the
subscriber’s software operates normally.
    When the request handler provides a response to the client, the
subscriber’s use of the server ends. The cloud platform then determines
whether the server should remain available for future requests, or should be
shut down. The subscriber incurs only the cost of handling the request, and
any applicable costs for the hardware and software infrastructure required to
do so.
    If the entire time to actually handle the request is 20, 50, 100, or 1,000
milliseconds, that’s what the subscriber pays for to run their software. If no
requests arrive for a second or two, the subscriber doesn’t pay for that time.
Compare that to cloud-provisioned servers, which incur costs just to stay
alive and ready, every second of every day, whether or not they are in use.
    Function as a Service (FaaS) is a kind of serverless mechanism that
supports the software architecture and design for the aforementioned
characteristics. Yet, FaaS is typically used to deploy very small components
into their operational capacities. The functions are meant to carry out very
narrowly focused operations that complete very quickly. Think of creating a
single procedure or method within a very large system—that is roughly the
scope addressed when implementing and deploying a FaaS.
    One difference might be how a request is handled. Thinking in terms of
functional programming, a function is implemented with side-effect-free
behavior. As was stated in the section, “Functional Core with Imperative
Shell” in Chapter 8: “[A] pure function always returns the same result for the
same input and never causes observable side effects.” Based on this
definition, it could be that the entire state on which a given FaaS will operate
is provided as input parameters, requiring no database interaction. The result
is determined by producing a new value that is then used by the FaaS, just as
a function would work. The input might be an event that was caused
elsewhere in the system, or it might be an incoming REST request. Whatever
the case, it’s possible that the FaaS might not itself interact with a database,
either reading from it or writing to it. Writing to the database would cause a
side effect. That said, there is no restriction to FaaS using a database as a
procedure or method could for both reading and writing state.



Applying the Tools
Several examples of applying message- and event-driven architectures have
already been given in this and previous chapters. The remaining chapters
detail the application of specific architectures and patterns explained in Part
III. The companion book, Implementing Strategic Monoliths and
Microservices (Vernon & Jaskuła, Addison-Wesley, forthcoming), provides
exhaustive implementation examples.



Summary
This chapter considered the challenges of using distributed systems and
synchronization between subsystems to complete a large use case by
completing a number of smaller step-based cases. The message- and event-
driven architectures were introduced as a means of carrying out complex,
multi-step processes while avoiding cascading failure due to asynchronous
messaging and temporal decoupling. Process management using both
choreography and orchestration was introduced, along with the differences
between these approaches and how each can be used. REST’s role in
process management was described as well. Event Sourcing and CQRS were
introduced, including their use in message- and event-driven systems.
Serverless and FaaS architectures show promise in future cloud computing.
Here are action items from this chapter:

     Use choreography for decentralized processing of limited multi-step
     distributed use cases.
     Employ the centralized orchestration pattern when complex processes
     with numerous steps are needed, driving steps across relevant
     subsystems.
     Consider the use of REST-based clients and providers of event-driven
     notifications when familiar technology approaches are desired.
     Use Event Sourcing to persist the stream of event records that represent
     the state of an entity over time.
     With CQRS, separate the service/application command operations and
     state from those used by queries to display groupings of state.

   This completes Part III. Part IV ties this and the two previous parts
together to build business-centric Monoliths and Microservices.



References
[Conductor] https://netflix.github.io/conductor/
[IDDD] Vaughn Vernon. Implementing Domain-Driven Design. Boston,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 2013.
[Reactive] https://www.reactivemanifesto.org/
[VLINGO-XOOM] https://vlingo.io
Part IV

The Two Paths for Purposeful
Architecture



Executive Summary

Here it is, the culmination of a trek to reach the pinnacle of purposeful
architecture with well-designed contextual boundaries of expertise. There
are two paths, Monoliths and Microservices. Both have purpose, yet the
purpose of each does not fit with every system or subsystem situation. The
two paths offered between the covers of this book are fitting for a given set
of circumstances, and possibly a hybrid of both is appropriate. There is no
shame in taking either path as long as the decision to take one over the other
is backed by sound reasoning and intellectual honesty.



Chapter 10: Building Monoliths Like You
Mean It
Building a Monolithic architecture should not feel like a third-class, cop-out
choice—that is, not if you build a respectable, well-modularized Monolith in
the way that the authors recommend. Building Monoliths as a first-class
choice is the theme of Chapter 10. We’ll offer guidance that explains two
ways to get there.

     Take a lesson in why Monoliths should be used under specific
     circumstances, and how to achieve the best results.
     Take a brief history lesson on how the industry reached the mess that it
     has found itself in. This historical perspective delivers a reliable
     background on why software went so wrong.
     Every system construction endeavor that does not need to use a
     Microservices architecture must set out on the path to create a well-
     modularized Monolith. This is not just an attainable goal, but the only
     way to avoid the tangled, muddy mess that is the inevitable destination
     of lesser efforts. The effort includes the proper reference to business
     capabilities and wise architecture decisions.
     When a Monolith has not been architected, designed, and implemented
     as a desirable, well-modularized Monolith, a course correction is
     difficult but not impossible. But how do teams deal with change that’s
     required to maintain the legacy system operational while
     simultaneously reworking the architecture?
     Either trek can be taken to achieve the best Monolithic architecture
     result, while keeping the sound software from gradually sliding into a
     pit of mud. Take advice on how to prevent the slowly creeping doom.



Chapter 11: Monolith to Microservices
Like a Boss
Microservices are a suitable architectural decision, especially when certain
contextual areas of expertise change more quickly than others. An added
advantage of Microservices is that they are delivered as separate deployment
units from all other subsystems. When Microservices are appropriately used,
they can be a boon to autonomous development and delivery.
  Mental preparation is essential for every software development
  venture. Even so, we must be especially mentally prepared to take on
  the challenges of distributed systems architecture. It’s not an easy trek
  to deliver robust distributed systems, but that journey can be made
  simpler by the use of some techniques and tools that support the
  techniques.
  The straightforward way to get from a Monolith to Microservices is
  when the Monolith is well modularized. This might have been because
  the Monolith was architected properly from the start. Or, instead, it
  could be that a legacy Big Ball of Mud was heavily refactored to a
  modularized Monolith using the steps provided in Chapter 10. Either
  way, starting with a modular Monolith is the best way to get from
  legacy to Microservices.
  When dealing with a legacy Big Ball of Mud, taking the trek directly to
  a Microservices architecture will be the most challenging journey.
  Even so, it is possible to reach that destination by fully comprehending
  the ruggedness of the terrain. This requires extracting components from
  the legacy, and implies all of the same challenges as the journey of Big
  Ball of Mud to modular Monolith that were discussed in Chapter 10.
  Yet, this is more like attaching new train cars to a train as it is speeding
  ahead, and then disconnecting those cars one-by-one as self-powered
  vehicles that arrive at the destination with all others. All the while, the
  team is working on the top of the train, with individuals simultaneously
  leaping from car to car as necessary. What could possibly go wrong?
  The guidance in Chapter 11 offers safety harnesses to the team members
  and catwalks between cars.
  Decisions, decisions. At what point can the legacy Monolith be
  decommissioned? There are several different trade-offs involved, not
  the least of which might be expensive hardware and software support
  licensing that have locked in businesses for decades. Consider the
  positive and negative consequences.



Chapter 12: Require Balance, Demand
Strategy
After an intense journey to reach solid, high ground with strategy digital
transformation and event-first learning and purposeful architecture, making
the best choices to use Monoliths and Microservices is possible. This
chapter steps through a cooldown with reinforcing reminders to balance
choices and remain bent on strategic innovation.

     Because software architecture is a multidimensional discipline, it calls
     for balance when choosing trade-offs between the competing forces of
     different quality attributes.
     Outstanding takeaway: Balance is unbiased. Innovation is essential.
     Demand strategy.

   Companies without a software innovation strategy will eventually
become obsolete. Don’t trade off the opportunity to turn a current core
software system into the next generation of SaaS or PaaS in your industry.
You now have incentive, inspiration, and tooling to start that journey, or to
keep innovating along the path that has already begun.
Chapter 10

Building Monoliths Like You Mean
It


Building clean and uncompromised Monoliths is not a pipe dream, and is the
best choice for a large number of systems. It’s also not as easy to achieve as
1-2-3. It requires thought, skill, discipline, and determination—much the
same mindset needed when creating Microservices.

  Note
  The running case study introduced in Chapter 1, and carried throughout
  this book, is continued in this chapter. If some context within the
  examples seems to be missing, please see previous chapters.


   To lead off, we’ll provide a recap of why Monoliths are a good choice in
many cases, at least early on, and how Monolithic architectures can be
created effectively by using the previously defined strategic toolset.
Organizations should learn to architect, design, and construct Monoliths that
meet their business strategic goals and that are maintainable and extensible
over a long lifetime.


                     The Whys and Hows of Monoliths

   The following list recaps points made earlier, such as in Chapters 1
   and 2, which are helpful in forming new Monoliths and restructuring
and refactoring existing ones:

     Why? Many software systems don’t need to employ
     Microservices.
     How? Experimentation using quick iterations, incremental value
     creation, and stepwise refinement is the best approach.
     How? Being wrong is not lethal, as long as it eventually leads to
     being right; develop a culture for safe experimentation and quick
     failures that result in valuable learning.
     Why? Monoliths are not bad in themselves; it’s the mud that
     many of them contain that ensures entropy.
     Why? Monolith should be an architecture, not the unarchitecture.
     How? Build an environment that supports creativity and
     innovation that is free of technology speedbumps.
     How? Effective communication within small teams of virtually
     flat structures is the only way to reach full success in the face of
     Conway’s Law.
     How? Fearlessly champion changes to the what or how so that
     your organization can achieve creativity and innovation;
     conversely, don’t be married to anything that stifles creativity
     and innovation.
     How? Reject the what and how that harms business operations;
     that is, the next generation of software must be mature enough to
     support decommissioning the previous generation.
     Why? Avoid escalating commitment to systems that have
     diminished life expectancy, or continuing to invest heavily due
     to fear of sunk costs from previous efforts.
     How? Think and rethink, which requires determination and
     costs mental and emotional energy.
     Why? Beware of overlooking business logic that is missing and
     compensated for by patching persisted data on a daily or even
     hourly basis; teams likely lack a full understanding of why
     expedient data patches were necessary.
         How? Fear losing individual changes and the context of changes
         within the Big Ball of Mud (BBoM) while trying to replace it;
         carefully track all changes in the subsystems being replaced.
         How? Beware of the unknowns associated with refactoring or
         replacing an existing BBoM; large chunks of time can be lost
         due to unforeseen complexities perceived as simplicity.
         How? Modularize as Bounded Contexts that follow business
         capabilities, not business lines.



   There are three primary concerns and goals with Monoliths:

  1. Getting a Monolith right from the start and keeping it that way
  2. Getting a Monolith right after it was previously done wrong
  3. Getting from Monolith to Microservices

Today, most organizations are pursuing the third concern and goal due to their
need to deal with Monoliths done wrong. It’s not the authors’ place to say
that the third concern is the wrong goal, but stakeholders should be willing to
consider that it might not be necessary or even the best target to aim for.
Assuming that a Monolith-to-Microservices transition is the correct ultimate
goal, it’s possible that initially focusing on the second concern is the better
initial strategy.
    Understanding how to succeed when dealing with the second concern is
best achieved by observing how to successfully accomplish the first goal. As
an analogy, consider people who are trained to recognize counterfeit money.
They don’t learn about every possible example of counterfeit money, partly
because it’s impossible to know all of those and the unending attempts at
new ways to counterfeit. Instead, they learn everything about the authentic
currency by practicing: “touch, tilt, look at, look through.” Those trained in
these ways are then capable of detecting all sorts of attempts at
counterfeiting. They can explain everything that is wrong about the
counterfeit and how it would appear if authentic.
    Following this reasoning, the first and second listed goals are addressed
in that order in this chapter. Chapter 11, “Monolith to Microservices Like a
Boss,” delves into the third goal, by examining two distinct approaches to
this transition. Before jumping in, it’s fair to provide a brief historical
overview starting at around 20 years before this writing.



Historical Perspective
It’s only proper to provide a historical perspective of the industry in the early
21st century, because it’s unfair to judge past decisions without
understanding the influences of the time the decisions were made. When
NuCoverage first started on its journey in 2007, the “software is eating the
world” declaration was not yet made. That was still four years in the future.
Even before 2001, software had taken on a different role due to the dot-com
boom. Although the fledgling global Web had not matured far past
brochureware and e-commerce storefronts, it was starting to hit its stride.
     By 2001, Software as a Service (SaaS) 1.0 had mostly failed due to
overambitious business plans and a lack of experience in developing
enterprise-grade systems, the expense of operating on premises (because the
cloud was not available), and—most especially—desktop suite lock-in. At
that time there was buzz around “intranets,” but software was still for the
most part an augmentation to human decision making. It was rare to conduct
business on the Web, other than to buy from an e-commerce store.
     Make no mistake about it: Humans were still carrying a lot of the
cognitive load in day-to-day business. Software was responsible for
managing the large volume of data that was impervious to human use without
augmentation around specific use cases. Business was still being conducted
by phone and email. Such business workers had what was sold as software
to help deal with their tasks. Commercial enterprise office products, such as
SharePoint, were used by low-tech knowledge workers to tuck away a lot of
indispensable email. These workers, who possessed business knowledge but
far too few technical skills for that sort of responsibility, would hack
document management repositories and feed their emails and attachments to
these disorganized, quasi–“data warehouses.” After only a few months of
archiving preexisting emails along with new ones, the warehouses became
nearly unusable, and certainly far less organized than many paper filing
systems. They were actually glorified network filesystems with no rules or
constraints on hierarchies or naming, where finding things was attempted
with poor-quality search tools, resulting in many false positives and few true
ones. Businesses could forget about attempting to gain business intelligence
from that data unless they undertook a major initiative to perform scrubbing,
restructuring, and reorganizing, so as to mold the data into useful pools of
potential knowledge rather than a usability crapshoot.
    Trial-and-error approaches to “office automation” weren’t isolated to
end-user–designed ticky-tacky document management systems. Still,
considering the predominant software development and production platforms
is also eye opening. From the late 1990s until perhaps 2004, the Java world
was ruled by J2EE. Between 2003 and 2006, the Spring Framework began to
disrupt J2EE, even becoming mixed together with the facilities of J2EE
application servers by application architects.
    On the other side of the divide was the .NET Framework, which arrived
in 2002. By 2004, claims of .NET overtaking J2EE in popularity were
abounding, yet the reality seemed to be somewhat less than that. One of the
better .NET improvements over J2EE was to leave out anything resembling
Enterprise JavaBeans (EJB). EJB Entity Beans were an utter disaster, and
never truly delivered a convincing solution for database entity objects.
Clued-in Java developers quickly realized that TOPLink and the later-
arriving Hibernate provided a far superior object-persistence experience.
Those who stuck with the Entity Bean bandwagon stumbled many times. On
the .NET side, the Entity Framework arrived in 2008 but was met with great
disappointment. Odd mapping rules forced impractical object designs, and it
was several years before these difficulties were overcome without a lot of
help from advanced application developers.
    Given the state of the tech world around 2007, NuCoverage did well to
bridle its ambitions by initially going no further than building software that
assisted underwriters in issuing policies and claims adjusters in determining
correct loss coverages. There was no Web-facing application submission or
virtual handshake upon issuing a policy or covering a claim. This
conservative approach got the company out of the gate, where it could make
fast strides toward making a profit while enhancing its system as it learned
more through experience.
    The problem was that the NuCoverage software teams didn’t possess a
good understanding of and appreciation for software architecture, or any clue
about modularizing their different business capabilities. This gap would
have been observable very early on by wiser, more experienced heads. As a
result, the team gradually faced the reality of crippling debt and entropy as
time advanced. It didn’t take long for the initial lumps of mud to take a toll.
Unsurprisingly, the unrecognized and unpaid debt, piling up year after year,
led to layer of mud upon layer of mud, until the Big Ball of Mud Monolith
illustrated in Figure 10.1 had NuCoverage working on a creepingly slow fix
and new-functionality conveyor belt.




Figure 10.1 The NuCoverage Big Ball of Mud resulted from years of
neglect and expedient changes.
    With an understanding of software architecture that employs
modularization of business capabilities, how could the NuCoverage
enterprise have been shaped, even as a Monolith, to be welcoming to many
years of change?
    Look beyond technologies and frameworks. Throwing SharePoint,
Enterprise Java, Entity Framework, JPA, database products, and message
buses at the problem domain will never spare teams from the need to think.
Even while the crazy technology failures were being thrust at every software
IT department, CIO, CTO, and developer, there were reasonable approaches
and guidelines that could have actually helped.
    Domain-Driven Design (DDD) was introduced by 2003 and the Ports and
Adapters architecture by 2004. Even earlier, the Layers architecture was
available from the first volume of Patterns of Software Architecture
[POSA1]. Extreme Programming [XP] existed well before DDD, as did the
Agile Manifesto [Manifesto]. Several ideas found in DDD bear a striking
resemblance to XP and the Agile Manifesto. There was a clear reference to
organizational (business) capabilities by 2004 [BC-HBR]. Additionally, the
ways of object-oriented design [OOD] and programming [OOP], domain
modeling [Domain-Modeling], and class responsibilities and collaborations
[CRC] were being used long before NuCoverage entered the fray. Several of
the ideas, patterns, and tools in existence by then had the opportunity to
influence architecture and development in 2007. Yet, that doesn’t mean that
they were used, and observing the results of systems developed from the past
and in the present, it’s clear that to a large degree they still aren’t.



Right from the Start
Don’t underestimate the importance of hiring top software architects and
developers. Do top businesses look for bargains in C-level executives? Then
why shop for bottom-shelf software developers when serious practitioners
can be recruited? Understand who to recruit—that is, the right people with
the right skills. Be aware that expertise in software engineering, although
different, is as important as that among executive management.
    Even though NuCoverage might have favored the idea that greatly
minimizing software development costs would be to its advantage, it
definitely wasn’t. Taking conservative first steps for an early release of a
minimal system doesn’t justify poor-quality architecture and design. In fact,
quite the opposite is justifiable. Early sound, tested architecture and design
would have prepared the system’s codebase for continued development of
progressively advanced functionality, and actually facilitated much more
rapid deliveries over the long haul. First and foremost, attention must be
given to commissioning architects and lead engineers to guard architecture
and code quality with avid, hawklike awareness and enthusiasm, as their
unending priority.
   Consider what a 2007 reboot of NuCoverage could have yielded. The
context of 2007 must be kept in mind when reading the following
descriptions. To be even more explicit, the following discussion does not
represent the contemporary context—that is, when WellBank approaches
NuCoverage. Instead, these events take place well before then, when
NuCoverage is in startup mode.


Business Capabilities
Recall that a business capability defines what a business does. This implies
that, while a business might be reorganized into a completely new structure,
the new structure doesn’t change its business capabilities. The business, for
the most part, still does what it did before the new structure came along. Of
course, the restructuring might have been undertaken for the purpose of
enabling new business capabilities, but no business capabilities that were
profitable the day before the restructuring have been jettisoned by the day
after. This reinforces the point that it is generally best to define a software
model’s communication boundaries according to the business capability that
it implements.
    In Figure 10.1, three business capabilities are apparent: Underwriting,
Claims, and Billing. They’re obvious choices for an insurance company. Yet,
there are other necessary capabilities that must also be discovered and
identified by the NuCoverage startup team.
    As shown in Table 10.1, the NuCoverage startup team collectively
identified their business capabilities. This required walk-throughs of
concrete usage scenarios that were understood by unified conversations to
develop a shared understanding of the business goals. Each is described in
Table 10.1 in terms of its initial purpose and implementation.


Table 10.1 The NuCoverage Initial Business Capabilities, as
Discovered in 2007
Business      Description                                    Type
Capability
Intake        Receives and validates applications, which Supporting
              can be submitted through the Web, but are
              often received via fax and email from agents,
              or as paper forms directly from applicants by
              way of postal mail. The intake process might
              require contacting agents and applicants to
              request missing data or to correct unclear and
              conflicting information. Approved
              applications are forwarded to Underwriting
              by means of an electronic feed.
Underwriting Produces a decision on whether a given          Core
             insurable risk is worth accepting, resulting in
             either issuing a policy or denying the policy.
             NuCoverage employs human underwriters to
             assess insurable risks based on software-
             based assistance from risk models.
             Underwriter review of the risk model
             recommendations, along with any necessary
             additional research and discussions with
             other underwriters, lead to a final human
             decision. The final underwriting decisions are
             recorded. Any details inside other business
             capabilities used for the underwriting process
             are collected in the respective contexts.
Business     Description                                   Type
Capability
Risk         Calculating a risk assessment is central to     Core
             insurance, as it is a means to determine the
             degree of loss potential in a given insurable
             risk. One key to NuCoverage’s success is its
             development of software actuarial risk
             models that assist human underwriters in
             decision making by means of automated
             calculations and recommendations. The initial
             focus is on auto and driver risks that lead to
             differentiating rates. This business goal
             requires careful scrutiny to reduce the risk by
             accepting the least likely loss potential.
Rate         Calculations of premium rates are based on Core
             the risk model recommendations combined
             with underwriter review and reasoning. The
             results of combining the data and human effort
             are recorded here. Over time, the final
             recorded rate results will be used to gradually
             improve automated rate calculations, along
             with providing the reasons applied from past
             experience.
Policyholder Keeps the account of every policyholder       Supporting
(Accounts) along with a historical but limited snapshot of
             all of their policies. When a new policy is
             issued by Underwriting, a record of that
             business transaction is entered into the
             respective policyholder’s account. This might
             require establishing a new policyholder
             account.
Business     Description                                   Type
Capability
Claims       Captures filed losses as claims by              Supporting
             policyholders and provides the means to
             calculate the actual loss and settlement
             payments. Losses and settlements are
             available for later renewals and possibly
             near-term premium adjustments. If the loss is
             highly likely to be fraudulent but unprovable,
             it’s a classic reason to proactively increase
             premium rates. If fraud is provable, the policy
             is certain to be canceled.
Renewals     Where the process of renewing a policy          Core
             begins. The process requires gathering claims
             against the policy, if any, along with current
             risk models and possible rate increases due to
             the increasing cost of covering specific risks.
             The renewal process includes the claims
             review, approved risk, and newly calculated
             rate, which are obtained and sent to
             Underwriting for renewal approval results.
             The finalized policy renewal is recorded in
             Underwriting and the policyholder’s account.
Business      Description                                    Type
Capability
Billing       Tracks premium payment schedules and           Generic
              generates invoices based on Underwriting
              policy issuance. Manages nonpayment and
              collections, which might lead to
              recommending policy cancellations. Initially
              payments are made by check or bank transfer.
              It’s possible that future payments might be
              made by credit card. Currently card
              transaction fees might cost as much as or more
              than NuCoverage’s profit margins. This can
              be overcome in the future when high numbers
              of payments are built up and new-tech
              payment gateways become available.


   Figure 10.2 shows the Monolith container with eight Bounded Contexts
modules, each representing a business capability. The business capability
type, both in Table 10.1 and Figure 10.2, indicates the level of strategic
value of each.
Figure 10.2 The initial NuCoverage problem space domain was
realized as a modular Monolith.


    At the present time, the Risk business capability is definitely a Core
Domain. Because of the urgency to ensure high business value and integrated
interactive operations, there are initially four different business capabilities
with core value. Underwriters perform their essential workflows and garner
valuable decision-making information while utilizing these four core
contexts: Underwriting, Risk, Rate, and Renewals. Not surprisingly,
underwriters have a lot to say about their workflows and the guiding
environment, treating the four core business capabilities as an underwriting
product suite.
    Over time, the core value will tend to shift. For example, as Underwriting
becomes more automated through continuous improvements in the Risk and
Rate functions, Underwriting will transition to a supporting role. The same
will be true of Renewals. There will be new Core Domains added.
    A few years after the successful launch of the minimum platform and
subsequent continuous improvements, another business capability arises—
namely, Rewards. As explained in Chapter 5, “Contextual Expertise,” the
Safe Driver Reward was the initial policyholder reward introduced.
Initially, it was considered a simple value in the Policyholder Accounts
capability. Although this was not a favorable long-term decision, it would
suffice until business priorities would drive out the additional Rewards
capability.


Architecture Decisions
After identifying business capabilities, NuCoverage now needs to make a
few architectural decisions. For example, how will users of various kinds
interact with the platform? It might seem obvious that a Web-based user
interface will be used. Even so, there is a growing need for devices that
support employees’ job duties, which require mobility and convenience
when those employees are on the go. Is there a sound way to propose, track,
and finally determine which architectural decisions are needed and how the
user-driven mechanisms and others can be provided by means of eyes-wide-
open adoption?
   The teams rely on Architecture Decision Records (ADRs) to define,
propose, track, and implement prominent architectural choices. Listing 10.1
provides three examples. The ADR approach to decision making was
described in Chapter 2, “Essential Strategic Learning Tools.” These
examples illustrate pertinent decisions made by the Auto Insurance System
teams.

Listing 10.1 ADRs Capture User Interface and Message Exchange
Proposals and Decisions
Click here to view code image
Title: ADR 001: REST Request-Response for Desktop User Interfaces

Status: Accepted

Context: Support Web-based user interfaces with REST

Decision: Use Web standards for desktop clients

Consequences:
  Advantages: HTTP; Scale; Inexpensive for experiments
  Disadvantages: Unsuitable for most mobile devices


Title: ADR 002: Use Native Device Development for mobile apps UI

Status: Accepted

Context: Support iOS and Android Toolkits for mobile apps

Decision: Use iOS and Android standard toolkits for mobile apps

Consequences:
  Advantages: Native look and feel
  Disadvantages: Multiple device types, form factors, languages,
toolkits; slow development


Title: ADR 003: Platform Message Exchange
Status: Accepted

Context: Collaborating subsystems exchange commands, events, and
queries

Decision: Use RabbitMQ for reliable message exchanges

Consequences:
  Advantages: Throughput; Scale; Polyglot; FOSS; Support available
  Disadvantages: Stability?; latency vs in-memory transport?;
                 support quality?; Operational complexity


  Note
  In the discussions that follow, there are several references to various
  architectures and related patterns, such as REST, messaging, and event-
  driven architectures. See Chapters 8 and 9 for discussions of these
  concepts.


    The eight Bounded Contexts in Figure 10.3 correspond one-to-one with
those shown in Figure 10.2. Highlighted in Figure 10.3 are the architectures
in use—namely, Ports and Adapters; in Figure 10.2, the emphasis is on the
modules used to separate each Bounded Context from the others. Actually, in
Figure 10.3, it might look as if each Bounded Context has almost exact
architectural implementations, but this is drawn only symbolically. In
actuality, the various Bounded Contexts could share some resemblance due
to the nature of Ports and Adapters. However, the inside application part of
the architecture layer, possibly with a domain model, would be implemented
differently depending on the need to deal with different levels of complexity.
See Part II, “Driving Business Innovation,” and Part III, “Events-First
Architecture,” for more detailed examples.
Figure 10.3 Eight Bounded Contexts inside a Monolith, each
employing Ports and Adapters.


    Note that the displays of the user interfaces are not shown in Figure 10.3
for the sake of simplicity, so it appears as if users are interacting directly
with adapters. Also, the users would usually be shown strictly on the left of
each subsystem. Here the architectures are “rotated” for the convenience of
showing users surrounding the system and playing roles in multiple
subsystems.
    The results of the ADRs can be identified in Figure 10.3. ADR 001 and
its REST request–response architecture, as well as ADR 002 for the user
interfaces of mobile apps, are recognized in the user interactions with the
Monolith. Furthermore, the outcome of ADR 003 is seen in the exchange of
messages on the Message Bus (or broker). It is superimposed through the
center of the Monolith to represent the means by which all Bounded Contexts
collaborate and integrate inside the Monolith. The NuCoverage software
development team was impressed by the early releases of RabbitMQ that
occurred in the same year as the founding of NuCoverage.
    Essential to understanding and properly implementing this Monolithic
architecture correctly is a perfectly clean separation between every Bounded
Context and the others. In Figure 10.3, this is represented by all contexts
using the Message Bus for inter-context communication. Yet, at the
boundaries of each context there must be adapters, as explained in Chapter 8,
that adapt all input to and output from each Bounded Context in a way that
suits the integration situation. As explained in Chapter 6, it’s vital to
recognize any upstream–downstream relationships. When one Bounded
Context is downstream from another, the downstream context must translate
its own language to those of the upstream context. This will happen before a
message (event, command, query) is placed on the Message Bus. Thus, the
coupling between contexts is maintained with the proper directionality,
which in most cases should be unidirectional.
    Don’t conclude that Figure 10.3 insinuates there is only one correct way
to communicate between contexts—that is, through reliable (durable
messages with at-least-once delivery semantics), asynchronous messaging.
The same effect could be accomplished by using inter-context request–
response APIs that honor upstream–downstream relationships. Such APIs
can even be executed asynchronously, and be fully event-driven.
    Even so, if a business chooses to use request–response APIs rather than
messaging APIs via a message bus, it must understand that this might impact
the smooth transition to future architectural decisions. At such a point, any
collaboration and integration between Bounded Contexts will need to deal
with failures that are common to distributed systems. As explained in
Chapter 11, “Monolith to Microservices Like a Boss,” network, server, and
additional infrastructure failures will have potentially catastrophic
consequences in the face of naive implementations. Be prepared to
implement failure recovery schemes.
    Generally speaking, by implementing a message bus/broker, some of such
problems can be alleviated “out of the box” because of the temporal
decoupling. The benefit derives from designing in latency-tolerance rather
than relying on Service Level Agreements (SLAs) that are based on time-
limited request–response communications. When many messages have
queued in a message bus/broker and require delivery, receivers can be
overwhelmed by large bursts of messages within a short time frame. Using
Reactive Streams can help here because it supports what is known as
backpressure, which provides a way for receivers to set limits on deliveries
within a processing window. Of course, it’s important to select a resilient
mechanism in the first place. For both message producers and consumers,
temporary loss of live connections to the messaging mechanism can occur, as
well as other failures such as broker leadership. Overcoming these
challenges by means of retries with persisted data, however, is far simpler
than trying to deal with the problems associated with accessing several
temporally coupled services REST APIs. Because messaging tends to
happen out-of-band, users are usually unaware of temporary failures,
whereas using the APIs of temporally coupled services most often puts the
problem “in the user’s face.”
    To be clear, each Bounded Context should own its own database(s), and
those must not be directly shared or accessed from outside the Bounded
Context. No well-designed context with purposeful architecture should
directly share its database with any other system-level contexts or any legacy
systems outside that context. This is true of any storage at all, as well as any
queuing mechanisms meant only for internal use. The only means of
integration with such a context is through its public-facing APIs, which may
be by means of REST, RPC, and/or messaging. See Parts II and III of this
book for more information.
    Sometimes it will not be practical to allocate a completely different
database instance for each Bounded Context when creating a Monolith.
Depending on the database product(s) in use, there might be ways to create a
single database with multiple schemas (Postgres and Oracle). With other
database products, using a single database instance but with context-specific
tables might be a possible solution. In both of these possible database
designs, a critical constraint is to provide unique user accounts and
credentials to prevent easy access to context-owned database resources that
must be protected from direct use by other contexts. The database resources
that belong to a Bounded Context must be rendered as virtually invisible to
other resources located outside the context. Due to the potential of several or
many Bounded Contexts using a single database, all of the scale and
performance consequences of many connections and simultaneous operations
may occur.
    Inside the Bounded Context in the application layer and in the domain
model at the center, strictly employing the following tactical patterns will
keep both object and temporal coupling to a minimum:

     Modules
     Aggregate-Based Entities
     Domain Events
     Domain Services

    The focus of this book is purposely constrained to strategy; it is not meant
to discuss the full implementation of such a system. Our follow-up book,
Implementing Strategic Monoliths and Microservices (Vernon & Jaskuła,
Addison-Wesley, forthcoming), describes these and other implementation
tools and techniques in full detail.



Right from Wrong
The timeline presented in this section is different from the one just described.
This one began in 2007, but the effort resulted in the entire Auto Insurance
System becoming a Big Ball of Mud of frightening size. Now, 14 years later,
NuCoverage has to turn this enormous wrong into a right. In this case, the
task will be accomplished as Monolith-to-Monolith refactoring rather than a
Monolith-to-Microservices transition. Chapter 11 describes the leap from
Monolith to Microservices in greater detail.


                               Caution Needed
   Transforming a system from a Big Ball of Mud to a modularized
   Monolith is not easy or even simple. It requires a lot of business-
   minded strategic discipline, smart tactics, kid-glove care, and even
   more patience. Note that the skills enumerated here are ones that have
   not been employed from the beginning, or at least not for a long time.
   Turning the enormous wrong into a right is often imagined as working
   like this: “Stop everything and give our team three months to make this
   right.” To be frank, although this might be possible, it probably won’t
   meet with success. The dynamics of a live system that is normally run
   by making continuous expedient fixes will most likely get in the way
   of a “stop everything” mentality. Software-business as usual will
   simply get in the team’s way (including the kinds of changes required
   to keep the system running), preventing them from focusing on their
   short-term goal of “make this right.” Thus, this section deliberately
   avoids selling the fantasy of short-term success. Even if it is believed
   that a given team can succeed in this way—and it might be possible—
   the odds certainly don't bode well for them. If success still seems
   certain, then kudos to that team. For most organizations, since it’s
   taken considerable time to reach this level of entropy, making the
   necessary adjustments will require a considerable mental shift, along
   with time and money. (At the risk of making a forward reference, see
   the section “Deciding What to Strangle” in Chapter 11 for additional
   cautionary points to apply.)


    Chapter 1, “Business Goals and Digital Transformation,” and Chapter 2,
“Essential Strategic Learning Tools,” discussed the reasons why software
goes wrong. It’s not practical to try to identify every possible reason for
poorly implemented software. Most times, the software implementation
simply starts out that way. Less often, it starts out well and then drifts into
chaos as time changes the team dynamics that instituted sound architecture
and effective design. In whatever ways it went wrong, transitioning to right
is the new first order of business.
    Some of the common ways that component source code exhibits chaos are
as follows:

     Technical rather than strategic business focus
       Undisciplined, haphazard structure (the unarchitecture)
       Lack of business-focused modularity; minimal modules that are
       technically motivated
       No unit tests; some large, slow, inter-layer integration tests
       Anemic model; CRUD-focused application
       Business logic lost in the user interface, and over multiple layers
       Large numbers of program source files within a single, technical
       module
       Deeply tangled coupling across many component source files (classes)
       Strong, bidirectional coupling across modules
       No separation of concerns; single concerns separated across multiple
       layers (both can exist together)

No doubt this list could go on, but we note that these are the common “big-
ticket” items. In other words, these problems carry a high cost in terms of
maintaining the existing code and making any attempts to correct the wrong.
    First consider a few of the highest-level problems: technical motivation,
poor structure, and lack of meaningful modularization. Listing 10.2 provides
a typical modularity failure situation.1 This module structure and the module
names might not be catastrophic if that structure hosted only a single, well-
defined business communication context—that is, the realization of a single
business capability. But it doesn’t, and even if it did, this modular structure
is nearly useless.
1. Note the meaningless “ais” module nomenclature chosen, which stands for Auto Insurance System.
   Yet, that’s the least of the naming problems for this system’s modules. Further, architected and
   designed properly, a business-centric codebase should never require components known as “helpers”
   and “utils.”

Listing 10.2 Modularity Gone Wrong, as Usual
nucoverage.ais.controller
nucoverage.ais.dao
nucoverage.ais.dto
nucoverage.ais.endpoint
nucoverage.ais.entity
nucoverage.ais.helper
nucoverage.ais.repository
nucoverage.ais.service
nucoverage.ais.util

    This is, in fact, the kind of module structure that would likely be used to
“organize” the entire Monolithic Auto Insurance System. Think about that:
eight major business functions all tucked away in a set of modules that have
zero business meaning. There would be quite literally hundreds of
component source files (e.g., classes) in many, if not all, of the individual
modules. Only tacit knowledge—employing an elephant-like memory—of
the contents of each module could lead to survival of the mayhem within.
Those not capable of leaning on their own memory will tax those who do
with their constant barrage of questions. But really, mayhem? The inter-
module coupling in multiple directions wasn’t even mentioned, but it plays a
big role in any effort to scoop and reshape meaningful components from a
Big Ball of Mud. Yes, mayhem is definitely the right word.
    Still, correcting the problems is possible. Where does a team begin to
take corrective action, and what steps should be followed throughout the
journey?


Change within Change
One thing that likely happens on a daily basis is change; that is, change
happens daily just to keep the system running by means of expedient bug
fixes. That’s the norm. Although this seems like a relentless foe, it might
actually be a friend when more than one kind of change is needed and the
team decides to slow down just a bit. As patch fixes occur, the team can take
a bit of extra time to initiate and continue the refactorings leading to cleanup.
    One of the first means of corrective action is to add tests to the code that
must change due to business drivers, such as for making patches and other
bug fixes. Create a corresponding test every time a patch or any other change
is made. Consider the following steps to be repeated continuously:

Step 1. Add tests to verify the ultimate correctness of code that is being
        changed, and then fix business-driven bugs.

         a. First create tests that fail due to the bug being fixed.
         b. Generally at the beginning of such efforts, the best things to test
            are not stand-alone units, but rather coarse-grained integrated
            layers. For example, given a Service Layer backed by an anemic
            model, creating tests against the Service Layer makes the most
            sense because testing an anemic model is nearly useless. Tests
            against an anemic model would test only that attribute/property
            setters and getters work correctly, which are almost impossible to
            get wrong, especially when they are generated by an IDE as is
            typical. Testing that the Service Layer sets the expected
            attributes/properties is useful at the early stages of this effort.

         c. Correct the code in error so that the test passes. Commit the
            changes to the primary codebase.

Step 2. After the tests are in place and the fixes are made, immediately
        experiment with modularity and attempt to move related business
        logic from the Service Layer code to the model.

         a. Is it possible to relocate the code with current bug fixes into a
            new business-centric module structure? If so, take that step. Test
            that the refactoring doesn’t cause regression. It might be
            necessary to add one or a few more tests to be certain. Create
            new tests for the relocated code by refactoring relevant code out
            of the previous tests and into the new tests.

         b. When a Service Layer fronts an anemic model, locate refactoring
            opportunities in the Service Layer methods. Typically the
            Service Layer uses a series of Entity attribute/property setters.
            These setters can be aggregated into a single, behavioral method
            on the Entity. To do so, migrate the setter invocations to the new
            method on the model Entity and have the Service Layer now call
            that new Entity method. The name of the new method should
            reflect the Ubiquitous Language in context. Test before and after,
            using tests on both the Service Layer and the model, to ensure
            that the components are healing from anemia.

         c. If other convenient, quick-win opportunities arise to refactor
            code that is nearby the code being fixed, jump in and make it
            right. These efforts could focus on additional modularizing of
            code and/or factoring the Service Layer business logic into the
            model. Remain somewhat conservative so that this work doesn’t
            result in regression. All such changes should always be tested.
            These quick-wins must not require hours of labor, only minutes
            here and there.

         d. As each change is made and all tests pass, commit the test and
            main code changes to the primary codebase.

Step 3. When additional changes are required to fix bugs or add features in
        code that has already received some care, take the opportunity to
        discover opportunities for more refactoring.

         a. Create preparatory tests for all of the following refactorings.

         b. Modularize other source files (e.g., classes) related to the ones
            that were previously changed but were left in the old modules
            because they didn’t require change at the time.

         c. Factor additional business logic from the Service Layer into the
            model; that is, when the model is anemic, the only chance of
            finding business logic is in the Service Layer.

         d. As each change is made and all tests pass, commit the test and
            main code changes to the primary codebase.

Step 4. When a Service Layer takes several parameters that will be used for
        setting data on Entities, refactor all related parameters into their
        respective Value Object types. Pass the Value Object types into the
        Entity behavioral methods that were previously introduced upon
        aggregating Entity setters into a single behavioral method on an
        Entity.

Step 5. As the codebase becomes more stable and there are fewer bugs to fix
        expediently on a daily basis, use the time to refactor as defined in the
        previous steps. At this point, the improvements will tend to
        accelerate because the team has grown in experience and confidence.
    Consider a reasonable module structure for the eight Bounded Contexts of
the Auto Insurance System built as a Monolith. As seen in Table 10.2, each
of the Bounded Contexts has a corresponding module just under the
NuCoverage company identifier. Every submodule under the context-
identifying module addresses a specific architectural concern.


Table 10.2 Business-centric Modules and Structure for the Monolithic
Auto Insurance System
Context Module            Submodule                      Description
nucoverage.intake                                        Primary Intake
                                                         module
nucoverage.underwriting                                  Primary
                                                         Underwriting
                                                         module
                           application                   Application
                                                         Services/Service
                                                         Layer
                           infrastructure                Adapters and
                                                         data objects
                                                         home
                           infrastructure.data           Data objects
                                                         used for
                                                         deserializing
                                                         from REST
                                                         requests and
                                                         serializing to
                                                         REST responses
                           infrastructure.query          Query model
                                                         interfaces
                           infrastructure.messaging      Messaging
                                                         adapters
Context Module             Submodule                       Description
                            infrastructure.persistence     Persistence
                                                           adapters
                            infrastructure.resource        REST resource
                                                           adapters
                            model                          Domain model
nucoverage.claims                                          Primary Claims
                                                           module
nucoverage.renewals                                        Primary
                                                           Renewals
                                                           module
nucoverage.risk                                            Primary Risk
                                                           module
nucoverage.rate                                            Primary Rate
                                                           module
nucoverage.policyholder                                    Primary
                                                           Policyholder
                                                           module
nucoverage.billing                                         Primary Billing
                                                           module


    In Table 10.2, the submodules of every context module are not shown.
Instead, the submodules of the Underwriting context module are shown; they
are representative of the common submodules to be found in the other context
modules. There are likely to be other submodules, especially within the
model of each context. There might be other submodules inside the
infrastructure module. For instance, if gRPC is used, there would be an
infrastructure.rpc submodule.
    Although it might be tempting to immediately break this Monolith into
separate executable components, such as Java JAR files or Windows DLL
files, it’s probably best to leave the entire system in a single source project
and single executable component for a time. The reasons are explained in the
next section, “Break the Coupling.”
    Working in this way with a gradually but continuously improving
codebase for a number of months, and possibly fewer months than
anticipated, will take the code from a muddy mess to a much more readable,
changeable, and stable version of itself.
    A friend of one of the authors, experienced in the construction industry,
asserts that it requires one-tenth or less of the amount of time to tear down a
building structure in an orderly fashion as was required to build it. The
purpose is not merely to destroy the building, but to reuse all of its
significant parts. Software construction is not much like the building
construction industry, but this assertion might well provide a clue to the
orderly refactoring and restructuring of a large system codebase with the
intention to significantly reuse its code. Although the codebase has been a
liability up to this point, it is possible that existing code is simpler to
reshape than it is to newly construct. If it required 10 years to reach a
position of deep technical debt, it could require as much as one year for a
team to work their way out of that debt by using the stepwise approach to
improvement we just described. Assuming a team has the experience to
skillfully address this difficult situation, it certainly won’t require 10 years
to reach a vastly improved state. At a minimum, one-tenth of the original
build time frame is a decent goal to set for this refactoring, and the team
could potentially even outperform it by a considerable margin.


Break the Coupling
There’s still a major challenge to overcome. So far, the team has avoided
breaking the strong coupling between most components. That challenge is the
most difficult part of successfully chipping away at change to reach a fully
refactored system codebase. Breaking the strongly coupled components into
loosely coupled or completely decoupled components is hard work. In
reality, tight coupling in the Big Ball of Mud is likely one of the biggest
reasons for the mysterious bugs that have undermined system quality and
plagued the development team. It’s been the most difficult kinds of bugs to
track down. What is more, some such bugs in the midst of a wildly confusing
Big Ball of Mud might never be completely understood. The root cause of the
relentless system failings must change.
    Consider what’s happened to this point. All components of a specific type
(Entities, for example) that were previously in one very large module are
now spread across several contextual modules. Sure, housing components in
their contextually correct modules is a desired effect. What isn’t desired is
the coupling that still exists between the components. This has been
purposely left unaddressed because it’s the most difficult of refactorings to
deal with, and it may be very disruptive to a large team of developers. It’s
easy to damage the stability of the system and interrupt previously good
progress when working through decoupling efforts. That’s the bad kind of
easy.
    Because there is still coupling between contextual modules, it might be
best to use a mono-repo for source code revision control for the time being.
Some even prefer a mono-repo on a long-term basis. Initially, this might help
reduce the complexity of maintaining dependencies across executable
components, such as Java JAR files and Windows DLL files.
    As Figure 10.4 shows, the legacy Policy, Claim, and Policyholder were
previously under a single overly crowded module known as
NuCoverage.ais.entity, along with all other Entities in the entire system.
Now they are all relocated to a specific contextual module and submodule.
Good. But examine the lines that indicate coupling between the Entities.
Although the coupling was previously the result of major problems, it was
nearly invisible to the developers unless they were specifically looking for
it. Now it’s started to stick out like a sore thumb. Breaking these couplings
apart is tedious work, but it can be readily accomplished.
Figure 10.4 Entities have been relocated to contextual modules, but
are still coupled.


   The primary strategy for decoupling can be summed up in two rules:

  1. For components that are coupled but have been relocated into separate
     contextual modules, make it a top priority to break the coupling during
     this step. Assuming that there are business rules across contextual
     modules that require consistency between components, employ eventual
     consistency.
  2. For components that have landed in the same contextual module,
     prioritize these as least important to decouple for the time being.
     Assuming that there are business rules across contextual modules that
     require consistency between components, employ immediate,
     transactional consistency. Address these as potential candidates for
     eventual consistency after the first priority decouplings are achieved.

Addressing the first priority requires eliminating inter-context component
direct coupling. To collaborate and integrate between contexts, there must be
some coupling. Still, the kinds of coupling can be changed and the firmness
of attachment greatly reduced.
    As Figure 10.5 demonstrates, coupling is reduced in three ways:
     There is no longer transactional consistency of components in different
     contextual modules.
     Lack of transactional consistency means that temporal coupling is
     greatly reduced.
     There are no direct object references from components in one
     contextual module to those in other contextual modules. References are
     by identity only.




Figure 10.5 Breaking coupling of inter-context dependencies with
event-driven architecture.


    An example of reference by identity only is seen in Claim, which holds
the policyId of the Policy against which the claim was filed. Also, an
Account holds one or more policyId references for each of the policies
issued to the policyholder. The same goes for each of the claims filed, with
the Account holding a claimId for each. There might be other value data held
along with the identity, such as a policy type being held along with its
respective policyId.
    As discussed in Chapter 5, the Renewals Context requires a Policy type
in its model. The Policy in the Underwriting Context is the original record of
its issuance. Creating a Policy in the Renewals Context is not duplicating
code or wrongly disregarding the Don’t Repeat Yourself (DRY) principle.
The Renewals Context has a different definition for Policy, even though it is
related to the original record of its issuance. That’s part of the purpose of
Bounded Contexts. The explicit separation acknowledges and protects the
differences from a confusing merger of two distinct languages into one
language that is wrong for both uses. The best models reflect a team’s ability
to sustain elevated communication in a context.


               Disregarding DRY (Don’t Repeat Yourself)

   There is a cost to code unification. It results in coupling and
   complexity, and leads to increased communication between modules
   and the teams working on them. Still, code repetition is bad.
       The zealous pursuit of DRY is often based on the
   misunderstanding that DRY is about code. It’s not. It’s about
   knowledge. DRY is meant to emphasize that the duplication of
   knowledge is a poor choice. For example, the Claims Context might
   have a Policy as a Value Object with all the properties needed by
   Claims. The Policy in the Underwriting Context is an Entity, and very
   different from the Policy in Claims. Those holding the wrong view of
   DRY would insist on unifying both into a single class; however, doing
   so would result in a complex model, including the creation of a “god
   class” that is highly coupled to everything else.
       Such unification blurs the boundaries between two separate
   contexts that should purposely model a Policy as two different
   concepts. Bounded Contexts are entirely about dividing concepts into
   contextually correct models by business language. Creating a unique
   kind of Policy in both Underwriting and Claims is not a violation of
   DRY, even if some aspects of the code in the different models bear
   some similarities.


   Another tedious challenge is to migrate existing database tables to
support the new context boundaries for the new model Entity types. Breaking
coupling apart on models will almost certainly require changes to the
database.
    When using object-relational mapping, usually one Entity references
others using foreign keys, both with forward and reverse relationships. The
foreign keys constraints across contextual databases/schemas will be
eliminated, and very likely present within the same database/schema.
Depending on the kind of database in use, one or more columns might be
needed to hold identities of associated Entities, or those might be embedded
in a fully serialized Entity state. Reference by identity techniques are used
both for Entities of the same context and those of inter-context references.
    Database migrations are common in enterprise applications, so they
should not be viewed as perilous steps. Nevertheless, these migrations must
be handled carefully, which further emphasizes the need to be conservative
in carrying out these decoupling efforts as gradual, stepwise refinements. As
explained in the section “Right from Wrong,” the team should create a
separate database, database schema, or access-managed database tables for
each newly defined context.
    Next, the team will take on the second priority refactoring—that is,
breaking up as much of the same-context coupling as possible. Using
Aggregate (Entity transactional boundary) rules, decouple all Entities from
the others unless they require transactional consistency to meet business
rules.


                    Beware of Design for Code Reuse

   One of the principles of modularized design is to advocate code
   duplication over coupling. Clearly, while the ability to reuse code is
   good, as with many good ideas that are misunderstood and misused,
   creating more problems by demanding reuse can cause more problems
   than it solves. Bob Barton2 said, “Good ideas don’t often scale”; in
   other words, an idea that works for a limited scope will not work
   when applied to a much broader scope. Think of building a
   skyscraper with the same principles, tools, and techniques as are used
   to build a single-family house. It won’t work. The same is true for
   design for code reuse at a larger scale. The developers risk spending
   far too much time trying to shape the code for future use, and in the
   end the code will have little or no actual utility. In fact, designing for
   reuse could render single-use code a failure. Design for use over
   reuse.
   2. Bob Barton was recognized as the chief architect of the Burroughs B5000 and other
      computers such as the B1700, and a co-inventor of dataflow.

       Designing for and implementing reusable code requires foreseeing
   future needs. Predicting the future is very hard, and few are those who
   are proved right. That’s why this book advocates experimentation
   with acceptable failure. Thus code duplication, which should actually
   be viewed as code contextualization, is preferable, and often
   advisable, to avoid ill-advised coupling.


     All “helper” and “util” (or utilities) components can quite possibly be
entirely eliminated from the legacy system. There should be no need, or very
little need, for extraneous components. That lot is often created to house
common code used across business components, such as to enforce rules, to
validate and constrain state, and to run simple processes. These components
should instead be primarily part of the domain model. If they cannot be
placed entirely in Entity and Value Object types, then they would likely be
amenable to handling by Domain Services. Otherwise, some “helper” and
“util” components may remain or become part of the Service Layer (i.e.,
Application Services).



Keeping It Right
After all the organization’s determination and vigorous effort was focused on
the goal of building a strategically significant modular Monolith, whether
from the start or by means of laborious correction, it would be most
disappointing for the good results to gradually slide into a Big Ball of Mud.
This can happen when those who were committed to the original effort leave
the project. Although such a migration is likely to happen to some extent, the
organization should try to prevent a mass exodus.
    On the one hand, system project departures might happen due to normal
attrition. Competent and driven engineers want new challenges, and there
might be no way to keep some of them on the team. When this occurs, the
most experienced hands must be replaced with others who have similar
strengths and skills.
    On the other hand, oftentimes management will move the more
experienced engineers to new projects, and backfill the hole they leave with
less experienced engineers. This tends to happen when the well-designed
system is considered to be “done” and enters “maintenance mode.” The
problems with this approach are discussed in Chapter 2 in the section,
“Getting Conway’s Law Right”—specifically at the bullet point, “Keep the
team together.” Considering a system that solves complex problems to be
“done” when it reaches version 1.0 or even 1.4 is generally the wrong
mentality. Some of the most important insights into ways to differentiate
value very likely lie ahead.
    The very nature of new innovations in an existing large codebase means
that significant architectural and model design changes will need to occur. A
domain model concept could be split to form multiple new concepts, or two
or more could be joined to form a single concept, each with different
transactional boundaries, and take on new characteristics—and that means
big changes will occur. These kinds of changes must not be left to less
experienced developers without any architecture and design supervision.
Getting these kinds of changes wrong could easily be followed by a slide
down a slippery slope, and end in a new Big Ball of Mud.
    Just as with any investment, watchful care is necessary to keep a strategic
codebase in good order. A strategic software differentiator is worthy of
continued investment and care to keep its dividends flowing for years to
come.



Summary
This chapter considered the whys and hows of Monoliths as a choice of
architecture. Monoliths should not be mistaken for a Big Ball of Mud.
Monoliths are a means to achieve well-architected solutions from the start,
or to mold them correctly after they were previously poorly architected.
Business capabilities were considered again in this chapter to demonstrate
their relationship to software models. Architecture Decision Records
(ADRs) can help the team define, propose, track, and implement their major
architectural choices. Guidance on how to avoid coupling between
components was also presented. Strong coupling generally leads to a tangled
Big Ball of Mud—something that should be avoided, and if not, eventually
defeated. The chapter finished with advice on how to keep the strategic
codebase in good order.
    Here are the action items from this chapter:

     Not every system requires a Microservices architecture. Monoliths can
     be a viable alternative and architecture choice for many teams and
     enterprise situations.
     Business capabilities define what a business does, and typically do not
     change even if a business structure is reorganized.
     Understanding the importance of and maintaining a clean separation
     between every Bounded Context is a key to properly implementing a
     Monolithic architecture correctly.
     Transforming from a Big Ball of Mud to a Monolith requires a lot of
     business-minded strategic discipline, intelligent tactics, and patience.
     Event-driven architectures make coupling explicit, highlighting inter-
     context dependencies.
     Beware of maintenance mode, because it is often a trap that results in
     overlooking the strategic differentiating value that is still ahead.

   Chapter 11 explores a few options for transitioning from Monoliths to
Microservices. The first option explores how to get from a well-
modularized Monolithic architecture to Microservices. The second option
coerces a Big Ball of Mud Monolith to Microservices. The first option is
relatively straightforward—but don’t plan on the second option being
anything other than very difficult.



References
[BC-HBR] https://hbr.org/2004/06/capitalizing-on-capabilities
[CRC] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Class-responsibility-
collaboration_card
[Domain-Modeling] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain_model
[Evolutionary] Neal Ford, Patrick Kua, and Rebecca Parsons. Building
Evolutionary Architectures. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2017.
[Manifesto] https://agilemanifesto.org/
[OOD] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object-oriented_design
[OOP] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object-oriented_programming
[POSA1] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pattern-
Oriented_Software_Architecture
[XP] http://www.extremeprogramming.org/rules/customer.html
Chapter 11

Monolith to Microservices Like a
Boss


There are circumstances when the use of Microservices is the best choice.
These were discussed primarily in Chapters 1, 2, and 8. Despite the
advantages of Microservices, making sweeping changes to introduce system-
wide use of Microservices might not be necessary. The number of
Microservices should be determined by business purpose and technical
justification.

  Note
  The running case study of NuCoverage, which was introduced in
  Chapter 1 and has been carried throughout this book, is continued in
  this chapter. If some context within the examples seems to be missing,
  please see the earlier chapters.


   Transitioning from a Monolith-only architecture to some qualified number
of Microservices might mean preserving some parts of the Monolith to
operate in conjunction with the newly extracted Microservices. There might
also be a good reason to entirely replace a Monolith with a full array of
Microservices. This chapter addresses both approaches.



Mental Preparation with Resolve
When breaking off Microservices from a Monolith, the freshly introduced
distributed system components bring along a significantly higher potential for
runtime failure. It’s not only the Microservices that introduce failure
potential, but also the overall distributed ecosystem required to provide an
end-to-end solution. This is largely due to the increased dependency on the
network to communicate across different computing nodes, and the fact that
both tend to fail: The more nodes, the greater likelihood of failure of both
network and nodes. To fathom the new complexities, it’s beneficial to
consider the effects of falling into the traps of distributed computing. Here is
a list of Fallacies of Distributed Computing [Fallacies]:

  1. The network is reliable.
  2. Latency is zero.
  3. Bandwidth is infinite.
  4. The network is secure.
  5. Topology doesn’t change.
  6. There is one administrator.
  7. Transport cost is zero.
  8. The network is homogeneous.

   Now, consider the results of believing these and how distributed systems
will fail because they are untrue. These are reasons that distributed systems
software will fail:

  1. The network is unreliable and changes over time without warning, and
     software lacks resiliency and recovery tactics.
  2. Latency is indeterminate and unpredictable, and worsened by the
     obliviousness common among inexperienced software developers.
  3. Bandwidth fluctuates at counterintuitive times, and that inconsistency is
     exacerbated by naivete.
  4. The network is not fully secure due to the Internet’s historical openness,
     as well as the complexity faced by security teams required to balance
     default openness with corporate security policies, and even
     complacency and laxness among common users who don’t follow
     mandated security policies.
  5. Topology has suboptimal routes and produces unexpected bottlenecks.
  6. An unknown number of administrators create conflicting policies that
     slow or block traffic.
  7. Building network transports is nontrivial. and mistakes in their
     construction can have negative financial and/or functional and quality-
     associated consequences.
  8. Assuming that the network is composed entirely of the same or similar
     parts leads to the effects of 1–3.

Points 1–3 indicate the primary problems with distributed systems. Most
software is unprepared to deal with network failures, or any other failures
common to distributed computing. Points 1–8 address network failures alone;
they don’t account for software failures unrelated to the network. Now add to
that list all other kinds of failure: application errors, server and other
hardware failures, persistence resources that are slowed or downed, and
other general infrastructure failures. All of these problems can lead to
catastrophic consequences.
    Distributed systems must have non-naive designs. Design with failure
prevention and recovery in mind:

     Failure supervision: Prevents cascading failures by placing software
     bulkheads around application components.
     Circuit breakers: Prevents cascading failures by blocking access to a
     failed component until that component is restored to full operation.
     Retries with capped exponential backoff: Provides the means for
     failed requests from a client to a server to retry until the server is
     restored to full operation, but without overwhelming the network or
     server by rapidly repeating retries at a constant rate.
     Idempotent receivers: When a server receives the same request more
     than once, it knows how to safely ignore subsequent operations, or
     otherwise perform the operation again without negative consequences.
     Out-of-sequence message deliveries: Generally applicable in the
     same way as commutative math (2 + 3 = 3 + 2), which works with
     addition and multiplication, but not with subtraction and division.
     Additionally, rather than demand a specific sequence, understand what
     qualifies as the total of all necessary message deliveries and take next
     step(s) only when the total is reached.
     Avoid overwhelming requests and/or deliveries using loadshedding,
     offloading, and backpressure: To lighten the runtime burdens on
     subsystems, loadshedding drops/ignores some unnecessarily work.
     Offloading distributes work to other workers that have capacity.
     Consumers use backpressure to limit the number of elements that might
     be received from a producer within a given time frame.

Of course, none of these remedies, by itself, will solve all problems. At a
minimum, failure supervision can prevent catastrophic outcomes.
Supervision might be difficult to introduce for some architectural designs.
The use of the Actor Model will generally provide supervision as a platform
requirement, but not always. Still, most software runtime environments are
devoid of supervision.
    Yet, even employing supervision should not be considered a complete
solution on its own. Continual failure with local recovery only, and lack of
cooperative stabilizing designs, will not reverse deteriorating conditions or
prevent compute anomalies. Think of the negative consequences of
improperly handled redelivery and wrongly ordered mutating operations.
For example, continuously adding to or subtracting from financial accounts
because of unrecognized redelivery will inflect monetary damage on
multiple parties, and possibly even prove fatal to the party responsible for
the error.


      Migration to Microservices Should Not Be a (Typical) Project

   The characteristics of a project include plans, scheduled workload,
   allocation of resources and developers, a starting date, various
   milestones, and probably an end date. For a Monolith-to-
   Microservices effort, creating a project with the aforementioned
   constraining characteristics is a mistake. Undue pressure to commit to
   a date before gaining understanding, confidence, and momentum will
   lead to problems. Friction will arise between people working on “the
   new thing” and those tethered to ongoing business pressures and
   servitude to legacy. There is always underestimation of effort and
   complexity, and the likelihood that engineers lack skills to drive the
   needed change.
       The transition from Monolith to Microservices should instead be a
   continuous and uninterrupted effort backed by all stakeholders who
   are committed to success. It must be a business goal. It’s critical for
   teams to be stacked with the right people—mature developers with
   advanced skills. Further, the teams should be organized around
   business capabilities and have cross-functional skills as discussed in
   the section “Culture and Teams” in Chapter 2, “Essential Strategic
   Learning Tools.”


   Teams must prepare mentally and resolve to prevent landslide failures,
and anticipate that the small technical failures that arise can become large
technical failures. This must be followed up with robust designs and
implementations, which are essential for successful distributed systems
operations.



Modular Monolith to Microservices
Chapter 10, “Building Monoliths Like You Mean It,” outlined two
approaches for building modular Monoliths:

     Build a modular Monolith from the start.
     Recover from the negative effects of a Big Ball of Mud by gradually
     refactoring it into a modular Monolith.

Figures 10.2 and 10.3 in Chapter 10 illustrated the ultimate goal of forming
eight contextual modules inside a single deployment container named Auto
Insurance System. Using either approach, NuCoverage now has a modular
Monolith. Even so, some new dynamics with the system are causing pain.
    There are five total teams working on the eight subdomains and
contextual modules. Each of the modules changes at a different rate, but two
of the eight modules, Risk and Rate, change especially frequently. The
business rules change in both, as well as the algorithms that execute the
actuarial processing and the pricing calculations, respectively. Additionally,
Risk and Rate must scale independently due to their heavy loads and their
demand for greater resources. Moreover, the company plans to expand the
Rewards offerings, and its addition of new lines of insurance will bring
several other impacts. This means that Rewards must be factored out of
Policyholder Accounts. The custom-built legacy Billing subsystem is getting
long in the tooth and lacks new billing rules and payment options. It will be
replaced by a Software as a Service (SaaS)–based billing solution.
   All these changes call for extracting some contexts from the Monolith into
Microservices:

  1. Risk Context
  2. Rate Context
  3. Policyholder Accounts Context
  4. Rewards Context
  5. Billing Context

There will be other extractions, but there are enough unfamiliar challenges to
be faced with these initial ones. Making stepwise refinements with these five
business capabilities will help the teams gain experience with relatively low
risk.
    The initial tasks extract one contextual module at a time. As Figure 11.1
shows, within a relatively short time, the four existing contexts have been
extracted into four autonomous Microservices. Although the Billing Context
will eventually be completely replaced, the team takes a conservative step of
extracting the existing modular context with a specific purpose in mind.
More refactorings follow.
Figure 11.1 The modular Monolith shrinks in the face of context
extractions into Microservices.


  Note
  As was the case with Figure 10.3, the user interfaces are not shown in
  Figure 11.1 for the sake of simplicity, so it appears that users are
  interacting directly with adapters. Also, the users would usually be
  shown strictly on the left of each subsystem. Here the architectures are
  “rotated” for the convenience of showing users surrounding the system
  and having roles in multiple subsystems. User interfaces are discussed
  later in the section “User Interactions.”


    Because the Monolith is already using a Message Bus with reliable
delivery, the inter-context communication using commands, events, and
queries by means of messaging requires no changes when extracting new
contexts. What changes is that any new Microservices must manage security
on their own to keep out bad actors and provide authorization to control who
can do what. Also, the Rewards model must be extracted from the
Policyholder Accounts Context and the Billing Context must be greatly
altered, mostly to provide a transport between the existing system and the
new SaaS Billing service. And we’ll add another item to the technical
concerns checklist: Each Bounded Context should own its own database(s).
    The SaaS-based Billing service doesn’t understand the Auto Insurance
System’s events or offer a means to stream events to it. As seen in Figure
11.2, to facilitate the integration of the NuCoverage system with the
subscription Billing service, we need a small Billing Interchange Context
that is responsible for translating the local events into API calls on the SaaS-
based Billing service.
Figure 11.2 Continued rework and model extractions.


    There is a feed available from the SaaS-based Billing service that
provides a stream of event records that carry information about what has
happened there. The NuCoverage Billing Interchange Context translates that
stream into events that are published onto the NuCoverage Message Bus and
understood where needed. The event types already exist, so the system as a
whole does not need to change as a result of using a new Billing subsystem.
    The initial extraction of the Billing Context might seem like a wasteful
step because much of it will be thrown out. It’s true that the legacy business
logic in Billing will eventually go away. Even so, taking advice from
refactoring guidelines, it would be safer to prove that extracting the current
Billing Context doesn’t break the system. Once that is done, each of the
features provided by the legacy Billing Context can be redirected one-by-one
to the new SaaS Billing service.
    True, the team could redirect Billing features one-by-one from within the
Monolith to the subscription service.1 Yet, taking the initial step will create
the separation that is ultimately desired. Specifically, the Billing capability
will no longer be inside the Monolith and there will be one less team to
cause a conflicting pace of change for the other teams. This will be
especially helpful as the intense refactoring of Billing takes place and
several releases begin occurring daily or at least weekly. Consider how
much time would be involved in extracting the current Billing Context
compared to the value it might or might not provide, and decide how the
team should proceed.
1. This is a form of the Strangler Fig Application pattern (also known as Strangler), which is discussed
   in the next section.

   Finally, the Rewards model is extracted from the Policyholder Accounts
Context into its own Rewards Context and packaged and deployed as a
Microservice. This is a fairly simple extraction because the current Rewards
support is implemented as just one or a few attributes on the Account type.
Nevertheless, migrating these into a new context and ensuring that all
Rewards concerns are now addressed in one place will provide at least
some opportunities for the team to pause and think. The good news is that the
number and types of Rewards can now more readily expand to popularize
new lines of insurance as the specific coverage products go live.



Big Ball of Mud Monolith to Microservices
The far more challenging approach to extracting components from a Monolith
involves decomposing a Big Ball of Mud directly into Microservices.
Considering that this effort requires assuming several complexities at once, it
isn’t difficult to perceive how challenging it is. All of the steps described in
the section “Right from Wrong” in Chapter 10 must be shoved and squeezed
through a narrow seam that must be pried open for each rework task. Because
this is all done while the existing Big Ball of Mud is still running in
production, nothing can be broken or compromised by this decomposition, or
at least not for very long. Collectively, the resulting sweeping changes will
be comparable to a very big leap forward. Even so, there’s a lot of weight to
lose and software strengthening required to make that strenuous long jump.
    Again, the major change involves transitioning from the troublesome
software development behaviors, pivoting on a pebble’s radius to become a
team operating in a highly optimized iterative process, while employing
business-driven strategy with quality assurance. This must happen quickly. A
tall order? Absolutely.
    Here’s a short list of what has to happen:

Step 1. Identify all business capabilities that exist in the Big Ball of Mud.

Step 2. Rank business capabilities according to strategic significance: core
        competitive advantage > supporting functionality > generic
        operations that could be replaced by third-party solutions.

Step 3. Gather an inventory of the business rules and functionality that are
        still relevant and now irrelevant.

Step 4. Decide which business capabilities will be extracted in priority
        order.

Step 5. Plan how the first of the business capabilities will be extracted.

Step 6. Work iteratively and deliver incrementally on steps 1–5.
   Early on, step 4 can bias the teams toward prioritizing its attack to obtain
an easy win. An example is replacing the legacy Policyholder Accounts with
a new Microservice. This would naturally lead to the Rewards Context
being created so that it can be extracted from Policyholder Accounts. These
changes are the least complex and can help build the teams’ experience and
confidence.
   Several varied details are inherent within step 5. The sections that follow
disclose the details, which are not necessarily given in sequential order.
Some steps may be taken at any given time as demand requires. For the most
part, this technique is known as “strangling” the Monolith, much in the same
way a vine strangles a tree.
User Interactions
The system remains enabled and available for users of the system at all
times. Thus, the user interface must remain consistent.
   Maintaining the system’s contract with users can be facilitated by placing
a Facade [GoF] between users and the Monolith. Figure 11.3 shows an API
Gateway as the Facade, which works as described next.




Figure 11.3 Use an API Gateway to direct user requests to the current
live contexts.


  1. Initially all user requests are directed from the API Gateway to the
     legacy Big Ball of Mud.
  2. As the features of business capabilities are extracted into Microservices
     and enabled for the user, the API Gateway is changed to direct some or
     all respective user requests to the newly enabled Microservice.
  3. This scheme can be used for A/B testing to determine if users in groups
     A and B have good/bad and better/worse experiences.
  4. If there are bad or worse experiences with the new Microservice, direct
     all user requests back to the legacy Big Ball of Mud.
  5. If tests determine that the newly enabled Microservice is sound and
     properly integrated, direct all user requests there.

Repeat these steps for every newly extracted Microservice.
    It is possible to succeed in redirecting requests without the use of an API
Gateway, but it requires changes to the UI. Although it might be more
difficult to perform A/B tests this way, it is still doable. The authors have
used this approach with success. Nevertheless, an API Gateway makes it far
simpler.
    A common complexity here, regardless of the approach used, is the need
to deal with single requests that must be split. This occurs when the legacy
and one or more new Microservices all provide part of the requested
service. Whatever the results they produce, the multiple outcomes must be
aggregated. This is much simpler to handle through an API Gateway. A query
request and response can often be readily aggregated. By comparison,
requests for creates and updates are not so readily aggregated. Some query
tools can make this task run more smoothly, but the solution might run the risk
of needing full and direct database access rather than using the well-
designed application and domain model. A query tool such as GraphQL can
also work through REST request–response communications, thus preserving
valuable application services and the domain model. The pattern has been
referred to as GraphQL for Server-Side Resource Aggregation [TW-
GraphQL].
    The preceding discussion points out a need to rethink how the user
interface is designed and built. As data becomes segregated into various
modules within the legacy, or as whole business capabilities are
reimplemented in autonomous Microservices, the user interface must display
the aggregation of the data from multiple sources to provide a meaningful
user experience. There is no longer just one place from which to get all the
data to render in the user interface.2 This is yet another reason to use an API
Gateway. As illustrated in Figure 11.4, the pattern that changes the way the
user interface works is known as Composite UI.
2. Actually, there was never a convenient way to aggregate data into the user interface from the Big
   Ball of Mud, although there was possibly an illusion that such a way existed from an outside
   perspective.




Figure 11.4 A Composite UI designed by NuCoverage for a rich user
experience.


    When using this pattern, the UI is aware that different components are
assembled within one Web page. This is accomplished by using the
relatively simple HTML Web markup language. It provides block-based
document segmentation or divisions, which can be used to compose various
areas of the Web page to show data from different subsystems. Each segment
or division gets its content from a different source. In Figure 11.4, there are
three user interface components to be rendered, which are obtained by
querying Underwriting in the legacy, and Risk and Rate in the new
Microservices. All of this aggregation and composition work can be
managed with an API Gateway. The API Gateway can use traditional REST
queries or specialized GraphQL queries.
   Note that it is possible to accomplish the same goals using other
approaches, such as a backend for frontend and micro frontends. These
approaches are described in detail in our follow on-book Implementing
Strategic Monoliths and Microservices (Vernon & Jaskuła, Addison-
Wesley, forthcoming).


Harmonizing Data Changes
While strangling the Monolith, the data that is being maintained in a
Microservice must be given to the legacy, and the legacy data must be given
to the Microservices. Otherwise, users will see inconsistent views of what
they perceive as the same data. Thus, whenever system state data is mutated
in the legacy, or when a Microservice’s state is modified, generally the
changes must be harmonized on the opposite side. That is, changes to the
legacy system state are generally made available to all Microservices that
use this data. Likewise, state changes made in a Microservice will likely be
needed by the legacy application. Because “generally” and “likely” aren’t
decisions, each case must be dealt with individually.

  Note
  It might seem better to refer to “harmonizing” as “ synchronizing,”
  because what is described here is a sort of synchronization. Yet, the
  data will no doubt take a different shape and possibly change its
  meaning between the legacy system and the new Microservices. Thus,
  the authors have chosen the terms “harmonizing” and “harmony.”
  What’s happening here is similar to two singers who have different
  vocal ranges, but can still sing in harmony.


    Such cross-process data harmony will be eventually consistent. Thus, if
the legacy system state changes, the Microservice that must be harmonized
will only be able to merge the changes after some delay. For this reason, the
Microservice will have at least a brief discrepancy with the data in the
legacy system. The same goes for the legacy system being eventually
harmonized with data changes in the Microservices. There isn’t much that
can be done about this temporary mismatch other than querying the multiple
sources of data and merging into the latest snapshot. Even so, changes to the
same data may occur before the current use case is completed. In distributed
computing, there truly is no “now,” and time always wins over consistency.
   Harmonizing data modifications on both sides is essential when both
remain at least partially dependent on the same data. This might seem odd,
but until an entire business capability is replaced by one or more
Microservices, all subsystems holding the same data must eventually agree
on the system’s state. This might be necessary for a while, despite it not
being the ultimate goal. The ultimate goal is a single source of truth.


                           Single Source of Truth

   Well-designed systems have single sources of truth, where a given set
   of data, such as an Entity, is owned by one subsystem of record.
   During Big Ball of Mud decomposition into Microservices,
   maintaining a single source of truth as a rule might or might not be
   possible while complex refactoring and extraction are under way.
       Some legacy systems are somewhat simpler to deal with, and
   maintaining strict single sources of truth throughout decomposition is
   possible. This could still require that the legacy data be updated from
   the results of data changes inside Microservices because of the need
   to easily query the data there. Nevertheless, all changes to the
   migrated data must be made in the owning Microservices only.
       If it is too complex to create strict single sources of truth, the rule
   might need to be relaxed for a while. Some codebases and database
   schemas are so convoluted that it is impossible to gradually release
   multiple Microservices into production while maintaining the strict
   single source of truth on a given Entity type at all times. To insist on
   the strict single sources of truth constraint at all times would likely
   mean that few, if any, Microservices would be gradually rolled out.
   The result would be more like a waterfall effort with a final big bang
   release after many months or even years of lift and tuck surgeries. The
   effort would likely be canceled before any, or at least more than a
   few, Microservices were deployed.
       Eventually, there should be only a single source of truth for each
   data element, within a system of record. This does not mean that no
   duplication of data can ever occur. Indeed, we acknowledge that
   attempting to keep two or more data elements that change often in
   harmony over the long haul is not only difficult but also quite risky.
   This series of multiple sources of replicated “truth” must not be
   maintained for long, and certainly not permanently. At some point, the
   strangling must prove deadly to the legacy. See the final section in this
   chapter, “Unplugging the Legacy Monolith.”


    Of course, having a single source of truth is impossible to achieve at all
times because at any given moment the changes in the legacy or a given
Microservice will be recorded in only one place. The harmony of system
state is achieved only eventually; that is, a true distributed system is always
eventually consistent. In reality, in a large and complex system with many
constantly changing sources of data, all system states are never fully
consistent. Achieving this feat would require defying the laws of physics, so
it’s best not even to try.
    Next, we’ll present three primary approaches to achieve eventual data
harmony of dependent system states: database triggers, event surfacing, and
Change Data Capture (CDC).


Database Triggers
The first approach uses database triggers. When a trigger fires, an event is
created to represent what changed, inserted into an events table, and managed
by the transaction scope. The event is made available to Microservices
through message publishing. A given use case might need triggers to fire on
multiple tables in a single transaction. The problem with triggers is that
database products other than RDBMS types don’t support them. Even when
they are supported, triggers can be tedious to work with. Triggers can also be
slow when used on a database under heavy load.
    The authors have used this technique when no better solution was
available. In one case, the legacy Big Ball of Mud was implemented in an
arcane language and framework with a sizable amount of reimplementations
and new work using a modern programming language. It would have been
quite difficult to use anything other than triggers due to the extensive use of
the Microsoft SQL Server database in that environment. Fortunately, with
SQL Server, all triggers can fire before the transaction commits, enabling the
aggregation of multi-table modifications into a single event. At the time,
Change Data Capture was not an option. Using database triggers in this
situation was challenging, but it worked.


Event Surfacing
The second approach to harmonize data is to create a table in the legacy
database that will be used to insert events related to each translation. Call it
the events table, and the technique event surfacing. We have named this
technique event surfacing because the original implementation was not
designed with events, but now events are being jammed into the legacy
system codebase to make strangling it easier. The difference between
database triggers and event surfacing is that the first approach creates an
event when one or more triggers are fired, while the second approach
explicitly creates the event in the application code and persists it into the
database along with the entities.
    When inserting, updating, or deleting one or more application entities to
carry out a use case, a new event is created by the application (perhaps the
Service Layer) and inserted into the events table. The Entities and the event
are committed in the same transaction. The event will later be queried by a
background task and published via messaging.
    The complexity here is that it is often difficult to find a good place to
create and inject the event. Sometimes multiple Service Layer components
will modify the system state independently while being managed within a
single transaction scope. Unless some top-level component is orchestrating
the subtasks, how and where is a single event created? Perhaps each
individual Service Layer component will create a unique event, and the
Microservices must deal with multiple events rather than one. If a thread-
local or thread-static concept is available, and assuming the legacy code is
single-threaded per request, this could be used to advantage in aggregating
all in-thread changes into a single event. These technical topics are
discussed in detail in our follow-on book, Implementing Strategic
Monoliths and Microservices (Vernon & Jaskuła, Addison-Wesley,
forthcoming).


Change Data Capture
A third approach uses special database tooling that supports Change Data
Capture [CDC]. In fact, triggers can be used to implement a form of Change
Data Capture, but a class of highly specialized tools for this task are
available that work even better. When such tools are applied, the database
transaction log holds only changes to be made to the underlying data. An
extraction tool runs as a separate process from the database, which
eliminates any problematic issues related to coupling and contention. This
specific technique is referred to as database transaction log tailing.
    For example, the tool named Debezium [Debezium] is available as open
source. Debezium has had some limitations in regard to the number of
database products it supports, but its abilities have been steadily increasing
and improving. Unsurprisingly, Debezium gives priority to supporting open
source database products. At the time of writing, there were nine total
supported database products—six open source and three fully commercial.
Take this product seriously and watch this space.
    Using Change Data Capture is very efficient when its proper use is well
understood. Such tools can be used for other solutions, and there are patterns
to describe those. The additional patterns are described in the follow-on
book within this series, Implementing Strategic Monoliths and
Microservices (Vernon & Jaskuła, Addison-Wesley, forthcoming).


Applying Data-Harmonizing Events
All of the previously discussed approaches to harmonizing data are a means
to the same end. They are not intended to make the Big Ball of Mud a better
place to work, although that can be a goal (as discussed in Chapter 10). In
this case, NuCoverage has decided that its Big Ball of Mud should be
decomposed piece by piece, and finally decommissioned.
    Likely one of the previously discussed approaches will suit this specific
situation, or at least provide some significant clues about what will work in
other cases. Once an approach has been chosen, it’s time to apply it to
harmonizing data. Figure 11.5 and the list that follows explain how this
process works from end to end.




Figure 11.5 Use change data capture to distribute local data
modifications to system peers.


  1. The user submits a request.
  2. The API Gateway directs the request to the legacy system.
  3. Data modifications are persisted into the legacy database transaction
     log.
  4. Change Data Capture reads the database transaction log and dispatches
     to a listener, and the listener creates an event that is placed on the
     Message Bus.
  5. The Message Bus delivers the event to the Microservice, which
     establishes consistency (database persistence implied).
  6. The user submits a request.
  7. The API Gateway directs the request to the Microservice.
  8. The event emitted by the Microservice (database persistence implied)
     is placed on the Message Bus.
  9. The Message Bus delivers the event to the legacy, which harmonizes the
     data.
 10. The harmonized data modifications are persisted in the legacy database.

    Note that both sides must understand how to detect and ignore events that
are seen during a full round-trip. That is, an event caused by the legacy that
harmonizes state in the Microservice will, in turn, emit an event that the
legacy system will receive. The legacy system must know to ignore the event
that is the result of a full round-trip. The same goes for an event that
originates in the Microservice as a result of a direct user action and is used
to harmonize state in the legacy, which in turn emits an event from Change
Data Capture. The Microservice must know to ignore the event that is the
result of a full round-trip. If this consideration is not taken into account, a
single database transaction could lead to infinite synchronization. This
outcome can be avoided by each event carrying the originator’s correlation
identity/tag, which must be propagated by all receivers into their emitted
events. When the originator’s correlation identity/tag is seen back home, the
event carrying it can be safely ignored.


Deciding What to Strangle
The previous two subsections describe the procedures for facilitating the use
of a pattern named Strangler Fig Application [Strangler-Fig], or simply
Strangler [Strangler].3 Here, we consider how to work within the ecosystem
that the Strangler creates.
3. Interestingly, Martin Fowler later decided that he didn’t like the name “Strangler Application,” which
   he originally used, because the word “strangler” has an “unpleasantly violent connotation.” Yet,
   encyclopedias and other sources use “Strangler” as a common name for this plant species. The
   authors use the name best known in the software industry, which is “Strangler.”

    Interestingly, the physical strangler fig itself, if it were sentient, might be
labeled an opportunist. It first gets a ride up a tree from inside an animal,
such as a monkey, and is then deposited on the tree in a most unpleasant
package. Growth begins by taking in sunlight and nutrients from rain, as well
as plant litter from the tree that becomes its host. From its humble
beginnings, the strangler fig spouts roots that begin a slow growth following
rich and convenient paths. When the roots find the ground, they embed
themselves securely into the soil and begin growing aggressively. This opens
new opportunities to forcefully overtake the host tree by consuming the
nutrients that the tree would otherwise receive. At the point where it covers
the whole host tree, the strangler fig tightens its grip by developing thicker
roots and squeezes the trunk of the tree. It simultaneously stretches above the
host, enveloping the top and blocking the sunlight’s reach. Incredibly, it’s not
only strangulation that kills the tree, but also depletion of sunlight and root
monopoly of soil nutrients.
    The organic “opportunistic strategy and tactics” provide a framework for
succeeding when strangling a legacy Big Ball of Mud. This is a fitting
metaphor from which we can learn valuable lessons.

       Things will be ugly and smelly when we first start out, and it might
       appear to be a long way to fall from our humble beginnings, but starting
       is a must.
       Begin slowly, and be biased toward prioritizing for an easy win. The
       example we cited earlier was replacing the legacy Policyholder
       Accounts with a new Microservice.
       After achieving some early growth and gaining confidence, it’s possible
       to sprout new roots by following a few more opportunities for certain
       wins.
       Continue in this mode until the team has become grounded in the
       techniques.
       Start aggressive growth, tightening the grip around the Monolith.
       If the choice is to kill the Monolith, that final squeeze might not be a
       long way off.
   One good thing about this approach is that it might not be necessary to
carry the baggage of the legacy forward. It’s possible that some existing code
could be migrated to Microservices, but that should be done with caution.
Strangling is not the same as refactoring from a Big Ball of Mud to a modular
Monolith, and this is a great opportunity to shed the weight of the legacy and
gain strength from a well-designed set of Microservices. This is discussed in
more detail later in this chapter in the section “Unplugging the Legacy
Monolith.”
   Consider some cautionary points regarding the decomposition of a Big
Ball of Mud Monolith into Microservices:

     Beware of blurred behavior. The legacy code has no explicit model of
     a given business behavior. Other impediments include components that
     have too many responsibilities, business logic is flung into the user
     interface and infrastructure, the user interface and service layer yield
     conflicts, and behavior and business rules have been duplicated. (On a
     more technical note, these problems may include issues such as low
     cohesion of related components and high coupling between any two or
     more components.) This list of impediments is not exhaustive, but the
     examples chosen are certainly frequently seen in the wild. One of the
     authors encountered a scenario where the user interface sported
     business rules that triggered massive technical workflows and
     processes and integration with business partners.4 A hierarchical
     selection list housed business logic, and depending on the list items
     involved, different categories of data would be updated, triggering the
     workflows and processes. The codebase provided no practical
     assistance in understanding the business logic and rules. To change this
     joyless situation, a deep analysis and extensive archaeological dig,
     including help from business experts, finally led to knowledge
     acquisition.
    4. In case it is not obvious, this is an antipattern that tends to go far beyond wrong.

     Don’t carry over the wrong behavior. Very often some parts of the Big
     Ball of Mud were wrongly implemented, from both business and
     technical perspectives. Business people must accomplish their work,
     even in the face of poorly designed systems. As a result, user-contrived
     workarounds abound. This tacit knowledge is gained and shared in the
     user community, and software never answers their needs. Familiarity
     breeds complacency. Fight it: Don’t replicate the same wrong model
     into the new Microservices. Instead, challenge business experts
     constantly to help discover breakthrough innovations. Keep checking
     the pulse of the legacy decomposition, monitoring how results are being
     received. One heuristic is to observe users accomplishing a certain task
     with the system. Does the user experience appear to be intuitive? Do
     users require special knowledge to work around problems? Do users
     need paper instructions, sticky notes on their display, or secret
     spreadsheets with hacks? The more experienced users might carry most
     of the knowledge in their head, so user experience issues might be
     difficult to see in some cases. Observe, yes—but also ask and
     challenge. Be understanding and empathetic.
     Don’t implement a new feature in the Monolith. The ongoing
     decomposition effort might take some time, but the business won’t grind
     to halt while waiting for those tasks to be accomplished. Rather, the
     business will constantly demand new features. If some business
     capability currently in the Monolith is supposed to be reimplemented in
     a Microservice, try to avoid implementing a new feature for that
     business capability in the Monolith, if at all possible. Doing so would
     be a waste of time and effort, unless there is a very urgent need to
     introduce the new feature in one of the remaining vestiges of the
     Monolith. Besides limiting the growth and size of the Monolith (which
     should instead be shrinking), building the new feature inside a
     Microservice will accelerate development and more quickly deliver
     the business value.

    Extracting business capability behavior out of a Big Ball of Mud requires
very hard work. There has to be a substantial effort devoted to rediscovering
the domain, identifying its rules, and challenging them.



Unplugging the Legacy Monolith
On the one hand, at some point it might be practical or even necessary to put
the final squeeze on the legacy and bring about its death. On the other hand,
that action might be either impractical or unnecessary. If the decision is to
keep some parts of the legacy in operation, it might be possible to rid its
codebase of obsolete code. Or it could be that the code was previously so
tangled that it’s not practical to remove large swaths or even small pieces.
The saddest part is knowing that harmonizing data between the legacy and
Microservices will very likely be necessary for the foreseeable future and
beyond.
    If some business capabilities will not be extracted at all, or will remain
relevant for a short time, leave the legacy Monolith running. Of course, this
is not desirable because the rigging to maintain data harmony will almost
certainly be necessary even for the reduced number of business capabilities
in the legacy. Naturally, leaving the Monolith running simultaneously with the
new Microservices will increase the operational and development
complexity, which will certainly lead to greater business risk.
    Some situations will not tolerate retaining the legacy system, even when
terminating it is associated with great complexity. Consider the cases where
companies are themselves in a stranglehold by computing machinery and
software that is long obsolete or extremely unpopular, not to mention the
grand expense of renewing licenses and support contracts. It can feel like
paying the mob for protection from the mob itself. This legacy overhead
imposes a huge “tax,” and unless the organization takes drastic measures, it
never, ever, ends. Even beyond vendor lock-in, in some situations it has
become nearly impossible to hire developers to maintain the legacy. The
original code might have been implemented by people who now have great-
grandchildren, or are no longer with us.
    For these reasons and more, a less significant muddy legacy system
cannot remain in service beyond a given license and support contract
expiration date. A few semi-tractor trailers (e.g., lorries or large hauling
trucks) must pull up to a shipping dock, where burly movers push some
behemoths into the trailer, and take them to the museum of computing. The
team charged with decommissioning the legacy must be the best possible
human form of the strangler fig. For some CEOs, CFOs, CIOs, and others
who would like to move on from the 1960s and 1970s, unplugging machinery
will have never felt so good.
Summary
This chapter considers how to move from a Monolithic architecture to a
Microservices architecture. Because it is essential to understanding the
challenges of Microservices, an introduction of the issues related to
distributed computing was provided first. Next, we considered the simplest
step of the transitioning from a well-modularized Monolith to Microservices.
With that understanding, we outlined the challenges related to extracting
Microservices directly from a Big Ball of Mud, and provided step-by-step
guidance for doing so. Lastly, the chapter described the goal of eventually
unplugging the legacy Big Ball of Mud in the face of the challenges
associated with shedding unhealthy technology lock-in.
    The primary takeaways of this chapter are as follows:

     Distributed computing introduces several complex challenges, which
     are mostly avoidable when employing a Monolithic architecture.
     The simplest and most direct way to realize Microservices architecture
     from a legacy system is to start with a well-modularized Monolith, like
     that developed in Chapter 10.
     It is far more challenging to extract components from a legacy Big Ball
     of Mud system directly into Microservices, because doing so requires
     assuming several levels of complexities at once.
     Consider an API Gateway as a means to aggregate requests between
     several Microservices and legacy applications when each implements
     parts of requested services.
     A composite UI is a great way of aggregating data from multiple
     services.
     Consider having always a single source of truth for any data when
     moving features from a Monolith to Microservices.
     Database triggers, event surfacing, and Change Data Capture are
     patterns to consider when migrating a legacy system to Microservices.

  In Chapter 12 (the final chapter in this book), we will look at everything
we have seen so far.
References
[CDC] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Change_data_capture
[Debezium] https://debezium.io/
[Fallacies]
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fallacies_of_distributed_computing
[GoF] Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, and John Vlissides.
Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995.
[Strangler] https://docs.microsoft.com/en-
us/azure/architecture/patterns/strangler
[Strangler-Fig] https://martinfowler.com/bliki/StranglerFigApplication.html
[TW-GraphQL] https://www.thoughtworks.com/radar/techniques/graphql-
for-server-side-resource-aggregation
Chapter 12

Require Balance, Demand Strategy


This book has taken us on an intense journey through many aspects of
business strategy, digital transformation, strategic learning tools, event-first
modeling, reaching domain-driven results, and purposeful architecture with
both Monoliths and Microservices.
    In this final chapter, we provide a chapter-by-chapter summary of our
journey. First, though, we reinforce a key message: There must be balance
between business functional requirements and quality attributes, where the
latter must be justified by identifying purpose. This balance is key if the
organization is to remain laser-focused on strategic innovation.



Balance and Quality Attributes
Software architecture is multidimensional. The section “Right from the Start”
in Chapter 10, “Building Monoliths Like You Mean It,” highlights the
importance of trade-offs in the face of balancing quality attributes, such as
performance, scalability, throughput, security, and others. One such trade-off
is to balance between performance and scalability without compromising on
either of them. Choosing which one of these requirements is more important
is essential, because it’s impossible to optimize equally for both. Ultimately,
one or the other must have the edge in the realized quality attributes.
    Thus, selecting between trade-offs is equally important for modular
Monoliths and Microservices. Take another look at the quality attributes in
Chapter 8, “Foundation Architecture.” Consider how the chosen architecture
affects the quality attributes, and how the quality attributes affect the chosen
architecture. It’s not difficult to understand why finding balance is so
important. Here’s a summary:

     Performance: Network latency affects performance. Microservices
     require a network, if not multiple networks. There are various options
     for lowering latency by ensuring there are fewer network requests and
     by making network requests simultaneously.
     Scalability: There is a definite advantage to using Microservices when
     high scalability is necessary, because they can independently scale the
     resource-intensive parts of the software. Yet, if a Monolith is designed
     and implemented as a cloud-native system, then it can be deployed as a
     Function as a Service (FaaS) component, yielding a cloud-scale
     application.
     Resilience, reliability, and fault tolerance: Both Monoliths and
     Microservices can be designed and implemented with these important
     qualities. There is less technical overhead in doing so with Monoliths.
     Use of the Actor Model and other single-process Reactive architectural
     approaches can increase these qualities in both Monoliths and
     Microservices.
     Complexity: There are several trade-offs between Monoliths and
     Microservices in terms of complexity, which tend to have opposite
     consequences.

    The quality attributes discussed in this section are not exhaustive. For
example, we could include a discussion about usability, and how it is
interrelated with the requirements we did discuss. Of course, security and
privacy, as discussed in Chapter 8, are not optional. Our focus here is on
what are generally the most salient among the quality-related consequences
brought from choice.
    There is no clear winner between modularized Monoliths and
Microservices. As always, it is important to understand the circumstantial
trade-offs. Modularized Monoliths fit well in the context where performance,
reliability, and the least possible complexity are required. Microservices
shine when it comes to scalability, availability, reliability, and fault
tolerance. Deciding which approach to pursue isn’t a binary selection
process. Instead, the options can be balanced to ensure the optimal
application of each.
    Finding balance is hard, especially in a large system, but tools are
available to help us do so [ATAM]. Sometimes, and possibly even more
often than not, a blend of modular Monolith and Microservices will give the
greatest payoff. Remember, the ultimate goal is to develop strategically
significant software that produces breakthrough innovations.



Strategy and Purpose
The overarching theme of this book has been reaching strategic goals by
means of strategic thinking and strategic software development. Recall what
has been explored in this journey, chapter by chapter.


Business Goals Inform Digital Transformation
Business goals should be differentiating; otherwise, transformation is just
another buzzword that is expensive to chase, but too elusive to catch. Here
are the big ideas from Chapter 1, “Business Goals and Digital
Transformation.”

     If pure invention seems nearly impossible, continuous and tenacious
     improvement is not. Although you will fail if you attempt to leap from
     A to Z, moving from A to B, and then from B to C, and then … is a
     feasible way to achieve innovations that outstrip imaginary
     transformation, such as on-premises to cloud migrations. (For a
     reminder of why this is “imaginary transformation,” see the section
     “Digital Transformation: What Is the Goal?” in Chapter 1.)
     Software goes wrong when lack of knowledge and necessary shortcuts
     aren’t recognized and then addressed by knowledge acquisition and
     corrective refactorings. A Big Ball of Mud becomes the destination,
     where everything becomes slow, and getting out of the hardened mud is
     difficult after spending a long time encased in it.
     Operating under the effects of Conway’s Law is an inescapable fact of
     life. Communication is the key to knowledge acquisition, and
     organization structure can either help or hinder this process. Organizing
     teams around areas of expertise with the right people and clear
     communication is the best way to innovate with success. Of course,
     we’re not recommending the creation of silos, but rather creating teams
     within specialized areas of a system that include cross-team
     communication and overall shared goals.
     Minds can be on autopilot, or they can be engaged in exploratory and
     deep thought. Rethinking multidimensionally and critically is a good
     way to challenge the status quo, with the goal of transitioning from a
     position of ordinary to a fresh strategic vantage point.
     Monoliths are damaging when poorly designed, and Microservices are
     disastrous when misappropriated. An architecture is good for its
     intended purpose. Purposeful architecture is the best architecture.
     #Agile is what teams make of it. If it is kept lightweight and focused on
     satisfying the customer, it will take teams in the direction of success. If
     it becomes heavyweight and ceremonial, those using it are by definition
     doing #agile rather than being #agile. Doing #agile will hinder
     success.
     A software system that has become deeply mired in debt, and possibly
     reached maximum entropy, took years or even decades to reach that
     point. Succeeding under such conditions depends more on attitude than
     on distributed architectures. Positive attitude is developed through
     confidence; confidence is achieved by smart choices and continuous
     improvement.


Use Strategic Learning Tools
A strategy is the what aspect of business creation, leading to new initiatives
that are intentionally unique and produce a combination of profit sources.
Make culture a tool. Learning to learn for strategic advantage is the essence
of Chapter 2, “Essential Strategic Learning Tools.”

     Decisions are necessary. Deciding when to make decisions is as
     important as the target decision. Make decisions at the last responsible
     moment. Being wrong so that you can eventually be right is the purpose
     of experimentation.
     Failure is not fatal when building an agile, failure-tolerant culture that
     fosters willingness to experiment. Providing people with the
     psychological safety needed to experiment and fail will only increase
     business success and competitive advantage. It makes teams stand up to
     Conway’s Law.
     Design modules first and push long-term deployment decisions as far
     out as possible.
     Innovating toward strategic, competitive advantage is hard. Achieving
     this aim requires focusing on software design based on business
     capabilities and tackling business challenges. Don’t allow poor
     architecture and design to derail business innovation.


Event-Driven Lightweight Modeling
In software development, some fundamental concepts underlie the way that
components work well together. Modeling software rapidly while
collaboratively applying the fundamental concepts of components is a
powerful approach that accelerates knowledge acquisition and success. Put
these tools from Chapter 3, “Events-First Experimentation and Discovery,”
to work.

     Software modeling is a big part of making sense of the complexities of
     business. The models produced are used to relate everyday business
     procedures and processes to software components.
     Model with events first, but include commands, policies, entities, and
     other elements where they benefit learning. This is a low-tech tool for
     experimentation that leads to understanding innovation within high
     technology.
     Although intended for in-person collaboration, EventStorming can be
     simulated online with remote teams using a virtual modeling surface.
     Using EventStorming big-picture modeling is an exercise in
     discovering the overall flow of the system under exploration. It’s an
     initial step toward dynamic and rapid learning.
Driving Business Innovation
Every business has a specialized sphere of knowledge, which is gained
through preexisting expertise and the activities of collective and shared
learning. Once this knowledge is reflected in software products, it has
influence on consumers. In actuality, businesses have multiple, if not many,
spheres of knowledge, and the chapters in Part II dive into ways to take
advantage of the core parts.

     When it comes to business software strategy, understanding where to
     invest the most and where to invest the least is critical to success.
     Software reaches across the breadth and depth of an entire business.
     The entire domain or sphere of knowledge of all software in a large
     enterprise is voluminous. Use the concepts of domains and subdomains
     to understand the problem space and strategic decision making.
     Separate the context of communication within a specific, focused
     sphere of knowledge into a Bounded Context. Develop a language
     around the salient features of the communication, and maintain its
     consistency of meaning inside the boundary.
     Understand the specific core, supporting, and generic subdomains
     within a system. Know where to invest in core differentiation, where to
     provide supporting models, and where commercially available
     solutions would work best.
     Use Context Maps to recognize and improve inter-team relationships
     and for selecting the appropriate integrations patterns.


Events-First Architecture
Not every architecture style and pattern will suit any set of arbitrary
business, technical, scale, performance, or throughput constraints. The
specific set of constraints will drive a purposeful architecture. These are
important takeaways from the chapters in Part III.

     Problems are likely to be encountered when there are fundamental
     differences between the external devices and other mechanisms used to
     interact with a software service or application. Use the Ports and
   Adapters architecture to separate the technology from the outside world
   into consumable stimuli offered to a service or application.
   A message-driven architecture emphasizes sending and receiving
   messages as playing a prominent role throughout the system. The
   benefits realized from this architecture include loose coupling of
   software components and services as well as reduced dependencies on
   expected outcomes within an arbitrary time dictated by technology.
   Events are inherently messages, so a message-driven architecture
   supports an event-driven architecture.
   REST is an architecture style and pattern that supports request–
   response actions. In consequence, REST can be useful even in an event-
   driven architecture. The requests are made using verb-based methods.
   Requests can be used by a consumer to register for events to be
   published by a system by means of REST-over-HTTP.
   Within the domain model of an event-driven architecture that uses a
   domain-driven approach, powerful tactical tools can be employed to
   manage the complexity of the business domain: Entities, Value Objects,
   Aggregates, Domain Services, and functional behavior.
   Use process choreography and orchestration, where fitting, to manage
   long-running system-wide workflows. For simpler long-running
   business software processes that require limited individual steps,
   choreography is suitable. For more complex processes with a fair
   number of processing steps, orchestration works best.
   Use Event Sourcing when maintaining an audit log of all past
   occurrences in a service or application is a business concern. Employ
   Command Query Responsibility Segregation (CQRS) when queries are
   complex and the organization can realize advantages from tuning the
   answers before the queries are executed.
   Managing security and privacy are certainly not the least important
   among the many architectural decisions. In fact, in recent years these
   issues have been pushed to the forefront of information technology
   concerns.


Monoliths as a First-Order Concern
Architecting and designing Monoliths to be both useful and manageable over
the long haul is not a pipe dream. For most companies, developing Monoliths
for use over the long term makes a lot of sense. Even if the organization
decides to use at least some Microservices, starting with a modular Monolith
makes it possible to reach decisions at the last responsible moment. Using
the following advice compiled from Chapter 10, “Building Monoliths Like
You Mean It,” can help teams focus on all-important software delivery rather
than getting sidetracked by architecture decisions that they might not have
ever needed.

     Effectively architecting and designing Monoliths from the start can be
     accomplished using straightforward steps.
     Seek business capabilities to implement in a Monolith, because the
     business capabilities of a company are natural places for division
     between various models. These decisions will be driven by business
     experts and technical stakeholders who engage in specific capability-
     centric conversations.
     Even after a Monolith becomes the unfortunate home of a Big Ball of
     Mud, an organization can use specific measures, as thoroughly
     explained in Chapter 10, to form a modular Monolith.
     After traveling the bumpy road to form a modular Monolith from a Big
     Ball of Mud, it might be that remaining with the modular Monolith
     makes the most sense.


Purposeful Microservices from a Monolith
If there are good reasons to separate some Bounded Contexts from a
Monolith into autonomous Microservices, that transition will be most
straightforward when the organization starts working from a modular
Monolith. If that’s not a luxury afforded to you, and the leap from a Big Ball
of Mud into Microservices is necessary, you can follow some steps to make
this shift happen more easily. When there is a purpose to using
Microservices, by following the guidance from Chapter 11, “Monolith to
Microservices Like a Boss,” you’ll be kicking [amorphous] and taking
names.
     As with any complex software development undertaking, developing
     the right mental perspective is quite important before embarking on a
     journey to develop an architecture. Yet, when pursuing distributed
     systems with a Microservices architecture, some challenges will stand
     out quite starkly. Performance, scalability, reliability and fault
     tolerance, and other complexities must be well understood.
     From team dynamics and technical perspectives, the choice of which
     Bounded Contexts to extract from a Monolith, even a well-modularized
     one, is not arbitrary. The best candidates are based on factors such as
     rate of change; a general need for autonomy, including independent
     deployments; performance; and scalability.
     Even when working from a modular Monolith, at the early stages the
     team should extract one coarse-grained contextual module (Bounded
     Context) at a time into a Microservice. Look for quick wins. After
     gaining experience and confidence, the team might be able to evolve
     more than one Bounded Context into a Microservice. If it encounters
     problems when doing so, the team can fall back to moving one Bounded
     Context to a Microservice at a time.
     Extracting Microservices from a Big Ball of Mud is very challenging,
     but the team can use some measures to render this a success. Move with
     caution and seek opportunities that lead to achievable wins.


Balance Is Unbiased, Innovation Is Essential
Software architecture is multidimensional, and its evolution requires
reaching a clear understanding of the current trade-offs. In the face of
balancing non-functional requirements, such as performance, scalability,
throughput, security, and others, it is essential to understand the trade-offs
and make unbiased decisions. If you want uncompromising value delivery,
heed these lessons.

     Imagining that Microservices automatically deliver higher performance
     is wrong. The only way to understand the trade-offs is to measure. In-
     process method invocations are faster than network operations.
     Performance and scalability can be achieved in different ways, and
     Microservices aren’t always a clear winner in that regard.
     Using “transformation” as an excuse for pursuing Microservices and/or
     a cloud-native system is not innovative or differentiating. Following
     this course of action must provide an advantage. Many companies have
     already adopted Microservices and cloud-native systems when it was
     not necessary, and have paid a heavy price for those bad decisions,
     both financially and operationally.
     Business goals must be sought for differentiating value. This does not
     negate making other strategic or tactical moves, such as moving to the
     cloud or using Microservices. Ultimately, those decisions should help
     the business to achieve differentiating value, not hinder it.
     Being wrong so that you can eventually be right is the purpose of
     experimentation. Knowledge workers must feel safe and be safe while
     seeking to acquire knowledge.
     Practice deep thinking and critical thinking when asking “Why?” and
     “Why not?” Experiment toward reaching strategic business goals.
     Apply strategic thinking and continuous improvement that leads to
     distinguishing software systems.



Conclusion
In 2011, Forbes published an article titled “Now Every Company Is a
Software Company” [Forbes-ECSC]. That article asserts:

   The era of separating traditional industries and technology industries
   is over—and those who fail to adapt right now will soon find
   themselves obsolete.

Now, at least 10 years after those words were written, many companies have
adopted that point of view. Many more companies have not. There are still
other companies that are somewhere in between.
    Does that mean companies that have not achieved a good amount of
progress toward digital transformation are now obsolete? Look for the
startup that could well displace that company within a few years. One
problem with huge companies is that they can’t move quickly. Another
problem is that they can’t detect their own slow death, because they can’t
understand that a $20,000,000 loss in a quarter occurred because consumers
are moving to the bright, young, agile competition. The company might
literally not even be aware of that new startup, or know of only one out of
five serious challengers.
    The answer to this dilemma is not for large companies to go on a
scavenger hunt, looking for all the new startups that could eat their lunch—
that is, unless buying their lunch (acquisition) is the only way to prevent this
fate. Allowing and actually enabling nimble startups to innovate over your
company with the idea of future acquisition is not a great strategy. Those
companies could be second in line or off the offering price by a few billion
dollars. Unicorns happen.
    Don’t trade the opportunity to turn a current core software system into the
next generation of SaaS or PaaS in your industry. We, the authors, truly hope
to have provided both incentive and inspiration to start your journey, or to
keep innovating along the path that has already begun.



References
[ATAM] https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset-view.cfm?
assetid=513908
[Forbes-ECSC] https://www.forbes.com/sites/techonomy/2011/11/30/now-
every-company-is-a-software-company/?sh=7cfd5ec2f3b1
Index

A
Access control lists (ACLs), 197
Access Tokens (JWT), 197
Accidental complexity, xix, 12, 226
Actor Model
    in architectural comparison chart, 191
    defined, 189
    in message-driven architecture, 214–215
    for resilience and fault tolerance, 290
    in transition to Microservices, 270
Adaptability, xx, 71
Advertising, FAANG company, xvii
Aggregates
    in concept modeling, 167, 168–169, 173
    Event Sourcing and, 223–227
    in EventStorming model, 87, 91
    purpose of, 107
Agile Manifesto, 34, 55, 111, 244
#agile development
    ADR for, 72
    benefit of, xx–xxi
    culture of, 43
    doing vs. being agile, 292
   to implement business capability, 127
   last responsible moment decisions, 55, 129
   mindset of, 34–36, 37
   tenets of, 111
Amazon, xvii, 9
Anticorruption Layer, 133, 141–142, 163
APIs
   and Anticorruption Layer, 141
   for Conformist pattern, 140
   for Customer-Supplier Development, 138
   in Monolith-to-Microservices transition, 276–277, 282–283
   in Monolithic architecture, 251
   Open-Host Service, 133, 143–148
   security considerations, 197, 198
   timeline for, 144
   upstream establishment of, 138
   when to create, 143–144
Apple, xvii, 39, 199
Application Service
   with Domain Model, 188
   Service Layer of, 187
   vs. Domain Service, 170
Approval, 93
Architect, 71
Architecture. See also Message- and event-driven architecture; Ports and
    Adapters (Hexagonal) Architecture
   ad hoc, 11
   ADR record of, 71–72
  Big Ball of Mud, 14–15
  business and technical, 48
  changes to, 11, 37
  clean, 71
  comparison chart, 191
  cost of, 182
  decisions, 248–253
  defined, 10–11, 70–71, 181–182
  design and, 181
  diagrams notation legend/key, xxi–xxii
  features of, xv, 10
  foundation. See Foundation architecture
  Modules. See Modules/Modularization
  Monolith. See Monoliths
  purpose-driven, 183, 193, 291
  REST. See REST
  strategic, 48, 70–72
  supporting user outcome, 9
  system vs. service level, 183
Architecture Decision Record (ADR)
  for decision tracking, 43, 71–72, 248–249
  NuCoverage case study, 72–74
  in REST Message Exchange decision, 74
  as shown on the Message Bus, 251
Asynchronous messaging
  alternatives to, 251
  API offered as, 147
  failures avoided by, 211, 232
    for inter-context communication, 192, 202
    for Message-based REST, 216
Atomicity, 168
Attitude. See Mindset
Authentication, 197–198
Authorization, 197–198
Auto-increment columns, 216
Autonomy, 137

B
Backend as a Service (BaaS), 229
Balance, 237, 289–290, 296
Barton, Bob, 263
Behavior
    blurred software, 285
    functional, 107, 170–173, 174
    sustaining wrong, 285–286
Bell, Alexander Graham, 81
Bias, 42
Big Ball of Mud
    communication and, 19, 37
    defined, 14–15
    example of, 15–18
    and failure, 45–46
    getting unstuck from, 36
    Microservices as, 33
    modularity to avoid, 54, 264
    Monoliths that aren’t, 30, 253
   NuCoverage example, 243
   scopes of knowledge in, 113, 115
   transition to Microservices, 275–286, 296
   as unreliable, 204
   via maintenance mode, 122–123
Big-picture modeling, 89–92, 94, 293
Blame, 46–47
Booch, Grady, 181
Boundaries, 151–152, 251
Bounded Contexts
   capability housed in, 125
   changes to, 126, 129
   Context Maps between, 131–133
   Core Domain, 122–123
   defined, xiv–xv
   evolution of, xv
   integrating, 194, 216
   as modules in a Monolith, 190–192, 247, 249–253, 296
   nesting, 128–129
   at NuCoverage, 160, 190, 193, 247
   ownership of, 130, 252
   partnerships between, 133
   Published Languages for, 148–151
   reducing coupling in, 253
   size of, 128, 129, 130
   as sphere of knowledge, 293
   Ubiquitous Language and, 117–121
Brandolini, Alberto, 82, 83, 85
Bugs
   discovering source of, 227, 257
   disorder and, 11
   as inevitable, 226
   in maintenance mode, 122
   quick fixes to, 11, 156
   as reason to backlog items, 110
   tests to patch, 256
   tight coupling as, 259
   via lack of tests, 204
Business
   communication with developers, 48, 50
   means of advancing, 110, 115
   simplifying, 70
   software as essential to, 297
   software as hampering, 14–15
   startups vs. established, 123
Business capabilities
   contextual divisions and, 105, 125–128
   cross-functional teams, 49, 50, 51
   cycle of insights, 50
   designing software for, 245
   knowledge within, 127
   in legacy systems, 124
   modularity for, 52, 255
   in Monolith-to-Microservices transition, 275, 286
   NuCoverage example, 245–248
   process and, 57–62, 127
    recognizing, 5, 245
    as revenue generators, 126
    as subdomains, 114
    in Topography Modeling, 154
Business experts
    #agile collaboration with, 111, 115
    in architecture conversations, 71
    communication with developers, 48, 50
    at EventStorming sessions, 82, 92–93, 94
    in Topography Modeling, 153
Business processes
    business capabilities and, 57–62, 127
    choreography and orchestration, 212, 294
    Domain Service to guide, 169
    event-driven management of, 220–223
    at EventStorming sessions, 88
    NuCoverage example, 158

C
C-level executives
    as audience for this book, xviii–xix
    hierarchical command by, 23
    as introverts, 77
    vs. technical leadership, 22
C programs, 27, 28
Calques, 141
Change. See also Transformations
    of Aggregate states, 223–225
   anticipating, 264
   architecture supporting, 11
   to Bounded Contexts, 126, 129
   within change, 256–259
   cooperative, 23
   in product types, 18
   rate of, 192
   replacing legacy systems, 27–28, 278–283
   resistance to, 22
   software impacts of, 11
   strategic, 71
   value of, 36
Change Data Capture [CDC], 281–282
Chaos, 254
ChaosMonkey, 205
Chaotic domain, 68–69, 73
Cheatsheet, 90
Child entities, 166
Choreography, 212, 213, 220, 294
Clear domain, 67, 69, 73
Client-server communication, 194
Cloud infrastructure
   allocating talent to, 125
   distributed computing and, 56
   for Monolith messaging, 192
   as serverless, 230
   transformation via migrating to, 9
COBOL, 27, 28
Code
   duplication of, 263
   functional behavior language for, 171
   repetition of, 262
Collaboration. See also EventStorming; Teams
   innovation via, 77
   remote, 84
   for sound architecture, 71
Command buttons, 78
Commands
   CQRS pattern, 228–229
   events and, 78–81
   at EventStorming sessions, 87, 91, 94
   in message-driven architecture, 213, 221
   software models and, 81
   in Topography Modeling, 154
Commitments, 36, 40–41, 240
Communication. See also Languages
   about modules, 53–54
   architecture via, 181–182
   Big Ball of Mud via poor, 19, 37
   Bounded Contexts for, 119–120
   client-server, 194
   collaborative, 77
   complexity and, 205
   innovation via, 82
   inter-team, 135
   by introverts, 77
   knowledge and, 19–20
   within a Monolith, 192, 251–252
   optimal, 23–24
   in remote meetings, 84
   within subdomains, 114, 251, 272
   and team structure, 48–49
   Telephone Game, 21–22
   via Context Mapping, 131–133
Competition, 7, 83
Complexity
   accidental, xix, 12, 226
   balancing, 290
   Cynefin Complex domain, 68, 69, 73
   Microservices, 206
   Monolith, 205
   Monolith-to-Microservices transition, 277
   Ports and Adapters, 186, 187
   as quality attribute, 205–206
   software, 70
   tracking, 206
Complicated domain, 67–68, 69, 73
Concept modeling
   Aggregates, 168–169
   applying, 173
   Domain Services, 169–170
   Entities, 166–167
   functional behavior, 170–173
   language for, 165–166
   Value Objects, 167–168
Concurrent development, 40
Confidence, 37
Conformist pattern, 133, 139–141
Consensus, 93
Consulting, xiii–xiv
Consumer-Driven Contracts, 147
Context Mapping, 131–151
   Anticorruption Layer, 133, 141–142
   APIs for, 143–148
   Conformist pattern, 133, 139–141
   Customer-Supplier, 133, 137–139
   for loose coupling, 192
   NuCoverage example, 160–163
   Open-Host Service, 143
   Partnerships, 132, 133–135
   principles of, 163
   Published Language, 133, 148–151
   purpose of, 127, 293
   Separate Ways pattern, 133, 151
   Shared Kernels, 132, 135–137
Contexts
   Bounded. See Bounded Contexts
   business capabilities and, 125–128
   decoupling, 260–261
   domains and subdomains, 112–115
   in EventStorming model, 88, 91
   mapping, 124
   naming, 120
   size of, 128
   small context scope, 113
   in Topography Modeling, 153
Contextual expertise, 105–106
Continuous Architecture in Practice (Murat, Pureur, Woods), 182, 196
Contractor model, 43–44, 126
Conway, Mel, 19
Conway’s Law
   defined, 19
   and design flexibility, 24
   as a fact of life, xv, 291
   modules and, 51, 52
   and team structure, 47–48
Core Domain/context
   focus on, 105, 121–123, 130
   integrating, 131
   NuCoverage example, 245–247
   support for, 123, 124, 134
   understanding, 293
Cost
   Actor Model to reduce, 214
   of architecture, 182
   of bargain-basement hires, 244–245
   of cyber-attacks, 196–197
   of experimentation, 82
   of innovation, 122
   of server use, 230
Coupling
    breaking, 259–264
    in Conformist pattern, 140
    as DDD failure, 155
    and event translation, 137
    failures and temporal, 211–212
    loose, 30, 157
    in a Monolith, 192, 253
CQRS (Command Query Responsibility Segregation), 225, 227–229, 294
Creativity, 93
Critical thinking, 24–26, 42
CRUD/CRUUD, 193–194, 195
Culture
    failure-tolerant, 45–46, 82
    teams and, 43–45
    “us versus them” mentality, 23
Cunningham, Ward, 13
Customer-Supplier Development, 133, 137–139, 163
Cyber-attacks, 196, 199
Cynefin
    case study using, 72–74
    for decision tracking, 43
    framework defined, 66–69

D
Data
    atomic translation of, 168
    business model based on, 165
   collection and protection, 199–201
   harmonizing changes to, 278–283, 286
   history of digitized, 242
   latency, 201–203
   replication, 155
   respect for origins, 157
   security, 196
   theft, 199
   value of, 199
   viewable vs. operational, 227–228
Databases
   Aggregates and, 168–169
   in Bounded Contexts, 252
   decoupling and changes to, 262
   in Monolith-to-Microservices transition, 279
   sharing, 143
   to track events, 216
Debezium, 281–282
Debt metaphor, 12–13, 36, 292
Debugging, 206, 227
Decision making
   ADR to record, 43, 71–72, 183
   Impact Mapping, 63–66
   last responsible moment, 40, 55, 206, 292
   as a learning tool, 40–43
   life and death examples, 47
   on Monolithic architecture, 248–253
   questions to ask, 25, 29
   timing of, 41
   tracking, 43
   via Cynefin, 66–69
Decoupling
   adopting temporal, 157, 232, 252
   in a Monolith, 259–264
   via process management, 212
Deep thought, 24–26
“Delaying Commitment” (Thimbleby), 41
DELETE, 194
Dependencies
   adapter interfaces to manage, 187
   ADR record of, 72
   as DDD failure, 155
   mapping direction of, 106
   minimizing code, 49
   in a Monolith, 192, 261, 265
   Published Language and, 162
   security and, 197
   temporal, 211–212
Deployment
   complexity and, 206
   at the end, 55–57, 292
   maintenance mode after, 122–123
   in partnership, 134
Design
   architecture and, 181
   for business capabilities, 245
   design-level storming, 89
   for failure and recovery, 205, 269
   flexibility, 24
   purpose of, 183
   reusable code, 263
   for security, 197, 198
   supporting user outcome, 9
Developers
   #agile collaboration with, 111
   challenging, 125
   hiring top, 244–245
   as industry leaders, xviii
   maintaining experienced, 264
   mental engagement of, 25
   work with business experts, 48, 50
Development
   best practices, 25
   customer-supplier, 133, 137–139
   factors affecting, 66
   honoring differences in, 103–104
   knowledge-driven, 104, 107
   negative side of, xix
   security considerations, 198
   of subdomains, 124
Differences
   Bounded Contexts to define, 119–120
   contextual divisions, 105
   development that acknowledges, 103
Differentiation
   as a business goal, 296–297
   as a strategy, 8, 77, 100
   via collaborative communication, 77
   via deep thought, 26
   via innovation, xviii, 37, 70
   via knowledge, 115
Digital Transformation. See Transformations
Disagreements, 94
Discipline, 51
Disorder domain, 68–69
Displays, external, 84
Distributed computing, 56, 268
Diversification, 16
Docker containers, 192
Domain-Driven Design (DDD)
   Bounded Contexts in, 119–120
   defined, 110
   failures in, 154–157
   functional behavior models, 170
   going beyond, xxi
   introduction of, 83, 244
   knowledge acquisition in, 110
   modeling tools, 173
   results via, 104
Domain-Driven Design Distilled (Vernon), 166, 173
Domain-Driven Design (Evans), 170–171
Domain Events, 201
Domain Model, 188–189, 191, 253, 294
Domain Services, 107, 169–170, 173
Domains. See also Concept modeling
    core, 121–123
    Cynefin, 66–69
    defined, 104, 109–110
    modeling, 106–107, 165, 173
    scopes of knowledge in, 112–113
    and subdomains, 112–115, 120–121
Don’t Repeat Yourself (DRY), 151, 262
Downstream teams
    Anticorruption model for, 141–142
    Conformist pattern for, 139–140
    Customer-Supplier relationship for, 137–139
    Open-Host Service, 143–148
Duplication, 151, 262, 263

E
Edison, Thomas, 81
Efficiency, 70
Encryption, 198
Engineering model, 43–44, 47
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), 59
Enterprise scope, 112, 120
Entities
    aggregates and, 169
    in concept modeling, 166–167, 173
    in data-centric business, 165
   decoupling, 260, 262–263
   in EventStorming model, 87, 91
   modeling with, 106
   in refactoring operations, 257
   in Topography Modeling, 154
Entropy
   of established business, 123
   righting the wrongs of, 254
   as a slow process, 292
   software, 13–14
Equities trading, 136
Erder, Murat, 182
Errors, 216
Escalation of commitment, 36
European Union (EU), 200
Evans, Eric, 170–171
Event-driven architecture. See Message- and event-driven architecture
Event logs, 216–218
Event Sourcing, 223–227, 294
Event Surfacing, 281
Events
   data-harmonizing, 282–283
   at EventStorming sessions, 83, 87, 90
   integrating, 145
   as a learning tool, 81
   in Topography Modeling, 154
   translating, 136–137
Events-first experimentation
    architecture supporting, 182
    commands and events, 78–81
    domain modeling via, 173
    EventStorming, 82–99
    overview of, 5–6
EventStorming
    big-picture modeling, 89–92, 293
    finding boundaries in, 151, 152
    NuCoverage example, 94–99, 158–160
    in-person, 85–89, 92–94
    process of, 82–83
    remote, 84–85
Experimentation. See also Events-first experimentation
    #agile, 36
    blame vs., 46
    in the Core Domain, 121
    with domain modeling, 173
    enabling safe, 51
    failure-tolerant, 45, 82, 154
    innovation via, 10, 110, 115, 296–297
    investing in, 82
    for market response, 29
    by talented people, 122
Expertise, 115
Extreme Programming (XP), 111, 244
Extroverts, 77

F
Facade, 276
Facebook, xvii, 98
Failures
   architectural, 71
   avoiding, 154–156, 163–164
   culture tolerating, 45–47, 292
   in DDD, 154–157
   designing for, 205
   with distributed software, 267–270
   embracing, 5
   fear of, 45–46
   modularity, 255
   in Monolith-to-Microservices transition, 267
   with REST, 211
   Thomas Edison on, 81
Fallacies of Distributed Computing, 268
Fault tolerance, 204–205, 290
Fear
   of failure, 45–46
   FOMO, 25, 42
Feedback, 182
Floating point values, 135
Flow
   structure vs., 61
   in Topography Modeling, 152
   of work, 127
Foote, Brian, 182
Foundation architecture
    Modularization, 190–193
    overview of, 177–178, 207–208
    Ports and Adapters (Hexagonal), 183–187
    quality attributes, 196–206, 289–290
    REST Request-Response, 193–195
    Service Layer with Domain Model, 188–189
    Service Layer with Transaction Scripts, 187–188
Fowler, Martin, 284
Fratto, Natalie, xx
Function as a Service (FaaS), 204, 231, 232, 290
Functional behavior, 107, 170–173, 174
Functional Core, 170, 173, 189–191
Functional programming, 189, 231

G
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), 199, 201
Generic subdomains, 124–125
GET, 194
Goals, business
    architecture supporting, 181, 182
    based on business size, 123
    capabilities and process to support, 60–62
    as Core Domains, 121–123
    digital transformation as, 8–10
    Impact Mapping of, 63–66, 126
    to inform transformations, 291–292
    initiatives as tied to, 29
    innovation as, 3–4, 37
    tracing impacts of, 115
    understanding, 156
Google, xvii–xviii, 9
Google Workspace, xvii–xviii
GraphQL, 141, 277
GS1 schema, 149

H
Harmony, data, 278–283, 286
HATEOAS (Hypertext As The Engine Of Application State), 195, 229
Health Level 7 schema, 149
Healthy culture, 44
Hexagonal architecture. See Ports and Adapters (Hexagonal) Architecture
Hippocratic Oath, 26
Historical overview, 241–244
Hollnagel, Erik, 51
Hooke, Robert, 81
HTTP, 193
HTTPS, 198

I
ICD-10 codes, 136, 149
Icebreakers, 93
Immutability
    for domain concepts, 172
    of entities, 167
    of stored events, 216
    of value, 167, 168
Impact, 111–112
Impact Mapping
   of business goals, 126
   Core Domains, 121–122
   overview of, 63–66
Imperative Shell, 189–190, 191
Implementing Domain-Driven Design (Vernon), 166, 173, 219
Implementing Strategic Monoliths and Microservices (Vernon and Jaskuła,
    forthcoming)
   architectural decisions in, 183
   on Bounded Contexts, 253
   caching in, 219
   design-level modeling in, 89
   implementation techniques in, 157, 172, 277
Incremental improvement, 4, 8–9
Infrastructure innovations, 9
Innovation
   as business goal, 37
   communication and, 19, 77, 82
   in the Core Domain, 121
   culture supporting, 44–45
   developers as industry leaders for, xviii
   for digital transformation, 9
   envisioning need, 7
   as essential, 296–297, 298
   mindset and tools for, 3–6, 291
   predecessor inventions, 81–82
   risks, xx
    by SpaceX, 8
    in technical mechanisms, 125
    via architecture and design, 292
    via experimentation, 110, 115
Insurance, 15
Integration
    between Bounded Contexts, 194
    Context Mapping for, 131
    Open-Host Service, 144–145
    Separate Ways pattern, 151
Intel Xeon, 32
Intelligence, xxi
Intercommunication formula, 49
Introverts, 77
“Inverse Conway Maneuver,” 48
Investment
    beyond Core Domain, 123
    in Core Domain, 122
    maintaining talent, 264–265
    over project’s life cycle, 123
    timing and placement of, 111–112, 115
Iterate, xiii–xiv

J
J2EE, 242
Jobs, Steve, 7, 39
JSON objects, 223
K
Knowledge
    acquisition, 110, 115
    of business capabilities, 127
    communication and, 19–20, 37
    for Cynefin framework, 69
    domain of, 104, 109
    at EventStorming sessions, 82–83
    law of least, 128
    and legacy system replacement, 27
    scopes of, 112–114, 120, 128, 293
    taking advantage of, 293
    value of, 199
Kubernetes Pods, 192

L
Lamport, Leslie, 211
Languages. See also Communication
    to convey business concepts, 166
    functional behavior, 170–171
    outdated programming, 27
    Published Language, 133, 148–151
    translating events, 136–137
    ubiquitous, 117–121, 127
Latency, 201–203
Lateral communication, 23–24
Law of Demeter, 128
Leadership, technical, 22
Learning
   Communicate-learn-innovate path, 19
   cost of, 82
   digesting, 157
   innovation via, 110, 115
   tools for, 4–5
   via decision making, 42
   via EventStorming, 81–83
   via failure, 154
Learning tools, strategic
   ADR, 71–74
   capability, process and strategy, 57–62
   Conway’s Law in action, 47–51
   culture and teams, 43–47
   Cynefin, 66–69
   decision making, 40–43
   modularity, 51–55
   overview of, 4–5
   strategic delivery, 62–66
   success via use of, 156, 292
   when to deploy, 55–57
Legacy systems
   how to unplug, 285–287
   integrating with, 145
   in Monolith-to-Microservices transition, 278–283
   replacing, 26–28
   as subdomains, 124
Legal team, 200–201
Light, speed of, 201

M
Machine learning algorithms, 97–98, 158–159, 199
Maintenance mode, 122–123, 264
Mapping
    Context Mapping, 131–151
    team dynamics, 106
    via Topography Modeling, 152
Markers, 85
Market timing, xv, 111–112
Medium-to-large system scope, 112
Memory, 28, 50, 51
Mental engagement, 24–26
Message- and event-driven architecture
    applying, 231
    breaking dependencies in, 261
    choreography and orchestration, 212
    communication in, 213–215
    CQRS, 227–229
    event-driven process management, 220–223
    Event Sourcing, 223–227
    FaaS, 231
    failures in, 211–212
    lightweight modeling of, 292–293
    in Monoliths, 251–252
    overview of, 178–179, 231–232
    principles of, 294–295
   REST, 216–220
   serverless models, 229–231
Message Bus
   in event-driven choreography, 213, 214, 220–222
   inter-context communication via, 251, 252, 272
   in a Monolith, 222
   in Monolith-to-Microservices transition, 273, 274
   unfamiliarity with, 216
Message bus, 213–215, 221
Microprocessors, 31
Microservices
   attack surfaces, 197
   Bounded Contexts as, 127, 129
   complexity of, 206
   Event Sourcing for, 226
   irresponsible choice of, 42
   latency in, 201–203
   in message-driven architecture, 222–223
   modularity for, 128
   NuCoverage example, 72–74, 193
   potential fail points, 267–270
   reasons for forming, 192
   reliability for, 204
   scalability of, 203–204
   transitioning to, 236–237, 267–288, 295–296
   value of, 31–33
   when to use, 235, 267, 290, 296
Microsoft, 9
Miller’s Law, 51
Mindset
   changes to, 18
   confidence and positivity, 37
   disciplined and thoughtful, 239
   of experimentation, 41
   of innovators, 122
   for Monolith-to-Microservices transition, 270, 295
Mocks, 189
Modeling
   of Bounded Contexts, 127
   design-level, 89
   domain concepts, 106–107
   at EventStorming sessions, 85–92
   lightweight, event-driven, 292–293
   money, 135–136
   new business models, xiv–xv
   software, 81
   topography, 151–154
Modules/Modularization
   architecture based on, xiv–xv
   in data-centric business, 165
   decoupling, 259–260
   lack of meaningful, 254, 255
   for Monoliths, 190–193, 249–253, 271
   naming, 55, 80
   NuCoverage example, 126
   overview of, 51–55
    in refactoring operations, 258
    reliability and, 204
    when to create, 207
Monetary schemes, 135–136
Mono-repo, 205, 206
Monoliths, 239–266
    attack surfaces, 197
    complexity of, 205
    concerns and goals with, 241
    historical perspective on, 241–244
    latency in, 203
    in message-driven architecture, 222–223
    modular, 190–193, 255, 271
    at NuCoverage, 72–74, 190, 193, 243–250
    overview of, 265
    reliability for, 204
    righting wrongs in, 253–264
    scalability of, 203–204
    scopes of knowledge in, 115
    tips for successful, 244–253, 264
    transition to Microservices, 253, 267–288, 295–296
    value of, 30–31, 295
    when to use, 56, 235–236, 237, 290
    why and hows of, 239–240
Multitasking, 50
Mutability, 167, 171–172

N
Naming
   business capabilities and processes, 61
   commands and events, 79
   deliverables, 64
   modules, 55, 80, 81
Need, in business context, xvii, 62
Netflix, xvii, 220
NoSQL database, 217
NotPetya, 196
Nouns, 165–166
“Now Every Company Is a Software Company” (Forbes), 297
NuCoverage Insurance
   ADR for, 72–74
   Anticorruption model for, 142
   business context, 16–17
   capabilities and process, 58–62, 126–127
   commands and events in, 79–80
   Conformist pattern for, 140
   Context Mapping, 132, 160–163
   context naming for, 120–121
   Core Domain, 122
   Customer-Supplier pattern for, 138–139
   decoupling example, 260, 261–262
   event-driven process for, 220–222
   EventStorming session for, 94–99, 158–160
   functional behavior example, 171–172
   historical perspective, 242–243
   message-driven architecture at, 213–214
    Microservices transition for, 271
    modules for, 55, 192, 271
    Open-Host Service, 143–148
    opportunity, 17–18
    Partnerships, 134–135
    Published Language, 148–151
    scopes of knowledge in, 113
    Shared Kernels, 136
    subdomains, 124
    use of Cynefin, 69
    user interface graph, 278
Nygard, Michael, 72

O
Object-oriented language, 170, 173, 189
Object-relational mappers, 223
Objectives and Key Results (OKRs), 123
O’Grady, Stephen, xviii
Office 365, 9
Onion architecture, 71
Open-Host Service, 133, 143
Opportunities
    cloud-based, 9
    in EventStorming model, 88, 92, 95–98
    EventStorming to find, 82, 83
    strangler as taking advantage of, 284
    in Topography Modeling, 154
    via failure, 46
    YAGNI and, 29
Orchestration, 212, 220–221, 294

P
Pain points, 127
Parent entities, 166, 168
Partnerships, 132, 133–135, 160
PATCH, 194, 195
Performance, 201–203, 289, 290
Personal data, 199–200
Personality, 5, 77
Perspective, 114
Policy
    Bounded Contexts to define, 119–120
    at EventStorming sessions, 87, 91, 94
    GDPR, 199
    as heterogeneous, 103
    module-based, 104
    in Topography Modeling, 154
    use of term, 119–120
Poll-based REST, 212
Poppendieck, Mary
    on the last responsible moment, 40
    on multi-pronged approaches, 47
    on SpaceX innovation, 8, 44
    on tools for successful ventures, xiii–xvi
Poppendieck, Tom, 40
Ports and Adapters (Hexagonal) Architecture
   authors’ promotion of, 71
   benefits of, 207
   Bounded Contexts in, 249–250
   complexity of, 186, 187
   flexibility via, 177
   illustration of, 185, 188, 250
   overview of, 183–189, 244
   in serverless approach, 230
   for tracing decisions, 43
POST, 194
Privacy, 199–201, 295
Problem space
   divisions by expertise, 114
   multi-pronged approach to, 50, 105
   naming of, 104
   in scopes of knowledge, 113, 114, 115, 120–121
   subdividing, 52, 75, 115
   understanding the, 35
Problems
   correcting, 253–264
   with distributed software, 267–270
   in event-driven architecture, 294
   at EventStorming sessions, 88, 92, 95–98
   integrating events to find, 145
   modularity to solve, 51
   money modeling, 135–136
   problem-solving language, 119
   subdomain/context alignment, 114, 115
    in Topography Modeling, 154
Process. See Business processes
Product development, 16, 18
Product terminology, 119
Profit, 37, 46
Progress   state, 167
Published Language, 133, 148–151, 162
Pureur, Pierre, 182
PUT, 194, 195

Q
Queries. See Views/Queries
Query tools, 277

R
Reactive architecture, 213, 214, 215
Records, immutable, 172
Refactoring, 12–13, 253, 256, 259
Relational databases, 216, 217, 218, 223
Reliability, 204–205, 290
Remote meetings, 84–85
Remote procedure calls (RPC), 147, 155, 198, 211, 213
Replacing systems, 27–28
Requests, 193–194
Resilience, 204–205, 290
Responsibility, 40, 49, 114
REST-over-HTTP, 211, 294
REST (REpresentational State Transfer)
    message- and event-driven, 216–220, 294
    in Monoliths, 251–252
    popularity of, 211
    resources, 145, 146, 147
    REST Request-Response, 193–195, 216–220
REST Request-Response, 193–195, 216–220
Rethinking, 26–30
Revenue generators
    business capabilities as, 57, 126
    of FAANG companies, xvii–xviii
    legacy systems as, 27
    NuCoverage example, 58, 59
    for startups, 123
    via digital transformation, 3, 103
    via incremental innovation, 82
Risk
    adaptability and, xx
    context naming for, 120–121
    EventStorming for, 97, 99, 158–160
    in insurance industry, 15–16
Rocket crashes, SpaceX, 8
Rounding off numbers, 135–136
Runtime failure, 267

S
Scalability
    balancing, 289, 290
    of choreography-based processes, 220
   and code reuse, 263
   of event logs, 217
   of Monoliths, 206
   as quality attribute, 203–204
Schema registry, 151
Scopes of knowledge
   for Bounded Contexts, 120
   within business capabilities, 128
   defined, 112–115
Scrum, 34, 110
Security, 196–199, 295
Self-contained systems, 30
Sense-giving/-reading, 20, 67–68
Separate Ways pattern, 133, 151
Sequences, 216
Server-Sent Events (SSE), 219–220
Serverless models, 204, 229–232
Service API, 146–148
Service Layer with Domain Model, 191
Service Layer with Transaction Scripts, 187–188, 191
Service Layers, 256–257
Service Level Agreement (SLA), 205, 252
Service-level requirements, 29–30
Shared Kernels, 128, 132, 135–137
Sharing, database, 143
Sharpie Fine Point markers, 85
Shaw, George Bernard, 24
Side effects, 171
Size, 128
Small context scope, 113
Snowden, Dave, 66
Social media, 98–99
Software
   brittle, aging, 11–12
   commands and events in, 78–81
   entropy, 13–14
   at FAANG companies, xvii–xviii
   failures for distributed, 267–270
   fighting complex, 70
   generic, 124
   history of, 242
   implementation of, 55, 64
   initiatives, 63–64, 122
   legacy, 287
   modeling, 81
   as a profit center, xvii, 6
   refactoring, 13
   retiring, 27–28
   rushed, 25
   as ubiquitous, 3, 297
   YAGNI, 62
Software architect. See Architect
Software architecture. See Architecture
Software as a Service (SaaS) model
   for Google Workspace access, xviii
   NuCoverage use of, 113, 271, 272
   reasons for failures in, 242
   transitions to, 237, 298
   VLINGO products, xxviii
Source code, 63, 173, 254
SpaceX
   architecture supporting, xv
   engineering model of, 44
   innovation by, 3, 8
   learning tools for, 4
Stakeholders
   at EventStorming sessions, 82–83, 92–93
   understanding needs of, 62
Startups, 123, 245
Sticky notes, 86–89
Storage, data, 200–201
Strangler Application, 284
Strategic Monoliths and Microservices (Vernon and Jaskuła), xix, xxi
Strategy
   differentiation via, 39
   digital transformation as, 291–292
   as an imperative, 237
   Monolith/Microservices choices, 290
   opportunistic, 284
   strategic architecture, 70–72
   strategic discovery focus, 155
Structure, flow vs., 61
Subdomains
   domains and, 112–115, 120–121
   expansion into, 104
   generic, 124–125
   integrating, 131
   nesting, 128–129
   partnerships between, 134
   problem/context alignment, 115, 121
   purpose of, 123
   in refactoring operations, 258
   scopes of knowledge in, 112–113
   supporting, 123–124
   in Topography Modeling, 153
   understanding, 293
Subscriber polling, 218–219
Subsystems
   architecture for, 10, 183
   communication for, 211, 213–214
   integrating, 131
Success
   effort required for, 103
   how to right wrongs for, 253–264
   via healthy culture, 44
   ways to ensure, 156–157
Sunk cost fallacy, 36
Supervision, 269–270
Supporting/generic contexts
   integrating, 131
   lesser investment in, 105
   NuCoverage example, 245–247
    overview of, 124–125

T
Table array, 217
Tacit knowledge, 19, 113
Talent
    allocated to tech mechanisms, 125
    in Core Domain, 122
    hiring top, 244–245
    for subdomains, 124
Team cohesion
    communication and, 19–24
    as component of success, xv
    culture and, 43–45
    organizational tips for, 48–49
Team Topologies [TT], 48
Teams
    architecture communicated by, 181–182
    Context Maps between, 131–133
    EventStorming, 82–83, 92–94
    in maintenance mode, 122–123, 264
    mapping dynamics between, 105–106
    Partnerships for, 133–134
    Topography Modeling, 152
    ubiquitous language of, 117
    upstream and downstream, 137
Technical excellence, xv, 125
Telephone Game, 21–22
Telephone, invention of the, 81
Tesla, 44
The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF), 113
Theft, data, 199
Thermodynamics, 13
Thimbleby, Harold, 41
Thought
   critical, 24–26, 291
   highlighting need for, xxi
   rethinking, 26–30
   simplification via, 70
   technology cannot replace, 244
Timing, 254
Tokens, security, 197–198, 201
Tools, learning. See Learning tools, strategic
Topography Modeling, 151–154, 163
Tracking
   complexity and, 206
   decision making, 43
   event logs, 216–218
   modular conversations, 53
   unnecessary features, 62–63
Transaction Scripts, 187–188, 191
Transformations
   business goals informing, 291–292
   creating environments for, xv
   digital, 3–4
   goal of, 8–10
    innovation for, 9
    by Iterate, xiii–xiv
    Monolith-to-Microservices, 241, 253, 267–288
    from wrong to right, 253–264
Transport Layer Security (TLS), 198
Triggers, database, 280
Truth, single source of, 279–280
Tuples, 172

U
Ubiquitous Language
    for Bounded Contexts, 117–121, 129
    within modules, 192
    UI included in, 127
    upstream/downstream, 141
Unarchitecture
    Big Ball of Mud as, 14, 37
    failures leading to, 71
Uncertainty, 94
Universally unique identifier (UUID), 201
Updates, 194–195
Upstream teams
    Anticorruption model for, 141–142
    Conformist pattern for, 139–140
    Customer-Supplier relationship for, 137–139
    Open-Host Service, 143–148
URIs, 195
“us versus them” mentality, 23
Users
    #agile collaboration with, 111
    commands and events for, 78
    improving outcomes for, 9
    modeling roles for, 88, 91, 99, 198
    Monolith interactions by, 251
    in Monolith-to-Microservices transition, 276–278
    viewable vs. operational data, 227–228
    workflow of, 127

V
Value Objects
    in concept modeling, 106, 107, 167–168, 173
    to implement functional behavior, 171
    in refactoring operations, 257
Values
    data and knowledge, 199
    monetary, 135–136
Vernon, Vaughn, 83
Views/Queries
    in EventStorming model, 88
    Query Model, 229
    in Topography Modeling, 154
Virtual environment, 84–85
VLINGO XOOM, xxviii, 151, 215
Voluminous enterprise scope, 112

W
White-label product, 17
Whitehead, Alfred North, 7
Woods, Eoin, 182
Workflow, 127
“Wrong,” being
    and decision making, 40–41
    in experimentation, 297
    fear of, 45
    righting wrongs, 253–264

Y
You Aren’t Gonna Need It (YAGNI), 29, 62

Z
Zachman Framework, 113
Code Snippets
Many titles include programming code or configuration examples. To optimize
the presentation of these elements, view the eBook in single-column, landscape
mode and adjust the font size to the smallest setting. In addition to presenting
code and configurations in the reflowable text format, we have included images
of the code that mimic the presentation found in the print book; therefore, where
the reflowable format may compromise the presentation of the code listing, you
will see a “Click here to view code image” link. Click the link to view the print-
fidelity code image. To return to the previous page viewed, click the Back button
on your device or app.
