DESIGNING ENTERPRISE
    ARCHITECTURE
    FRAMEWORKS
  Integrating Business Processes
       with IT Infrastructure
This page intentionally left blank
DESIGNING ENTERPRISE
    ARCHITECTURE
    FRAMEWORKS
  Integrating Business Processes
       with IT Infrastructure




                Edited by
        Liviu Gabriel Cretu, PhD




       Apple Academic Press
          TORONTO   NEW JERSEY
CRC Press                                         Apple Academic Press, Inc
Taylor & Francis Group                            3333 Mistwell Crescent
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300           Oakville, ON L6L 0A2
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742                         Canada
© 2014 by Apple Academic Press, Inc.
Exclusive worldwide distribution by CRC Press an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa
business

No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20131218

International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4822-4057-3 (eBook - PDF)

This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reason-
able efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher
cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The
authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in
this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not
been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so
we may rectify in any future reprint.

Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced,
transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information
storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.

For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.
copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
(CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organiza-
tion that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been
granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.

Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and
are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com
For information about Apple Academic Press product
http://www.appleacademicpress.com
ABOUT THE EDITOR


Liviu Gabriel Cretu, PhD

Dr. Liviu Gabriel Cretu is a research director at the Centre for Research
and Education in Management Information Systems, Alexandru Ioan
Cuza University, Iaşi, Romania; a lecturer at the same university; and a
consultant in applications architecture at the European Commission, D.G.
Informatics, Unit B-Information Systems and Interoperability Solutions.
He is a researcher, developer, and author, having published numerous
peer-reviewed articles in the fields of enterprise systems, semantic web
and enterprise architectures, model-driven engineering, service-oriented
architecture, and business process management. He received his PhD in
business information systems from the Alexandru Ioan Cuza University,
Iaşi, Romania.
This page intentionally left blank
CONTENTS



        Acknowledgment and How to Cite .................................................. ix
        List of Contributors ......................................................................... xi
        Introduction.....................................................................................xv
Part I: Setting the Stage
1. Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise
     Architectures .............................................................................................. 1
       Mahesh R. Dube and Shantanu K. Dixit

2.     Evaluation of ARIS and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise
       Architectures ............................................................................................. 33
       Melita Kozina

3.     An Integrated Enterprise Architecture Framework for
       Business-IT Alignment ............................................................................. 63
       Novica Zarvić and Roel Wieringa

4.     Enterprise Architecture: New Business Value Perspectives ........... 77
       M. de Vries and A. C. J. van Rensburg

Part II: Open Issues and Novel Ideas
5. Pattern-Oriented Approach for Enterprise Architecture:
     TOGAF Framework ................................................................................. 99
       Mohamed Taleb and Omar Cherkaoui

6.     A New Content Framework and Metamodel for Enterprise
       Architecture and IS Strategic Planning ............................................... 115
       Mouhsine Lakhdissi and Bouchaib Bounabat

7.     Agent-Oriented Enterprise Architecture: New Approach for
       Enterprise Architecture......................................................................... 135
       Babak Darvish Rouhani and Fatemeh Nikpay

8.     ADaPPT: Enterprise Architecture Thinking for Information
       Systems Development ............................................................................ 145
       Hanifa Shah and Paul Golder
viii                                                                                                        Contents



9.     A New Method of Performance Evaluation for Enterprise
       Architecture Using Stereotypes ............................................................. 159
       Samaneh Khamseh, Fares Sayyadi, and Mohammad Hosein Yektaie

10. Six Sigma Driven Enterprise Model Transformation ........................ 181
       Raymond Vella, Sekhar Chattopadhyay, and John P.T. Mo

Part III: Implementations
11. Evaluating and Refining the ‘Enterprise Architecture as Strategy’
     Approach and Artifacts .......................................................................... 205
       M. de Vries and A. C. J. van Rensburg

12. An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for Business-IT Alignment:
    Adopter and Developer Perspectives .................................................... 229
       Zulkhairi Md. Dahalin, Rafidah Abd Razak, Huda Ibrahim,
       Nor Iadah Yusop, and M. Khairudin Kasiran

13. Enterprise Architecture Ontology for Supply Chain Maintenance
    and Restoration of the Sikorsky’s UH-60 Helicopter .......................... 255
       James A. Rodger and Pankaj Pankaj

14. An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Mobile Commerce........ 277
       Khawar Hameed, Hanifa Shah, Kamran Ahsan, and Weijun Yang

15. EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Characteristic Problems in Educational
    Institutions............................................................................................... 291
       Mardiana and Keijiro Araki

       Author Notes ........................................................................................... 325
       Index ........................................................................................................ 327
ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND
HOW TO CITE


The chapters in this book were previously published in various places and
in various formats. By bringing them together here in one place, we offer
the reader a comprehensive perspective on recent investigations into the
design and implementation of enterprise architecture frameworks. Each
chapter is added to and enriched by being placed within the context of the
larger investigative landscape. Specifically:
    • Chapter 1 provides one of the few, well-documented overviews of the
      main enterprise architecture frameworks. The authors have also made
      a distinct contribution to the field by proposing a comparison method
      based on higher order goals as well as non-functional requirements. It
      is a very good starting point in order to understand the EA landscape.
    • Chapter 2 makes a very well-documented and in-depth comparison be-
      tween two highly popular EA frameworks: ARIS and Zachman. The
      level of detail as well as the accuracy of the analysis are rather high,
      thus transforming the paper into a “must-read” for the beginner to better
      understand the domain of enterprise architectures.
    • Chapter 3 proposes an interesting approach to compare well-known
      enterprise architecture frameworks in order to build an integrated EA
      model needed to represent interorganizational concerns. The main goal
      is to identify the common elements needed to facilitate the communica-
      tion between companies using different frameworks to represent their
      enterprise architecture.
    • Why is enterprise architecture important for business and which precise
      business areas might EA help improve? The answer to this question is
      not only given but also very well documented in Chapter 4.
    • Chapter 5 introduces a novel idea of embedding patterns in enterprise
      architecture frameworks, in order to create new architectures based on
      pre-defined business and IT building blocks. The authors identify ten
      architecture design patterns, one for each of the TOGAF’s main activi-
      ties.
    • Chapter 6 details a new content framework and metamodel for enter-
      prise architecture with the aim to reduce the number of architecture lay-
      ers and to organize the content of each architecture layer. The main
      contribution of this paper is the artifacts needed to describe EAs. The
      authors also compare their approach with well-known EAFs.
x                                              Acknowledgment and How to Cites



    • Chapter 7 offers a different perspective on enterprise architecture than
      the classical, heavy-weighted EA frameworks. The authors propose a
      combination of EA with agent-oriented architecture, which should ad-
      dress the ever-changing requirements in managing complex informa-
      tion systems.
    • Chapter 8 proposes a different classification of the EA views, name-
      ly people, processes, technology and data. The authors compare their
      framework with the Zachman framework and show how the ARIS tool-
      set may be used to create an ADaPPT enterprise architecture.
    • Although the method provided in Chapter 9 might be improved, still the
      subject of EA evaluation has an intrinsic value of its own. Architecture
      evaluation is key aspect when deciding which approach to take in order
      to move a system from “as-is” state to the desired new state.
    • Chapter 10 presents a rigorous approach for the transition between “as-
      is” enterprise model to the “to-be” enterprise architecture. The authors
      combine the famous Motorola’s Six Sigma method for process improve-
      ment with the enterprise architecture framework, having the main goal
      to guide the transformation process of the enterprise model.
    • Chapter 11 provides a study on the status of architecture implementa-
      tions within the industry, also taking into account the level of imple-
      mentation maturity as well as statistical analysis of the frameworks used
      by various companies with respect to their operating model.
    • Chapter 12 details in-depth study of EA adoption issues with relation to
      software development methodologies. It focuses on the need of some
      architecture methodology in any company, and it mainly analyzes the
      SEAM framework implementation.
    • Chapter 13 uses an ontology-based approach to align maintenance and
      repair supply chain management to the ISO 10303 standard. Since this
      process involves multiple organizations, the common understanding of
      the whole model is built using the Zachman framework and correlation
      ontology.
    • Chapter 14 uses an EA framework to organize the core components spe-
      cifically needed in mobile-businesses. The work provides an EA usage
      scenario for the specific domain model.
    • Chapter 15 is an interesting and pragmatic usage of EA in combination
      with model-driven architecture (MDA) to solve particular issues in the
      conception and management of information systems for the higher edu-
      cation sector. It also offers a case study of the transition between “as-is”
      to the “to-be” architecture of a specific university.
    We wish to thank the authors who made their research available for this book,
whether by granting permission individually or by releasing their research as
open source articles. When citing information contained within this book, please
do the authors the courtesy of attributing them by name, referring back to their
original articles, using the credits provided at the beginning of each chapter.
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS



Kamran Ahsan
Faculty of Computing, Engineering and Technology, Staffordshire University, Stafford, United
Kingdom


Keijiro Araki
Dept. of Advanced Information Technology, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan


Bouchaib Bounabat
Al Qalasadi Computer Science Laboratory, ENSIAS, Université Mohammed V – Souissi BP 713,
Agdal – Rabat, Morocco


Sekhar Chattopadhyay
RMIT University; Australia


Omar Cherkaoui
University of Quebec at Montreal, Montreal, Canada


Zulkhairi Md. Dahalin
Utara Malaysia, Sintok, Malaysia


M. de Vries
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering University of Pretoria, South Africa


Shantanu K. Dixit
Department of Electronics and Telecommunications, WIT, Solapur, India


Mahesh R. Dube
Department of Computer Engineering, VIT, Pune, India


Paul Golder
Birmingham City University, TEE, Millennium Point, Birmingham, B4 7XG, UK


Khawar Hameed
Faculty of Computing, Engineering and Technology, Staffordshire University, Stafford, United King-
dom
xii                                                                          List of Contributors



Huda Ibrahim
Utara Malaysia, Sintok, Malaysia


M. Khairudin Kasiran
Utara Malaysia, Sintok, Malaysia


Samaneh Khamseh
Department of Computer Engineering, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University, Ilam,
Iran


Melita Kozina
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Organization and Informatics, Varaždin, Croatia


Mouhsine Lakhdissi
Al Qalasadi Computer Science Laboratory, ENSIAS, Université Mohammed V – Souissi BP 713,
Agdal – Rabat, Morocco


Mardiana
Dept. of Advanced Information Technology, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, and Dept. of Electri-
cal Engineering, University of Lampung, Indonesia


John P. T. Mo
RMIT University, Australia


Fatemeh Nikpay
Advanced Informatics School, University Technology Malaysia (UTM),
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia


Pankaj Pankaj
MIS and Decision Sciences, Eberly College of Business & Information Technology, Indiana Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania, Indiana County, Pennsylvania, USA


Rafidah Abd Razak
Utara Malaysia, Sintok, Malaysia


A. C. J van Rensburg
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering University of Pretoria, South Africa


James A. Rodger
MIS and Decision Sciences, Eberly College of Business & Information Technology, Indiana Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania, Indiana County, Pennsylvania, USA
List of Contributors                                                                       xiii


Babak Darvish Rouhani
Advanced Informatics School, University Technology Malaysia (UTM) Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia


Fares Sayyadi
Faculty Member of Electrical and Science, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Ilam, Iran


Hanifa Shah
Birmingham City University, TEE, Millennium Point, Birmingham, B4 7XG, UK


Mohamed Taleb
École de Technologie Supérieure (ÉTS), Montreal, Canada


Raymond Vella
Ford Motor Company, Australia


Roel Wieringa
University of Twente, Department of Computer Science, Information Systems Group P.O. Box 217,
7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands


Weijun Yang
Faculty of Computing, Engineering and Technology, Staffordshire University, Stafford, United
Kingdom


Mohammad Hosein Yektaie
Faculty Member of Computer and Science, Abadan branch, Islamic Azad University, Abadan, Iran


Nor Iadah Yusop
Utara Malaysia, Sintok, Malaysia


Novica Zarvić
University of Twente, Department of Computer Science, Information Systems Group P.O. Box 217,
7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
This page intentionally left blank
INTRODUCTION



Large software systems are defined as systems where the size is measured
in millions or tens of millions of lines of code and the life of the project is
measured in years [1]. Complex software is usually associated with enter-
prise information systems and it is built to support all the business process-
es of an organization. Large software systems involve inherent complexity,
which does not make their development and maintenance an easy task.
Brown [2] names the following difficulties arising in the development of
enterprise software solutions: (1) understanding highly complex business
domains and management of the huge development effort; (2) time-to-
market pressures; (3) complexity of target software platforms frequently
kept with poor documentation. To address these issues, modern software
engineering employs tools and techniques specifically designed to man-
age the complexity of systems. Among these, enterprise architecture (EA)
frameworks are the most advanced management tools to organize various
models describing an organization and to align the business needs to soft-
ware components in such a way that all the stakeholders have the same
understanding of the whole enterprise system.
    In the 1987 article “A Framework for Information Systems Architec-
ture” [3] John Zachman proposed a classification schema for organizing
the architecture of information systems. He started from the observation
that the term “architecture” was used loosely by information systems pro-
fessionals and meant different things to planners, designers, programmers,
communication specialists, and others. Therefore he designed the first
enterprise architecture framework that mainly provides a matrix with a
synoptic view over the models needed for enterprise architecture. In this
matrix one row represents a complete functional (sub-) system only re-
garded from the specific stakeholder’s perspective. Each column repre-
sents a complete part of the system. The idea is that a translation mecha-
nism should exist to transform the models from one row to the other.
xvi                                                                Introduction



    Twenty years later the proposed EA schema proved to be still valid
for the organization of IT resources in modern companies [4]. In 2007 the
ISO standardization body adopted ISO/IEC 42010:2007 standard (Recom-
mended Practice for Architectural Description of Software-intensive Sys-
tems) formerly an IEEE standard [5], which gives a formal definition to
architecture descriptions: a document, repository or collection of artifacts
used to define and document architectures. According to this standard,
every system is considered in the context of its environment. The envi-
ronment of a system is understood through the identification of the stake-
holders (e.g. client for the system, users, operators, developers, suppliers,
regulators) of the system and their system concerns (e.g. data structure,
behavior, data access, control, cost, safety, security). In order to take into
consideration both the stakeholders and the many concerns of a system,
the standard introduces two fundamental constructs of the system’s archi-
tecture: viewpoints and views. These can be shortly described as follows:

      • A viewpoint captures the conventions for constructing, interpreting
        and analyzing a particular kind of view such as languages, notations,
        model types, modeling methods, analysis techniques, design rules
        and any associated methods. Examples of viewpoints include: busi-
        ness, conceptual, technical, physical;
      • A view is a collection of models representing the architecture of the
        whole system relative to a set of architectural concerns. A view is
        part of a particular architecture description for a system of interest.
        Examples of views: data, functions, events, roles.

    Many formal models of enterprise architecture have been developed
over time and some of them became very popular in the IT industry (e.g.
TOGAF, ARIS). All of them have in common the pursuit to create, man-
age, and evolve repositories of models, the well-designed plans of large
organizations containing multiple descriptions to show different views and
viewpoints of the same enterprise.
    This book aims to gather the critical body of knowledge produced in
the scientific literature regarding what EA is and how it may be used to
better organize the descriptions of enterprise systems and to achieve the
desired level of business-IT alignment. The papers have been selected in
such way as to provide a solid foundation for a cross-disciplinary professional
Introduction                                                               xvii



practice and to serve IT professionals with easy-to-read and under-
standable materials. The book is further organized in three main sections:
1) Setting the Stage; 2) Open Issues and Novel Ideas; 3) Implementations.
For each article a short introduction is given to help the reader understand
the rationale behind the selection and the place of that chapter within the
whole picture. To see these explanations for each chapter, please view the
acknowledgment page in the front of the book.
     The first section comprises four papers which together make a good
introduction to the field in order to create the right level of critical knowl-
edge required to understand the EA concept and its place within the land-
scape of information systems management and the business-IT alignment.
The reader will also become familiar with the popular frameworks that
may be an option when choosing how to implement a specific EA.
    Chapter 1, by Dube and Dixit, provides an introduction to enterprise
architectures. Enterprise architecture defines the overall form and function
of systems across an enterprise involving the stakeholders and providing
a framework, standards, and guidelines for project-specific architectures.
Project-specific architecture defines the form and function of the systems
in a project or program within the context of the enterprise as a whole with
broad scope and business alignments. Application-specific architecture
defines the form and function of the applications that will be developed to
realize functionality of the system with narrow scope and technical align-
ments. Because of the magnitude and complexity of any enterprise inte-
gration project, a major engineering and operations planning effort must
be accomplished prior to any actual integration work. As the needs and
the requirements vary depending on their volume, the entire enterprise
problem can be broken into chunks of manageable pieces. These pieces
can be implemented and tested individually with high integration effort.
Therefore it becomes essential to analyze the economic and technical fea-
sibility of realizable enterprise solution. It is difficult to migrate from one
technological and business aspect to other as the enterprise evolves. The
existing process models in system engineering emphasize on life-cycle
management and low-level activity coordination with milestone verifica-
tion. Many organizations are developing enterprise architecture to provide
a clear vision of how systems will support and enable their business. The
paper proposes an approach for selection of suitable enterprise architecture
xviii                                                          Introduction



depending on the measurement framework. The framework consists of
unique combination of higher order goals, non-functional requirement
support and inputs-outcomes pair evaluation. The earlier efforts in this
regard were concerned about only custom scales indicating the availability
of a parameter in a range.
    Chapter 2, by Kozina details the significance of integral business sys-
tems based on closer alignment of information technology to business pro-
cesses. Comprehensive business frameworks are necessary to capture the
entire complexity of such systems. These frameworks, called enterprise
architectures, can provide the conceptual foundation necessary for build-
ing and managing the integral business system and all its components. The
goal of this paper was to analyze the Architecture of Integrated Informa-
tion Systems (ARIS) and the Zachman frameworks, to define the criteria
for comparison and evaluation of these approaches, and determine their
level of complement. Furthermore, the contents of the paper define the
generic model of business system management supported by said concepts
(frameworks) and analyzes their orientation towards value.
    Zarvic and Wieringa describe in Chapter 3 how when different busi-
nesses want to integrate part of their processes and IT they need to relate
their enterprise architecture frameworks. An enterprise architecture frame-
work (EAF) is a conceptual framework for describing the architecture of
a business and its information technology (IT), and their alignment. In
this paper, the authors provide an integration among some well-known
EAFs (Zachman, Four-domain, TOGAF and RM-ODP) and produce an
integrated EAF (IEAF) that can be used as common framework to com-
municate about EAFs of different businesses and relate them to each other.
    In Chapter 4, by de Vries and van Rensburg, the authors detail how
organizations today are characterized by conglomerate organization struc-
tures that evolve through mergers and acquisitions. Corporate offices
need to add superior knowledge and skills to ensure that the collection
of diverse businesses is operating as more than independent units. A new
management approach is required to create synergies between the diverse
businesses, their processes, and system landscapes. Enterprise architecture
(EA) creates value on a corporate level by facilitating process/informa-
tion technology alignment and synergy between different strategic busi-
ness units (SBUs). Unfortunately many EA implementations seemed to
Introduction                                                             xix



fail owing to a short-term financial focus and measurement. This article
explores the possibilities of linking EA to a corporate balanced scorecard
(BSC) to demonstrate its long-term financial improvement capabilities in
supporting the business strategy. The aim is to use the corporate BSC con-
text to direct EA objectives in creating contextualized value for a specific
enterprise.
    The next six articles arranged in section two introduce novel ideas re-
garding the organization, transformation, and evaluation of EA models.
The integration of multiple business models using EAs as well as the con-
tent of these models are also among the subjects treated by the authors.
This section seeks to draw attention on open issues in the EA field regard-
less of the EA framework taken into consideration for a specific purpose.
    Taleb and Cherkaoui suggest in Chapter 5 that developers must be able
to reuse proven solutions emerging from the best design practices to solve
common design problems while composing patterns to create reusable de-
signs that can be mapped to different types of enterprise frameworks and
architectures such as The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF).
Without this, business analysts, designers, and developers are not properly
applying design solutions or take full benefit of the power of patterns as
reuse blocks, resulting in poor performance, poor scalability, and poor us-
ability. Furthermore, these professionals may “reinvent the wheel” when
attempting to implement the same design for different types of architec-
tures of TOGAF framework. In this paper, the authors introduce different
categories of design patterns as a vehicle for capturing and reusing good
analyses, designs and implementation applied to TOGAF framework while
detailing a motivating exemplar on how design patterns can be composed
to create generic types of architectures of TOGAF framework. Then, they
discuss why patterns are a suitable for developing and documenting vari-
ous architectures including enterprise architectures as TOGAF.
    Chapter 6, by Lakhdiss and Bounabat, argue that IS strategic planning
and enterprise architecture are two major disciplines in IT architecture and
governance. They pursue the same objectives and have much in common.
While ISSP has benefited from business strategic planning methods and
techniques, it has not evolved much since the 90s and lacks from formal,
tooled and standard methodology. In the other hand, enterprise architec-
ture has known a very fast progression in the last years, helped by market’s
xx                                                                 Introduction



needs and research in the domain of entreprise modeling. The basic
component underlying both fields is the content framework and metamod-
el necessary to describe existing and future states. The aim of this paper is
to present a new EA content framework and metamodel taking into con-
sideration ISSP concerns and bridges the gap between these two fields
    In Chapter 7, Rouhani and Nikpay argue that nowadays, utilizing EA
by enterprises with medium-and long-term goals causes improvement in
their productivity and competitiveness. With respect to varied changes in
enterprise’s business activities and attitudes, flexibility in information sys-
tems of EA is a crucial factor. An Agent’s capacities in implementation of
complex systems goal convinces huge enterprises to use agent-oriented
architecture in their EA programs. Combination of EA and agent-oriented
architecture introduces a new attitude in order to make better conditions
for huge enterprises with complex information systems. This paper first-
ly enumerates the current problems of enterprise architecture, and then
agent-oriented enterprise architecture is introduced as a comprehensive
solution for eliminating mentioned defects deals raised. The main results
of agent-oriented enterprise architecture includes: more flexibility in or-
ganizational change, reengineering organizational processes, and compre-
hensive coverage of all activities of huge and complex organizations with
no other lateral requirements.
    Enterprises have architecture; whether it is visible or invisible is anoth-
er matter. Shah and Golder show in Chapter 9 how an enterprises’ archi-
tecture determines the way in which it works to deliver its business objec-
tives and the way in which it can change to continue to meet its evolving
business objectives. Enterprise architectural thinking can facilitate effec-
tive strategic planning and information systems development. This paper
reviews enterprise architecture (EA) and its concepts. It briefly considers
EA frameworks. It describes the ADaPPT (Aligning Data, People, Pro-
cesses and Technology) EA approach as a means to managing organiza-
tional complexity and change. Future research directions are discussed.
    These days, we see many organizations with extremely complex sys-
tems with various processes, organizational units, individuals, and infor-
mation technology support where there are complex relationships among
their various elements. In these organizations, poor architecture reduces
efficiency and flexibility. Enterprise architecture, with full description of
Introduction                                                             xxi



the functions of information technology in the organization, attempts to
reduce the complexity of the most efficient tools to reach organizational
objectives. Enterprise architecture can better assess the optimal conditions
for achieving organizational goals. For evaluating enterprise architecture,
executable models need to be applied. Executable models using a static
architectural view to describe necessary documents need to be created.
Therefore, to make an executable model, we need a requirement to pro-
duce products of the enterprise architecture to create an executable model.
In Chapter 9, Khamsey and colleagues show that for the production of
an enterprise architecture, the object-oriented approach is implemented.
The authors present an algorithm to use stereotypes by considering reli-
ability assessment. The approach taken in this algorithm is to improve
the reliability by considering additional components in parallel and using
redundancy techniques to maintain the minimum number of components.
Furthermore, they implement the proposed algorithm on a case study and
the results are compared with previous algorithms.
    In Chapter 10, Vella and colleagues show that enterprise architecture
methods provide a structured system to understand enterprise activities.
However, existing enterprise modeling methodologies take static views
of the enterprise and do not naturally lead to a path of improvement dur-
ing enterprise model transformation. This paper discusses the need for a
methodology to facilitate changes for improvement in an enterprise. The
six sigma methodology is proposed as the tool to facilitate progressive and
continual Enterprise Model Transformation to allow businesses to adapt
to meet increased customer expectation and global competition. An align-
ment of six sigma with phases of GERAM life cycle is described with
inclusion of Critical-To-Satisfaction (CTS) requirements. The synergies of
combining the two methodologies are presented in an effort to provide a
more culturally embedded framework for enterprise model transformation
that builds on the success of six sigma.
    The rest of the material gathers various case studies and implementa-
tion scenarios presented from the perspective of different stakeholders.
The aim is to illustrate the adoption of EA and its usage at the industry
level.
     Chapter 11, by de Vries and van Rensburg, details enterprise architec-
ture (EA): a new discipline that has emerged from the need to create a
xxii                                                              Introduction



holistic view of an enterprise, and thereby to discover business/IT inte-
gration and alignment opportunities across enterprise structures. Previous
EA value propositions that merely focus on IT cost reductions will no lon-
ger convince management to invest in EA. Today, EA should enable busi-
ness strategy in the organization to create value. This resides in the ability
to do enterprise optimization through process standardization and integra-
tion. In order to do this, a new approach is required to integrate EA into the
strategy planning process of the organization. This article explores the use
of three key artifacts—operating models, core diagrams, and an operating
maturity assessment as defined by Ross, Weill and Robertson [1]—as the
basis of this new approach. Action research is applied to a research group
to obtain qualitative feedback on the practicality of the artifacts.
    Chapter 12, by Dahalin and colleagues, proposes the use of an enter-
prise architecture methodology known as the Systemic Enterprise Archi-
tecture Methodology (SEAM) to determine the relevance of EA in ad-
dressing the business-IT alignment. A construct that characterized EA was
developed based on review of the literature. A theoretical framework build
upon the SEAM was used based on a business-IT alignment market, in
which supplier business systems compete to provide a value to an adopter
business system. Data was empirically gathered based on survey respon-
dents who are concerned with the adoption, planning, and implementation
of EA in their organizations. Respondents were managers and executives
representing the IT and senior level management of public and private
organizations in Malaysia. The data collected was then analyzed based
on the following factors: (1) EA business issues; (2) EA environment; (3)
EA governance; and (4) EA methods, tools and frameworks. Comparative
analysis was carried out based on the four factors to examine the trend
and status of EA adoption and implementation in Malaysia vis-à-vis the
international scenario. Statistical analysis was used to validate the SEAM,
which was found to be relevant in addressing the business-IT alignment.
    Ontologies have emerged as an important tool in the enterprise archi-
tecture discipline to provide the theoretical foundations for designing and
representing the enterprise as a whole or a specific area or domain, in a sci-
entific fashion. In Chapter 13, Rodger and Pankaj examine the domain of
maintenance, repair, and overhaul (MRO) of the Sikorsky UH-60 helicop-
ter involving multiple enterprises, and represents it through an ontology
Introduction                                                            xxiii



using the OWL Language and Protégé tool. The resulting ontology gives
a formal and unambiguous model/representation of the MRO domain that
can be used by multiple parties to arrive at a common shared conceptual-
ization of the MRO domain. The ontology is designed to be conformant to
ISO 13030 or the Product Life Cycle Support Standard (PLCS) standard,
hence representing the state of being as per this standard especially at the
interfaces between enterprises while incorporating existing reality to the
greatest possible extent within the enterprises. As a result the ontology
can be used to design Information Systems (IS) and their interfaces in all
enterprises engaged in MRO to alleviate some of the issues present in the
MRO area and to support business intelligence efforts.
    The increasing deployment of mobile technologies across industry sec-
tors is creating fertile ground for organizations to exploit new revenue
streams generated from applications that exploit the mobile ecosystem. M-
Commerce (mobile commerce) has been recognized as a key driving force
of next generation computing, and industry analysts such as IDC have
predicted revenue growth arising from m-commerce to far exceed US$27
billion by the end of the decade [1]. Mobility has, without doubt, under-
pinned the current wave and generation of computing systems resulting
in the concept and practicality of mobile solutions becoming embedded
as natural or inherent ones that support the daily functions of individuals
and corporations. Chapter 14, by Hameed and colleagues, explores an ap-
proach to encapsulating the m-commerce ecosystem through the perspec-
tive of an enterprise architecture framework.
    In Chapter 15, Mardiana and Araki illustrate that higher education in-
stitutions require a proper standard and model that can be implemented
to enhance alignment between business strategy and existing information
technologies. Developing the required model is a complex task. A com-
bination of the EA, MDA, and SOA concepts can be one of the solutions
to overcome the complexity of building a specific information technol-
ogy architecture for higher education institutions. EA allows for a com-
prehensive understanding of the institution’s main business process while
defining the information system that will assist in optimizing the business
process. EA essentially focuses on strategy and integration. MDA relies on
models as its main element and places focuses on efficiency and quality.
SOA, on the other hand, uses services as its principal element and focuses
xxiv                                                                        Introduction



on flexibility and reuse. This paper seeks to formulate an information
technology architecture that can provide clear guidelines on inputs and
outputs for EA development activities within a given higher education in-
stitution. This proposed model specifically emphasises on WIS develop-
ment in order to ensure that WIS in higher education institutions has a co-
herent planning, implementation, and control process in place consistent
with the enterprise’s business strategy. The model will then be applied to
support WIS development and implementation at University of Lampung
(Unila) as the case study.


REFERENCES

 1.    R. E. Kraut, and L. A. Streeter (1995). Coordination in software development, Com-
       munications of the ACM, vol.38, no.3, pp.69-81.
 2.    A. W. Brown (2004). Model driven architecture: Principles and practice, Software
       and Systems Modeling, vol. 3, no 4, pp. 314-327.
 3.    J. A. Zachman (1987). A Framework for Information Systems Architecture. In: IBM
       Systems Journal, vol 26, no 3. IBM Publication G321-5298
 4.    L. G., Cretu (2012). Ontology for Semantic Description of Enterprise Architectures.
       In Business Information Systems Workshops (pp. 208-219). Springer Berlin Hei-
       delberg.
 5.    IEEE: IEEE Standard 1471-2000 (2000). Recommended Practice for Architectural
       Description of Software-Intensive Systems. IEEE Computer Society, New York.
       Available online: http://www.iso-architecture.org/ieee-1471/ (2000)
      PART I

SETTING THE STAGE
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 1



COMPREHENSIVE MEASUREMENT
FRAMEWORK FOR ENTERPRISE
ARCHITECTURES
MAHESH R. DUBE and SHANTANU K. DIXIT




1.1 INTRODUCTION

American National Standards Institute/Institute of Electrical and Electron-
ics Engineers (ANSI/ IEEE) standard 1471-2000 describes architecture as
the fundamental organization of a system, embodied in its components,
their relationships to each other and the environment, and the principles
governing its design and evolution. Enterprise architecture is the set of
representations required to describe a system or enterprise regarding its
construction, maintenance and evolution. Enterprise architecture aims at
creating an environment suitable for mapping the organizational assets to
business processes which can identify relevance and realm of business
strategy adopted. An Enterprise architecture framework typically consists
of business architecture, information architecture, application system ar-
chitecture, and infrastructure technology architecture.
    Architecture frameworks are evaluated on the basis of scope, archi-
tecture process, verification support, standards compliance and overall
complexity of the architecture. Enterprise architectures should support the



This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons Attribution License or equivalent.
Dube MR and Dixit SK. Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures.
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology 3,4 (2011), DOI: 10.5121/
ijcsit.2011.3406 71.
2                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



business processes and indicate the benefits earned by its application. Fea-
ture extraction and enhancement are the major issues while dealing with
architecture flexibility and scalability. Productivity, cost-effectiveness and
optimization in terms of services are the other broad parameters affecting
deployment of enterprise architectures.
    It is necessary to observe the pattern of migration from platform-inde-
pendent and platform-specific elements in Enterprise architecture evolu-
tion. In this paper, we are limiting the scope of views and its correspon-
dence to The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF), Generalized
Enterprise Reference Architecture and Methodology (GERAM), IEEE Std
1471- 2000 IEEE Recommended Practice for Architectural Description,
Model-Driven Architecture (MDA) and ISO RM-ODP.


1.2 RELATED WORK

John Zachman developed a framework in 1987 which was based on plan-
driven approach and best practices adoption that can be deployed within
the development organizations to address enterprise engineering prob-
lems. It was based on maintaining information profile of function aspects
as well as the management required to accomplish the development ac-
tivities. The prime issue addressed by Zachman’s framework was archi-
tecture integration and implementation with a well-designed organization
structure. Cap Gemini Ernst & Young developed an approach for analysis
and development of enterprise and project-level architectures known as
the Integrated Architecture Framework (IAF). IAF was the first imple-
mentation of enterprise engineering solutions which was widely accepted
by technical community. Similar to Zachman’s framework, IAF also aims
at partitioning the problem in to manageable pieces based on the area of
concern. IAF starts at Business Management aspect primarily dealing with
business process and taskforce management. It maps the technology prob-
lem to information as knowledge-base, Information System used for trace-
ability, and Technology Infrastructure, with special emphasis on Security
aspects and Governance. Enterprise Architecture Planning (EAP) defines
a process that emphasizes techniques for organizing and directing enter-
prise architecture projects, obtaining stakeholder commitment, presenting
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures          3



the plan to stakeholders, and leading the organization through the transi-
tion from planning to implementation [1].
    Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework (FEAF) was developed in
1998 with the vision of integrating federal architectural segments. The
FEAF was based on knowledge and asset management across the organi-
zation with a uniform terminology used for architectural integration. The
business-driven aspect of FEAF was designed in view of accommodating
the current as well as future business needs. The business information was
later used in planning and implementation business operations in order
to realize the Enterprise Architecture. FEAF emphasized on Architecture
Evolution management with the help of transitional and transformational
processes [8].
    The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF) was based on Ap-
plication Lifecycle Management which largely covered the areas of gov-
ernance as applicable to related areas of problems spanning from data to
security. TOGAF is considered to be as a major contribution for enterprise
architecture development because of the flexibility offered as well as veri-
ficationvalidation support provided. The Open Group is a vendor-neutral
and technology-neutral consortium seeking to enable access to integrated
information, within and among enterprises, based on open standards and
global interoperability [2].
    The IFAC/IFIP Task Force on Architectures for Enterprise Integra-
tion developed an overall definition of a generalized architecture which
focused on modeling and tools that can be used for enterprise develop-
ment. Generalised Enterprise Reference Architecture and Methodology
(GERAM) addressed the issue of single enterprise development as well
as networked enterprise development through various views which can be
used at various levels of details depending on area of specialization of the
enterprise. GERAM was based on Entity oriented strategy used for enter-
prise development [12].
    The Object Management Group (OMG) introduced the Model-Driven
Architecture (MDA) initiative as an approach for system development
based on specification and interoperability expressed in terms of formal
models. In MDA, Platform-Independent Models (PIMs) are used to repre-
sent the target system analysis and design expressed in a general-purpose
modeling language, such as Unified Modeling Language (UML). The
4                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



platform-independent model can be mapped to a Platform-Specific Model
(PSM) by mapping the PIM to some implementation language using set of
transformational rules. The MDA considers Metamodeling as a key con-
cept for artifact generation at all stages evolution. MDA support evolution
with the help of consistent mapping of resources at source to target with
the help of metamodel at the two ends as well as transformation rules
along with model merging [13].
    The OMG MDA comprises CWM, UML, MOF and XMI as standards
for model-driven development. The Common Warehouse Metamodel
(CWM) defines a metamodel representing both the business and technical
metadata which can be found in the data warehousing and business analy-
sis domains. It is used as the basis for interchanging instances of metadata
between heterogeneous, multi-vendor software systems. UML, which is a
general purpose modelling language provides support for modelling struc-
tural and behavioural properties of the system and is part of CWM. UML
is an integrated effort of three object-oriented methods (Booch, OMT, and
OOSE). UML has extensive support for modelling generic systems. UML
2.0 is widely used in reactive systems behaviour analysis. The Meta Object
Facility (MOF) is an OMG standard defining a common, abstract language
for the specification of metamodels. It defines the four-level structure used
to represent the details of how the notation repository can be made avail-
able to the modeller on model space. MOF semantics defines metadata
repository that support model construction. It has the support for applying
the transformations based on metamodel level selected. XML Metadata
Interchange (XMI) defines XML tags that can be used to represent objects
and their associations [3] [4].


1.3 ZACHMAN FRAMEWORK

The Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture is a widely used
and accepted approach for developing or documenting an enterprise-wide
architecture. It is based on Information System Architecture (ISA) and
typically used in a development environment which supports organiza-
tion structures and practices [5]. It is considered to be the basis for the
emergence of other eminent enterprise architectures. ZF’s key goals are
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures              5



for enterprise architecture analysis and modelling and it is concerned with
perspectives of constructing an information system. The Zachman Frame-
work organized as a table as indicated in Table 1. The rows are as follows:

   • Scope: It is an executive summary for a planner.
   • Business model: It indicates the business process engineering efforts and
     activities planned in order to achieve business goals.
   • System model: It indicates data elements and software functions that repre-
     sent the business model.
   • Technology model: It describes the constraints of tools, technology, and
     materials.
   • Components: It indicates smallest pieces of system that can found to be
     functional, tested and verified according to specification.
   • Working system: It depicts the operational system.

The columns are as follows:

   • Who: Represents the individuals who have enactment of fulfilment of some
     service.
   • When: Represents achievement of explicitly stated goals or objectives by
     the individuals on a time line indicating activity arrival and exit.
   • Why: Describes the motivations of the enterprise.
   • What: Describes the activities involved in corresponding area of the enter-
     prise.
   • How: Shows the functions within each perspective.
   • Where: Shows locations and interconnections within the enterprise


1.4 ISO RM-ODP

The Reference Model of Open Distributed Processing (ISO-RM-ODP)
provides a framework for the development of systems that supports pro-
cessing under heterogeneous platforms [6]. To model distributed systems,
Object-modeling approach is used in RM-ODP. RM-ODP is a joint effort
by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the Interna-
tional Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and the Telecommunication
Standardization Sector (ITUT). The problem-solution pairing can be done
by the “viewpoints” which provide a way of describing the system; and
the “transparencies” that identify specific problems unique to distributed
systems as indicated in Figure 1. [7].
6                                         Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



TABLE 1: Zachman Framework
Data         Function      Network        People         Time (when)     Motivation
(what)       (how)         (where)        (who)                          (why)
Scope        List of       List of        List of        List of or-     List of       List of
(Planner)    things        processes      locations      ganisations/    significant   business
             important     the business   where          agents that     events        goals/
             to business   performs       business       are important                 strategies
                                          operates
Enterprise   Semantic      Business       Business       Work Flow       Master        Business
Model        Model         Process        Logistic       Model           Schedule      Plan
(Owner)                    Model          System
System       Logical       Application    Distributed    Human           Processing    Business
Model        Data Model    Architecture   System         Interface       Structure     Rules
(Designer)                                Architecture   Architecture
Technol-     Physical      Systems        Technology     Presentation    Control       Rule
ogy Model    Data Model    Design         Architecture   Architecture    Structure     Design
(Builder)
Com-         Data Defi-    Program        Network        Security        Timing        Rule
ponents      nition                       Architecture   Architecture    Definition    Specifica-
(Subcon-                                                                               tion
tractor)




    RM-ODP consists of four basic International Standards:

    • Overview: It describes the overview of the ODP, Scope and terminology
      involved in overall architecture development.
    • Foundations: It describes the significant issues and factors which should be
      considered for distributed processing functions and systems. .
    • Architecture: It represents the characteristics possessed by distributed pro-
      cessing system under constraints mentioned in specification. It also recom-
      mends the use of viewpoints that can be used for logical grouping of related
      areas of the enterprise.
    • Architectural Semantics: It focuses on the modelling with the help of for-
      mal specification techniques with adequate details of each concerned area.

The viewpoints in RM-ODP are:

    • Enterprise viewpoint: It deals with the strategy that can be used to accom-
      plish the business goals and needs as identified in the preliminary phase of
      problem investigation.
    • Information viewpoint: It focuses on information structure, information
      flow, logical and physical organization of information with information
      change tracking.
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures                                    7




                                                                   FIGURE 1: Viewpoints in RM-ODP
8   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




                                            FIGURE 2: FEAF Reference Models
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures                                          9




                                                                   FIGURE 3: Simplified FEAF structure.
10                                      Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



     • Computational viewpoint: It focuses on structural elements of the system
       and their dynamics guided by protocols represented by interfaces and func-
       tionality by objects.
     • Engineering viewpoint: It indicates overall organization of the objects
       identified and their participation in various interaction patterns to satisfy a
       service.
     • Technology viewpoint: It indicates hardware and software components that
       formulate the system.


1.5 FEDERAL ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE FRAMEWORK (FEAF)

The goal of FEA is to improve interoperability within U.S. government
agencies by creating single enterprise architecture for the entire federal
government [8].
   The intent of the FEAF is to enable the federal government to define
and align its business functions and supporting IT systems through a com-
mon set of reference models. Figure 2 indicates FEAF Reference Models
which are defined as follows:

     • Performance Reference Model (PRM): The PRM is a standardized frame-
       work to measure the economics of investments and adherence to program
       portfolios in future based on performance.
     • Business Reference Model (BRM): The BRM is a function-driven frame-
       work for describing business operations of the federal government indepen-
       dent of the agencies that perform them.
     • Service Component Reference Model (SRM): The SRM is a framework
       which supports enactment of service-component relationship on the basis
       of performance objectives.
     • Data Reference Model (DRM): The DRM is a generic model which de-
       scribes the information necessary to trace operation level details.
     • Technical Reference Model (TRM): The TRM is a technical framework which
       verifies and validates the components capabilities in relation to the specification
       stated and acceptable performance with reference to standards agreed upon.

     The major components of the FEAF are (Figure 3):

     • Architecture Drivers: It indicates the factors and conditions due to which
       the business scenario or target design can change over a time period.
     • Strategic Direction: It consists of the vision and strategic information re-
       garding objectives to be achieved by the target architecture. The strategic
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures                11




FIGURE 4: Conceptual framework of IEEE 1471


       direction becomes necessary to have a pilot estimate of operational effort
       required to realize the enterprise solution.
   •   Current Architecture: It defines the "as is" scenario of the enterprise ar-
       chitecture and consists of existing solutions to the problem identified. It
       describes the capabilities needed to be addressed in accordance with the
       limitations of the existing solution.
   •   Target Architecture: It defines the "to-be-built" scenario of the enterprise
       architecture and consists of improved architecture and performance. It in-
       dicates the changed business needs which are required to be fulfilled in ac-
       cordance with the technology migration. The target architecture can be as-
       sessed by using performance metrics indicating adherence to specification.
   •   Transitional Processes: It supports the migration from the current to the
       target architecture.
   •   Architectural Segments: It consists of focused architecture efforts on major
       crosscutting business areas.
   •   Architectural Models: It indicates both strategic and technical models that
       guide the enterprise solution which is feasible with formal representations.
   •   Standards: It refers to all standards, guidelines, and best practices.
12                                  Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



1.6 IEEE1471-2000 STANDARD

The IEEE Recommended Practice for Architectural Description of Soft-
ware-Intensive Systems (IEEE Std 1471-2000 aka ANSI/IEEE Std 1471-
2000) introduces a conceptual model that integrates mission, environment,
system architecture, architecture description, rationale, stakeholders, con-
cerns, viewpoints, library viewpoint, views, and architectural models fa-
cilitating the expression, communication, evaluation, and comparison of
architectures in a consistent manner [9].
    Stakeholders are the one who are materially benefited from the solution
development. The stakeholders have specific concerns and roles which should
be carefully accounted while initiating and terminating the development ac-
tivities. The customers or users may not have a complete view of acceptability
of the solution. Therefore it is crucial to identify the stakeholder needs before
the development can commence. A view indicates group of concerns as identi-
fied through partitioning of the system. A viewpoint defines a specific case of
view related to a key aspect. A viewpoint indicates possible alternatives that
can be considered while analyzing and designing the system rationally using
appropriate modelling techniques [10]. The conceptual framework of IEEE
1471 is shown in Figure 4 and described as follows:

     • A system has architecture.
     • Architecture is described by one or more architecture descriptions.
     • An architecture description is composed of one or more of stakeholders,
       concerns, viewpoints, views, and models.
     • A stakeholder has one or more concerns.
     • A concern has one or more stakeholders.
     • A viewpoint indicates possible alternatives for relevant stakeholders.
     • A view conforms to one viewpoint.
     • A viewpoint defines the reason for existence of the model.
     • A view can have collective representations guiding more than one view.
     • A viewpoint library is composed of viewpoints.


1.7 THE OPEN GROUP ARCHITECTURE FRAMEWORK (TOGAF)

TOGAF enables corporate architects and stakeholders to design, evaluate,
and build flexible enterprise architecture for the organization. The initial
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures               13



versions of TOGAF were based on the Technical Architecture Framework
for Information Management (TAFIM), developed by the U.S. Depart-
ment of Defense (DoD) [11]. There are four types of architectures that
are commonly accepted as subsets of overall enterprise architecture, all of
which TOGAF is designed to support:


   • Business (or business process) architecture: It defines the organization
     structure, business processes as well as governance.
   • Applications architecture: It indicates the base architecture which includes
     architectural segments along with their interrelationships that conforms to
     business processes of the organization.
   • Data architecture: It describes the data management capabilities grouped
     to logical as well as physical assets supporting application realization.
   • Technology architecture: It is concerned with the infrastructural capabili-
     ties which should be considered while implementing and deploying the en-
     terprise solution. As platform independence is a prime issue to be dealt in
     service composition and availability, it describes the technological alterna-
     tives available to male system resources available.



    TOGAF has following views and viewpoints for development of en-
terprise. As mentioned previously, this may be regarded as taxonomy
of viewpoints by those organizations that have adopted ANSI/IEEE Std
1471-2000.


   • Business Architecture Views, which address the concerns of the users of the
     system, and describe the flows of business information between people and
     business processes
   • Data Architecture Views, which address the concerns of database designers
     and database administrators, while identifying and normalizing the data-
     base entities of the system.
   • Applications Architecture Views, which address the concerns of system and
     integration engineers responsible for developing and integrating the soft-
     ware components of the system.
   • Technology Architecture Views, which address the concerns of acquiring
     the commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) components that may reduce the
     cost of software development. The amendments to the components falls
     into white-box and black-box modifications made to the components. It
     depends on the suitability of the existing components to identified services
     to be realized.
14                                     Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



1.8 GENERALIZED ENTERPRISE REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE &
METHODOLOGY (GERAM)

Previous research, carried out by the AMICE Consortium on CIMOSA,
by the GRAI Laboratory on GRAI and GIM, and by the Purdue Consor-
tium on PERA, has produced reference architectures which were meant
to be organizing all enterprise integration knowledge and serve as a guide
in enterprise integration programs. The IFIP/IFAC Task Force concluded
that the architecture derivation should have unique purpose and satisfy the
service demands and business needs with a possibility of retainment of
service capabilities of previous reference architectures. The recognition of
the need to define a generalized architecture is the outcome of the work of
the Task Force [12].
    The GERA life-cycle for any enterprise consists of different life-cycle
phases that define types of activities that are pertinent during the life of the
entity. Life-cycle activities encompass activities that span from identifica-
tion to realization of the enterprise or entity. The activities can be broken
into lower level tasks in order to manage the operational effort. Traditional
lifecycle management is evident in GERAM methodology with a shift
from process components to entities.

     • Entity Identification: It describes the entities that constitute the enterprise
       problem and their limits with possible interactions within the system as
       well as the external environment. This can be treated as scoping of entities
       identified..
     • Entity Concept: It deals with entity’s mission, vision, values, strategies, ob-
       jectives, operational concepts, policies, business plans which can be used to
       create entity’s knowledge base for further development processes initiation.
     • Entity Requirement: The activities needed to develop descriptions of opera-
       tional requirements of the enterprise entity, its relevant processes and the
       collection of all their functional, behavioral, informational and capability
       needs.
     • Entity Design: It indicates the process of solution structure and specifica-
       tion of individual components that conforms to the requirements specified.
     • Entity Implementation: It describes the effort needed to implement the com-
       ponents identified during the Entity Design step. Reusable components can
       also be used in concern with cost of modification. If cost of modification of
       components is higher, components from scratch can be implemented.
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures              15



   • Entity Operation: It deals with deployment of product or service at the cus-
     tomer end. It deals with transition of the solution from source environment
     to target environment with identification of problems at customer end while
     using product or services.
   • Entity Decommissioning: These activities are needed for future issues like
     refactoring, reengineering problems associated with the product or servic-
     es. It emphasizes on the new demands raised to reconsider the problem due
     to training or design issues.




1.8.1 MODELING FRAMEWORK OF GERA

GERA provides an analysis and modeling framework which is based on
the life-cycle approach and indicates following dimensions for defining
the scope and content of enterprise modeling.

   • Life-Cycle Dimension: providing for the controlled modeling process of
     enterprise entities according to the life-cycle activities.
   • Genericity Dimension: providing for the controlled particularization (in-
     stantiation) process from generic and partial to particular.
   • View Dimension: providing for the controlled visualization of specific
     views of the enterprise entity.


1.8.1.1 ENTITY MODEL CONTENT VIEWS

Four different model content views define for the user oriented process
representation of the enterprise entity descriptions The Function View rep-
resents the functions contained in individual business processes and the
control applied to each one of them at operational level. The Information
View formulates the knowledge base about the entities and the objects
identified so as to address the mission and objectives of the enterprise.
The Resource View represents hardware, software and human resources
required to realize the enterprise solution. The Organization View repre-
sents the roles and responsibilities of the people concerned with enterprise
development. It also deals with the accountability of human resources in
the organization.
16                                    Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



1.8.1.2 ENTITY PURPOSE VIEWS

     • The Customer Service and Product View represents the contents relevant to
       the enterprise entity’s operation and to the operation results.
     • The Management and Control View represents the contents relevant to
       management and control functions necessary to control that part of the en-
       terprise entity that produces products or delivers services for the customer.


1.8.1.3 ENTITY IMPLEMENTATION VIEW

     • The Human Activities View represents the set of tasks that are required to
       be achieved in order to realize the entities identified along with clear de-
       scription of responsibilities.
     • Automated Activities View is an indicator of automation effort required
       to be estimated and delivered to address the technological aspects. This
       view indicates the tasks that can be automated so as to reduce the manual
       processing overheads.


1.8.1.4 ENTITY PHYSICAL MANIFESTATION VIEWS

     • The Software View represents all information resources capable of control-
       ling the execution of the operational tasks in the enterprise
     • The Hardware View represents the physical resources that are needed to
       achieve the product functionalities or services at the source and target envi-
       ronments of the enterprise.


1.9 MODEL DRIVEN ARCHITECTURE (MDA)

Model Driven Architecture was introduced by Object Management Group
to allow long-term flexibility of implementation, integration, and testing
of products and services. Interoperability and platform independence were
the two major concerns addressed by MDA. MDA was significantly dif-
ferent approach for specification-based modeling of systems which con-
centrated on models as a prime issue than objects as in case of object
oriented methodologies. MDA introduced model composition and trans-
formation from three levels of models i.e. from Computation-Independent
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures               17



Model (CIM) to Platform-Independent Model (PIM) to Platform-Depen-
dent Model (PSM) based on mapping rules [13]. The core technologies of
the OMG MDA are the UML modeling language, the Meta Object Facil-
ity (MOF) and the Common Warehouse Metamodel (CWM). Organiza-
tion of a software system can be represented by structural elements or
classes with their interfaces that comprise or form a system and behavior
represented by collaboration among these elements. UML is not associ-
ated to a process model since it supports the engineering activities rang-
ing from requirements to realization. MOF provides the basis for defining
metamodels and model repositories. CWM provides the baseline for data
warehousing and data integration. Models are formal specifications of sys-
tem. A formal specification is consists of syntax, semantics for constructs
formulation and usage [14]. The models of the system fall into following
categories:

   • The conceptual model that captures the system in terms of the domain enti-
     ties that exist and their association with other system environments.
   • The logical view of a system that captures the abstractions indicating the
     logical separation and boundaries of each identified entity in the conceptual
     model. It also describes the mechanism through which these entities will
     interact and form realizable behaviour.
   • The physical model of a system describes the software and hardware com-
     ponents that form the system solution space conforming to the specification.

A model can exhibit static structure and defines the universe of discourse.
It requires concept mapping from the application domain to a well-formed
structure. The analysis classes are transformed to design classes and lat-
er to software classes with implementation details of interaction pattern
amongst the objects [15]. Dynamic behaviour can be modelled as the life
history of one object as it interacts with the rest of the world; the other is




FIGURE 5: Measurement Scale
18                                    Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



the communication patterns of a set of connected objects as they interact
to implement behaviour or as the view of an object in isolation is a state
machine, a view of an object as it responds to events based on its current
state, performs actions as part of its response, and transitions to a new
state. Following are the views of “4+1” view architecture:

     • Use Case view: It focuses on scenarios indicating the functional require-
       ments which will be used by external entities. This view incorporates analy-
       sis level information that dictates static behaviour of the system along with
       further decomposition of the functionalities.
     • Design view: It represents the logical structures which support the require-
       ments expressed in the case view described in terms of classes (and objects)
       and their behaviour (including interactions between them). It encompasses
       classes, interfaces, and collaborations that define the vocabulary of a sys-
       tem and supports functional requirements of the system.
     • Implementation view: It incorporates physical components that can be
       grouped into packages indicating realized entities. The basis for these com-
       ponents is analysis and design level classes. The class hierarchy and inter-
       action profile are preserved in this view.
     • Process view: It deals with dynamic interaction profile of object including
       concurrency, time and flow of control. Process view is important in case of
       real-time applications where synchronization is an important dimension.
     • Deployment view: It consists of executables in the form of nodes. De-
       ployment view indicates the resources of system in implementation
       environment.

    The Model-Driven Architecture consists of CIM, PIM, and PSM indi-
cating how they should be used in context of system generation. A view-
point indicates an aspect or concern of the system which is identified using
abstraction principles. A viewpoint model or view of a system is a repre-
sentation of the domain or partition under consideration. The details of a
view can help organize the system elements into realizable components. A
platform is a set of functionalities relevant to technology indicating avail-
ability of usable services and resources. The platform independence can be
achieved by hiding the details of service profiles at software architecture
level from the application level by introducing interfaces which can make
the resource available from one platform to the other.
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures               19



TABLE 2: Comparison by higher order goals
 Comparison Parameter      ZF   RMODP   FEAF   TOGAF   IEEE 1471   MDA   GERAM
 Architecture Definition   3    5       5      5       5           5     5
 & Understanding
 Architecture Process      0    0       5      5       5           5     5
 Architecture Evolution    0    3       5      5       5           5     5
 Support
 Architecture Analysis     5    5       5      5       5           5     5
 Architecture Models       5    5       5      5       5           5     5
 Architecture              0    5       5      5       5           5     5
 Knowledge Base
 Abstraction               4    3       4      4       3           4     5
 Application               3    2       3      3       3           4     4
 Architecture
 Architecture              4    4       4      4       3           4     4
 Continuum
 Architecture              3    3       4      4       3           4     3
 Governance
 Architecture              3    3       3      3       3           4     3
 Landscape
 Architecture              0    3       0      5       5           5     5
 Verifiability
 Baseline                  4    2       3      4       4           3     3
 Business Governance       4    3       3      5       3           4     4
 Capability Architecture   3    4       3      4       3           4     3
 Data Architecture         3    2       4      4       2           3     3
 Design Tradeoffs          3    3       4      3       4           3     3
 Design Rationale          3    5       4      5       5           5     5
 Data Governance           3    2       4      4       2           3     3
 Enterprise Continuum      3    4       4      5       3           4     4
 Environment               4    3       3      4       3           4     3
 Management
 Foundation                1    3       2      5       4           4     4
 Architecture
 Gap Analysis              3    3       3      5       4           3     4
 Metamodel                 3    2       2      5       4           4     4
 Performance               2    2       2      4       2           4     4
 Management
 Standardization           0    5       3      5       5           5     5
 Total                     69   84      92     115     98          108   106
20                                   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



     • Computation Independent Viewpoint: The computation independent view-
       point focuses on requirements of the system and its structure with environ-
       mental needs. It indicates customer, user and stakeholder’s perspectives and
       expectations from system.
     • Platform Independent Viewpoint: The platform independent viewpoint fo-
       cuses on analysis and design models of the system which incorporates the
       system elements identified and their explicit relationships without adher-
       ence to implementation details.
     • Platform Specific Viewpoint: The platform specific viewpoint indicates
       implementation level details of the system elements specific to a particular
       platform. This can be accomplished by using mapping and transformation
       rules for migrating from PIM to PSM.


1.10 MEASUREMENT PROCESS

Measurement is the process of describing entities in terms of numbers or
symbols. It also indicates the uniqueness property that should be preserved
by each identified entity [Fenton 95]. Thus, measurement requires entities
(objects of interest), attributes (characteristics of entities) and rules (and
scales) for assigning values to the attributes. Measures and metrics are
based on measurement scales which can be derived from the rules that
we use for assigning values to attributes. Different rules lead to different
scales. An ordinal scale permits measured results to be placed in ascending
(or descending) order. However, distances between locations on the scale
have no meaning. We have used ordinal scale having score values ranging
from 0 to 5 as indicated in Figure 5.


1.10.1 COMPARISON BY HIGHER ORDER GOALS

Enterprise integration begins with identification of mission and objectives
that directs the business needs of the customer. The enterprise problem
then broken into domains that can be implemented and integrated so as
to form the enterprise segments [16] [17]. The success of enterprise ac-
ceptance depends on customer needs realization and its fulfillment. All
enterprises follow a life cycle from their initial concept through a series
of stages or phases comprising their development, design, construction,
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures                21



operation and maintenance, refurbishment or obsolescence, and final dis-
posal. Table 2 indicates comparison by higher order goals [18]. Following
list indicates higher order goals for Enterprise Architecture:

   • Architecture Definition and Understanding—it describes the terminology
     and guidelines that must be used to define the architecture framework con-
     forming to the needs as stated by the stakeholders identified.
   • Architecture Process—it the set of activities performed to attain architec-
     ture construction.
   • Architecture Evolution Support—it maintains traceability and change pro-
     file of system evolution.
   • Architecture Analysis—it is a process used to determine the aspects, view
     and viewpoints that makes up basis of architecture segments.
   • Architecture Models—it represents the system in terms of analysis and de-
     sign models that conforms to standards and specification that guides the
     development plan.
   • Architecture Knowledge Base—it maintains the information base of sig-
     nificant design decisions that directs the enterprise architecture rationale.
   • Abstraction—it is an approach to classify the system elements based on
     similarities and differences. It leads to identification of unique entities of
     the system.
   • Application Architecture—it describes the logical entities and components
     along with their interaction pattern conforming to identified business needs.
   • Architecture Continuum—it is an information base that keeps records of
     identified architectural segments with appropriate and adequate details so
     as to realize the architecture. It also encompasses strategies and reference
     model dictating adoption of architectural styles.
   • Architecture Governance—it is the set of processes that guides manage-
     ment and control of the enterprise architectures and other issues related to
     enterprise-wide level development.
   • Architecture Landscape—it deals with identification and management of
     enterprise assets in accordance with stakeholder needs. It indicates the pro-
     cesses and plans which incorporates strategic and operational profile of the
     enterprise conforming to stakeholder needs.
   • Architecture Verifiability—it provides the set of properties and characteris-
     tics that can be checked in order to review the service or product functions.
   • Baseline—it is a specification indicating agreed upon properties and char-
     acteristics of system that can be examined with current deliverables to es-
     timate its performance. It also serves as important dimension in addressing
     the changes to be incorporated and its control.
   • Business Governance—it indicates the business processes, policies and
     regulations that need to be practiced while developing the enterprise.
   • Capability Architecture—it indicates specification of architectural compo-
     nents with detailed implementation and compositional semantics.
22                                            Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



     • Data Architecture—it describes the data resources grouped into logical and
       physical compartments guiding organizational assets.
     • Design Tradeoffs—it offers the alternatives for selecting rational design
       from available choices in order to address the diverse business and techni-
       cal needs.
     • Design Rationale—it indicates the proof of statements for verification and
       review decisions.
     • Data Governance—it indicates the verification mechanisms used to ensure
       that the data properties and structure has adequate support for transforma-
       tion and migration.
     • Enterprise Continuum—it describes the process of classification of ar-
       chitecture segments and components that makes up the enterprise. It also
       maintains the catalogue of reference models used; foundation architectures
       referred leading to custom architectures.
     • Environment Management—it indicates the source and target environment
       in which the system will be operational. It describes the set of resources,
       facilities and information base that should be made available to deploy en-
       terprise solution.
     • Foundation Architecture—it is an architecture of generic services and func-
       tions that provides a base for construction of architectural components in
       question.
     • Gap Analysis—it is an indicator of differences between two representa-
       tions. It is performed to estimate acceptance level of enterprise architecture
       designed and the baseline considered.
     • Metamodel—it is model about model. It specifies the detailed structure and
       semantics of architectural properties specifications.
     • Performance Management—it indicates the post-development activities
       that needed to be followed to keep track of application performance after
       deployment.
     • Standardization—it indicates whether the determined and accepted stan-
       dards are met or not.

TABLE 3: Architecture Definition and Understanding
 Score   Factors indicating Degree of influence
 0       Enterprise Scope and focus is not defined.
 1       The extent of enterprise and architectural effort required to attain the same is defined.
 2       A complete architecture domain description consisting domain information with resource
         and time constraints is specified.
 3       The level of detail of architecture and architecture effort is determined.
 4       Timing considerations for Architecture Vision realization are indicated.
 5       Target Architecture and Transition Architecture alternatives are defined in order to address
         the stakeholder objectives in order with increments.
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures                                  23



TABLE 4: Architecture Process
 Score   Factors indicating Degree of influence
 0       Organizational context for conducting enterprise architecture is not defined.
 1       Organizational context for conducting enterprise architecture is defined and reviewed.
 2       The sponsor stakeholder(s) and other major stakeholders impacted by the business direc-
         tive are identified to create enterprise architecture and determine their requirements and
         priorities.
 3       The elements of the enterprise organizations affected by the business directive are identi-
         fied and scoped with constraints and assumptions.
 4       The framework and detailed methodologies to be used for developing enterprise architec-
         tures in the organization concerned are defined.
 5       Target Architecture, infrastructure and supporting tools are selected and implemented.




TABLE 5: Architecture Analysis
 Score   Factors indicating Degree of influence
 0       The life cycle management principles and commitments are not defined; hence realistic
         schedule of architecture development is absent.
 1       Preliminary phases of life cycle are defined and the overall realm of architecture frame-
         work is defined and formally stated
 2       The Key Process Areas (KPA) as well as the Key Performance Indicators (KPI) are defined
         with adherence to the corresponding business processes and drivers .
 3       The Baseline Architecture effort with the relevant stakeholders, and their concerns and
         objectives is defined.
 4       The development schedule and performance metrics to meet are developed.
 5       Formal approval plan and impact analysis of development cycle is established.


TABLE 6: Architecture Verifiability
 Score   Factors indicating Degree of influence
 0       No Architecture Verification iteration exists.
 1       Architecture Context iterations indicating architecture approach, principles, scope, and
         vision is established.
 2       The iterations required to establish correct and stable architectural information base is
         established and revised with relevant technical drivers.
 3       Transition Planning iterations supporting formal change adoptions for a defined architec-
         ture is established.
 4       Architecture Governance iterations supporting governance of change activity progressing
         towards a defined Target Architecture is established.
 5       The opportunities and migration planning are traced.
24                                            Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



TABLE 7: Architecture Governance
 Score   Factors indicating Degree of influence
 0       Governance principles are not established and hence no architecture verification can exist.
 1       All the stakeholders of the enterprise development have agreed upon the processes and
         deliverables as stated by the stakeholders and recorded by the organization.
 2       All actions implemented and their decision support is available for inspection by autho-
         rized organization and provider parties.
 3       All processes, decision-making, and mechanisms used are established so as to minimize or
         avoid potential conflicts of interest.
 4       Performance metrics and practices to be followed to ensure the architecture enactment
         policies are determined and monitored.
 5       Stakeholder participation and interaction is determined to monitor progress and perfor-
         mance of architecture development. It principally yields the client and development orga-
         nization neutral scenario to deploy architectural solution successfully.


Table 8: Business Governance
 Score   Factors indicating Degree of influence
 0       No description of the Baseline Business Architecture.
 1       Major domain areas and architectural elements are identified formulating the productlevel-
         functions and services. Target architecture scope and applicability in corresponding envi-
         ronment are determined.
 2       Reviews of Target Business Architectures and baselines are conducted and examined.
 3       Architecture views and viewpoints are established in accordance with the stakeholder
         needs and concerns in order to reveal stable architecture segments.
 4       Organization, Goals, Role and Business Service catalogue is developed and standards for
         each building block from reference model are selected.
 5       Cross check of overall architecture and Architecture Repository mapping is performed.


TABLE 9: Standardization
 Score   Factors indicating Degree of influence
 0       Enterprise architecture program is not defined.
 1       The enterprise architecture processes and standards are derived by ad hoc means and are
         not formal enough to guide the business strategies.
 2       The vision and mission of target enterprise architecture is established with stable and ex-
         plicit business strategies.
 3       The architecture is well defined and communicated to human resources and management
         with operation details and responsibilities assigned. It also covers the initial investments to
         be made along with procurement processes and control.
 4       Enterprise architecture documentation is maintained so as to control and trace the changes
         incorporated in ongoing development cycle.
 5       Metrics and measures are established and practiced to verify the architecture process. The
         areas for improvement and optimization of business processes are identified.
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures             25



    Table 3 to Table 9 indicates the selection criteria on the measurement
scale 0 to 5. Architecture Governance, Business Governance and Stan-
dardization are the key parameters which determine the applicability of
the enterprise architectures depending on the business domain and context
identified. Architecture Process and Verification are the other parameters
which can be useful in adjudging suitability of the enterprise architecture
at the construction and deployment stages. Architecture Analysis depends
on baselines and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs).


1.10.2 COMPARISON BY NFR SUPPORT

Requirements are a specification of functions or services that should be ac-
complished by the system. The requirements are the properties and character-
istics possessed by the system along with satisfaction of constraints on them.
Requirements vary in intent and in the kinds of properties they represent in
terms of product parameters and process parameters. Product parameters
are can be further classified as functional requirements (FR) which indicate
what the system should do and affects the performance of the system directly
whereas non-functional requirements (NFR) indicate what the system should
do and affects the performance of the system indirectly [19] [20].
     NFRs are particularly difficult to handle and tend to vary significantly if
the goals are expressed ambiguously. Many non-functional requirements have
emergent properties. Such requirements cannot be addressed by a single com-
ponent, but depends for their satisfaction on how all the system components
inter-operate. Correctness, consistency, traceability and requirement interac-
tion management are the prime issues to be dealt [21]. Unfortunately, non-
functional requirements may be difficult to verify. Non-functional require-
ments should be quantified. If a non-functional requirement is only expressed
qualitatively, it should be further analyzed until it is possible to express it
quantitatively. The non-functional requirements mentioned below are quanti-
fied on the scale as indicated in the measurement process. Table 10 indicates
the comparison by NFR support. Following are the NFRs considered:

   • Cohesiveness—It is the degree to which each module in a system does one
     task and does it well. Cohesion refers to the uniqueness of purpose of the
     system elements.
26                                       Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



     • Conceptuality—It represents the concepts in the domain under study. With
       a conceptual perspective, developers may conceive of what the customer
       requires, not how. The conceptual level is more abstract than the imple-
       mentation level, in which the details of how the requirement is to be met are
       manifested in the code itself.
     • Configurability—It describes the ability to organize and control elements of
       the software configuration. A system's software configuration is defined as the
       items that comprise all information produced as part of the software process.
     • Consistency—It describes two aspects of a system's design and development.
       Consistency may refer to the use of approaches and techniques describing the
       system specifications which leads to uniform representations of the system.
     • Coupling—It describes the degree to which the modules and components
       of a given system rely on and interact with other modules and components
       of that system.
     • Diversity—It describes the degree of difference between a system's com-
       ponents and modules. It refers to the degree of difference between data
       structures and data types throughout a program.
     • Extensibility—It involves extending both the design of the system and the
       software system itself. It describes the degree to which architectural, data,
       or procedural design can be extended by adding variations to an already
       stated theme.
     • Standardizability—It indicates acceptability and conformance of deliver-
       ables against standards. The process standard defines the procedures or
       operations used in making or achieving a product; the product standard
       defines what constitutes completeness and acceptability of items that are
       produced as a result of a process.
     • Adaptability—It is defined by the rate at which the software solution can adapt
       to a new requirement. Adaptability also refers to the degree to which a system
       may be changed based on a pre-existing system or an unalterable constraint.
     • Dependability—It describes the degree to which software performs expect-
       ed functions and services without failure and acceptable precision.
     • Flexibility—It describes the effort required to modify an operational pro-
       gram or system. A software system may be required to be flexible if there
       will be known a change in its operating environment after it has been de-
       ployed and is in normal operation.
     • Maintainability—It describes the effort required to locate and fix an error
       in a program. It the ease with which a program can be corrected if an error
       is encountered, adapted if its environment changes, or enhanced if the cus-
       tomer desires a change in requirements.
     • Maturity—It describes the degree to which a software system is mature. A system
       is said to be mature when it has attained a final, desired state of full development.
     • Portability—It describes the ease with which the software can be trans-
       posed from one environment to another.
     • Scalability—It refers to the ease with which a system may be made smaller
       or larger, although most of the time, increasing the system's size is the con-
       cern, not reducing it.
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures                27



   • Robustness—It describes the degree to which a program or system can re-
     cover gracefully whenever a failure occurs. It also describes the time it
     takes the system to restart after experiencing system failure.
   • Security—It describes the mechanisms that detect the possible threats to
     programs and data. It may also refer to the probability that the attack of a
     specific type will be repelled.
   • Compatibility—It describes the ability of two or more systems to exchange
     information. When a system is being deployed to replace an earlier version
     of that system, it is imperative that it be compatible with everything that it
     is replacing is compatible with.
   • Inter-operability—It is defined as the ability of the systems to exchange the
     services with agreed protocols and architectural support at both the ends.
   • Usability—It describes the effort required to learn and handle the services
     or product functions over a period of time.


TABLE 10: Comparison by NFR support
Comparison          ZF   RMODP     FEAF     TOGAF     IEEE 1471   MDA     GERAM
Parameter
Adaptability        4    4         3        5         4           5       4
Compatibility       3    4         3        5         3           4       4
Cohesiveness        3    3         4        4         4           4       4
Conceptuality       4    4         4        5         4           4       4
Configurability     2    4         4        4         4           4       4
Consistency         3    3         4        5         4           4       4
Coupling            3    3         4        5         4           4       4
Diversity           3    3         3        5         3           5       3
Dependability       3    4         4        4         4           4       4
Extensibility       3    3         4        4         3           4       4
Flexibility         3    4         3        5         4           4       4
Inter-operability   3    3         3        5         3           5       3
Maintainability     3    4         4        4         3           4       3
Maturity            3    3         3        4         4           4       4
Portability         2    4         3        4         3           4       3
Robustness          3    4         4        4         3           4       4
Scalability         3    3         4        4         4           4       4
Security            2    3         4        4         3           4       3
Standardizability   3    3         4        5         4           4       3
Usability           4    3         3        5         3           4       3
Total               60   69        72       90        71          83      73
28   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




                                            FIGURE 6: Consolidated Comparison Chart
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures           29




1.10.3 COMPARISON BY INPUTS AND OUTCOMES

Business drivers, Technology inputs, and Business requirements focus on
the problem issues in view of the stakeholders. The context and relevance
of the problem scenario can be further broken into various model supports
as indicated in Table 11. The process enablers as well as process measures
are key areas determining sustainability and stability of the enterprise
solution.


TABLE 11: Comparison by Inputs and Outcomes
Comparison           ZF   RMODP   FEAF   TOGAF   IEEE 1471   MDA   GERAM
Parameter
Business Drivers     3    3       5      5       3           5     3
Technology Inputs    0    3       5      5       5           5     4
Business Require-    5    5       5      5       3           5     3
ments
Information Sys-     3    5       5      5       5           4     4
tem Environment
Existing Architec-   3    5       5      5       5           4     5
ture Evaluation
Business Model       5    5       5      5       3           5     3
Support
System Model         5    5       5      5       5           5     4
Support
Information Model    5    5       5      5       5           4     4
Support
Computation          5    5       5      5       5           5     4
Model Support
Software             0    3       0      5       4           4     4
Configuration
Management
Software Process     4    4       4      5       3           4     3
Incorporation
Implementation       3    4       4      4       3           4     4
Model
Platform             4    5       4      4       3           5     4
Total                45   57      57     63      52          59    49
30                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



   Figure 6 indicates the consolidated chart representing the enterprise
architecture suitability depending on higher order goals, NFR support and
input-outcomes.


1.11 CONCLUSIONS

The paper covers a broad discussion of major enterprise architecture meth-
odologies. The enterprises can be categorized into small-sized, medium-
sized and large-sized enterprises depending on the range of problem is-
sues, business requirements, and organization portfolio. It is significantly
difficult to decide on selecting a specific enterprise architecture method-
ology due to the changes that drives the enhancement scenario for these
methodologies. Every system development effort is constrained by the
time, scope and cost triplet. The relationship between scope and perfor-
mance has to be established at the time of system conceptualization so that
realistic solution with required fitness criteria can be developed.
    The paper proposed an ordinal scale based measurement process for
measuring enterprise architecture methodologies in terms of higher order
goals, NFR support and input-outcomes. It can be observed that TOGAF
and MDA are the most successful methodologies in addressing the issues
indicated due to incorporation of views and viewpoints. Business, Archi-
tecture, Technology and Data governance are also the key areas which
indicate the rationale and applicability of the methodologies. However,
the fundamental methodology proposed by Zachman Framework is nearly
adopted and considered by every descendant methodology development
effort.
    The paper focused on the criticality of addressing NFR issues. NFR
properties are the abilities that the system should possess that ensure re-
quired quality and performance has been met at product or service level.
We have considered major NFRs that can impact the selection of enter-
prise architecture methodologies. It can be observed that TOGAF, MDA,
GERAM and IEEE 1472-2000 are in a comparable range in this context.
The paper also suggests that there cannot be a radical shift from one meth-
odology to the other since methodology mapping must be discovered be-
fore doing so. Finally, the selection of any enterprise architecture method-
Comprehensive Measurement Framework for Enterprise Architectures                        31



ology will depend on organization culture, mission, principal investment
at the initial phase and adherence to the architecture principles.


REFERENCES

 1.    L. Bass, P. Clements & R. Kazman, (1997) Software Architecture in Practice, Addi-
       son-Wesley, Reading, MA.
 2.    Bachmann F., Bass L., Klein M. & Shelton C., (2005) Designing software architec-
       tures to achieve quality attribute requirements, IEE Proceedings – Software 152 (4),
       153–165.
 3.    D. Chen & F. Vernadat, (2004) “Standards on enterprise integration and engineer-
       ing—state of the art,” International Journal of CIM, Vol. 17, No. 3, pp. 235–253.
 4.    Jeff A. Estefan, (2007) Survey of Model-Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) Meth-
       odologies, INCOSE MBSE Focus Group, pp 1-47
 5.    J. A. Zachman, (1987) “A framework for information systems architecture,” IBM
       System Journal, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 276–292.
 6.    ISO/ITU-T (1997), Reference Model for Open Distributed Processing (ISO/ITU-T
       10746 Part 1 - 4), Information Standards Organization.
 7.    K. Farooqui, L. Logrippo, and J. de Meer, “Introduction into the ODP Reference
       Model,” 2/14/96, Department of Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa
       K1N 6N5, Canada; Research Institute for Open Communication Systems Berlin
       (GMD-FOKUS), D10623 Berlin, Hardenbergplatz 2, Germany
 8.    CIO-Council, (1999) Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework version 1.1, URL
       http://www.cio.gov/archive/fedarch1.pdf, Accessed 21 December 2010.
 9.    P. Clements, (2005) “1471 (IEEE Recommended Practice for Architectural Descrip-
       tion of Software-Intensive Systems),” CMU/SEI-2005-TN-017, Software Architec-
       ture Technology Initiative, Carnegie-Mellon Software Engineering Institute
 10.   IEEE Architecture Working Group, (2000) “IEEE Recommended Practice for Archi-
       tectural Description of Software-Intensive Systems, IEEE Std 1471-2000,” IEEE,
       Tech. Rep.
 11.   The Open Group, (2003) The Open Group Architecture Framework (ver 8.1 Enter-
       prise Edition), URL http://www.opengroup.org/architecture/togaf/#download, Ac-
       cessed 21 December 2010.
 12.   IFIP-IFAC Task Force, (1999) “GERAM: Generalized Enterprise Reference Archi-
       tecture & Methodology,” IFIP-IFAC Task Force on Architectures for Enterprise In-
       tegration, Tech. Rep.
 13.   Reda Bendraou, Philippe Desfray, Marie-Pierre Gervais & Alexis Muller, (2008)
       MDA Tool Components: a proposal for packaging know-how in model driven devel-
       opment, Journal of Software and System Model Vol3: pp 329–343, Springer-Verlag.
 14.   Kruchten P, (1995) The 4+1 View Model of Architecture, IEEE Software, 12, 6 pp
       42-50.
 15.   Jacobson I., Booch G. & Rumbaugh J., (1999) The Unified Software Development
       Process, Addison-Wesley.
32                                   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks


16. Dobrica L. & Niemela E., (2002) A survey on software architecture analysis meth-
    ods, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 28 (7).
17. Nelly Condori-Fernández & Oscar Pastor, (2008) Analyzing the Influence of Certain
    Factors on the Acceptance of a Model-based Measurement Procedure in Practice: An
    Empirical Study, MODELS`08 Workshop ESMDE, pp 61-70
18. Benoit Vanderose & Naji Habra, (2008) Towards a generic framework for empirical
    studies of Model-Driven Engineering, MODELS`08 Workshop ESMDE, pp 71-80
19. Chung L. & Nixon B., (1995) Dealing with Non functional Requirements: Three
    Experimental Studies of a Process-Oriented Approach, Proceedings of the 17th In-
    ternational Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 24–28.
20. Cysneiros L. & Leite J., (2004) Non functional Requirements: From Elicitation to
    Conceptual Models, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 30 (5), 328–350.
21. Sadana V. & Liu X., (2007) Analysis of conflicts among non-functional require-
    ments using integrated analysis of functional and non-functional requirements.
    Computer Software and Applications Conference, COMPSAC.
CHAPTER 2



EVALUATION OF ARIS AND
ZACHMAN FRAMEWORKS AS
ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURES
MELITA KOZINA




2.1 INTRODUCTION

Structured frameworks called enterprise architectures capture and man-
age the complexity of modern organizations. Today, modern organizations
are based on connectivity of the business system model and its relevant
information system (IS) model. Such integral business systems are highly
complex systems consisting of elements such as objectives, data, people,
processes, technology. These systems require coordination and integration
in order to manage the existing interdependencies between all these ele-
ments.
    Enterprise architecture frameworks present a conceptual map neces-
sary for building an integral business model supported by the relevant
IS. It requires identification information about the organization from dif-
ferent perspectives (views). The main perspectives are: data, functions,
networks, organizational structures, schedules and strategy. Each of there
business perspectives gradually get implemented into the components of
a future IS. This process is supported by the second dimension of the con-
ceptual map containing certain phases (levels). Consistently, frameworks
support various management tasks such as business process improvement,

This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent. Kozina M.
Evaluation of ARIS and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures. Journal of Information and
Organizational Sciences 30, 1 (2006).
34                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



workflow management, software engineering and in general, business sys-
tem management.
    Building enterprise architectures involves modelling techniques in or-
der to capture the organization in its entirety, an adequate methodology to
establish a basis for business system management, and a lifecycle concept
of IS as well as integrated modelling tool in order to build and maintain
these architectures. This paper analyzes two important frameworks for en-
terprise architecture: the Architecture of Integrated Information Systems
(ARIS) and the Zachman framework. The goal of this paper is to compare
these approaches according to defined criteria, to determine the points
of their complement and to assess how efficient this approach is to busi-
ness system management. In order to solve this, in the paper we describe
the general phases of business system management (Chapter 2), analyze,
compare and evaluate ARIS and Zachman frameworks (Chapters 3, 4) and
define the generic model of business system management supported by
said architectures (Chapter 5).


2.2 BUSINESS SYSTEM MANAGEMENT

One of the characteristics of the business system management is continu-
ous optimization of business processes and relevant IS implementation.
The following process changes could become necessary for business pro-
cess optimization (business process improvement): changing the process
structure; changing organizational structure and responsibilities; changing
the data in use; discussing possible outsourcing measures (shifting from
internal to external output creation); implementing new production and IT
resources to improve processing functions. Figure 1 shows the procedural
model of business system management. Through the entire management,
we can recognize two main levels: business level and IS development/
implementation level.
    The starting point of the entire process is the strategic plan and the
goals of the business system, for which an adequate IS is developed. Busi-
ness applications need to support the realization of business goals, which
is why information needs stem from the business technology model.
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures                                                              35




                                                                        FIGURE 1: Procedural model of Business System Management
36                                Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    Business process design (AS-IS model)/ redesign (TO-BE model) aims
to achieve the greatest efficiency possible in terms of business-organiza-
tional solutions. When engineering optimal business processes, different
models (diagram techniques) can be provided using ARIS/Zachman archi-
tectures and adequate integrated tools and methods. This is the only way
to get a picture of the existing process and all its aspects (AS-IS model).
    The reference models can be also included, along with available
knowledge on best practices. It is also possible to compare alternative pro-
cedures (benchmarking) or carry out simulation studies. Multiple alterna-
tives are generated, studied and analyzed in simulation studies in order to
engineer the best possible business process. Defining and analyzing the
various engineering alternatives in “what-if” situations are also necessary.
In dynamic simulations the dynamic behaviour of process alternatives is
studied. Furthermore, ICT innovations can also have an effect on the new
design of business processes. For example, if the firm in question should
implement standard integrated software, the business model would be cus-
tomized using standard reference models. Also available are various meth-
ods for ensuring the quality of the processes (like ISO9000).
    In order to design business processes in accordance with specific goals,
they must be evaluated in accordance with process goals. Data obtained
from lower management levels ensure the basis for process evaluation. Mea-
suring, controlling and evaluating business processes ensure data on effi-
ciency of business processes, resource utilization, process throughput times,
process qualities and process costs. By changing process priorities, resource
allocations and processing sequences in order to achieve the process goals,
process owners can manipulate the process itself. In order to be able to plan
and control current business processes, the appropriate information must be
made available to the persons responsible for the process. This is why ARIS/
Zachman concepts and compatible integrated tools and methods are being
used. For example, an efficient method for cost structure analysis is the ABC
method (Activity Based Costing). Measuring and evaluating business pro-
cesses visualize various reasons for redesign (TO BE model) and for linking
design and controlling/evaluating phases with one another.
    The next important phase in further development of the integrated
business system is the development of logical and physical models of the
future IS, i.e. gradual transformation of business aspects into IS compo-
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures                                    37




                                                                        FIGURE 2: The classic enterprise architecture
38   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




                                           FIGURE 3: The balanced enterprise architecture
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures                                                             39




                                                                        FIGURE 4: Views of the ARIS business process meta-model
40                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



nents. So constructed integrated business system demands continuous
performance measuring and evaluation aimed at checking the efficacy of
business applications in the realization of business goals. Furthermore, it
is a good base for further AS-IS studies and new optimization of business
processes (TO BE model).


2.3 ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE FRAMEWORKS




2.3.1 EVOLUTION OF ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE

The concept of enterprise-wide information technology architecture was
developed very quickly. The concept included Application, Data and
Technology Architectures. As a result, the enterprise architecture became
software oriented and application development oriented. However, it was
still not enough, since a good alignment between business processes and
requests, i.e. needs, as the starting point in the design of IT solutions, could
not be established. Therefore, to ensure effective mappings and require-
ments tracing, business architecture was incorporated into the concept.
     The merging of business and IT concepts was a big step forward in the
evolution of the enterprise architecture. Although the developed architec-
tures were still too technically-oriented, the alignment between the busi-
ness needs and IT solutions grew none the less. Business elements such
as functions, processes, organizational units and users were introduced to
ease the task of software requirements analysis and to increase the quality
of application development results. Fig. 2 shows a classic case of enter-
prise architecture.
     Further development found the emergence of comprehensive IT ori-
ented enterprise architecture comprised of Business Process, Organiza-
tional and Business Performance Architectures (performance metrics on
strategic, operational and human levels). There are many benefits of such
architectures such as [3]:
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures          41




FIGURE 5: ARIS phase concept (levels)




   •   Faster response to environmental threat or opportunity;
   •   Better alignment of change initiatives with enterprise strategy;
   •   Better alignment of application systems with business objectives and needs;
   •   Reduced application development lifecycles;
   •   Reduced application maintenance costs;
   •   Improved operating procedures.

   Fig. 3 shows the balanced enterprise architecture concept.
42                                Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




2.3.2 THE ARIS FRAMEWORK

Business process model aimed at modelling and optimization is very com-
plex. With that in mind, the ARIS concept (ARIS: Architecture of Integrat-
ed Information Systems) allows us to reference the following important
business aspects (meta-classes) [4]:organizational units; corporate goals;
initial and result events; messages; functions; material output, service out-
put and information services; financial resources; machine resources and
computer hardware; application software; human output; process envi-
ronmental data. In order to reduce complexity, meta-classes with similar
semantic interrelationships are grouped into ARIS views [4, 7, 9]. The
grouping of classes and their relationships into views serves the purpose of
structuring business process models. Figure 4 shows five different views.
FUNCTION VIEW -HOW, WHY
The processes transforming input into output are grouped in a function
view. Due to the fact that functions support goals, goals are also allocated
to function view. In application software, computer-aided processing rules




FIGURE 6: The ARIS architecture
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures             43



of a function are defined. Thus, application software is closely aligned
with functions, and is also allocated to function view.
ORGANIZATION VIEW – WHO, WHERE
The class of organization view creates the hierarchical organization struc-
ture. This view is created in order to group responsible entities (depart-
ment, team, position, person, role) or devices executing the same work
object.




TABLE 1: ARIS modelling techniques (ARIS Toolset)
 View           Description Level of System   ARIS Modelling Techniques
                Lifecycle
 Organization   Requirements Definition       Organizational chart
                                              Shift calendar
                                              Location allocation diagram
                Design Specification          Network topology
                Implementation                Network diagram
                                              Technical resource model
 Data           Requirements Definition       Authorization hierarchy
                                              CD Diagram
                                              Cost category diagram
                                              DTD, DW-structure
                                              eERM, SAP structured ER model
                                              eERM attribute allocation diagram
                                              Material diagram
                                              Information carrier diagram
                                              IE data model
                                              Technical terms model
                                              Data warehouse
                Design Specification          Attribute allocation diagram
                                              Relations diagram
                                              System attributes
                                              System attribute domain
                Implementation                Table diagram
 Function       Requirements Definition       Function tree
                                              Objective diagram
                                              SAP ALE function model
                                              SAP applications diagram
                                              Y diagram
                Design Specification          Application system type diagram
                Implementation                Application system diagram
44                                          Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



TABLE 1: Cont.

Control/Process   Requirements Definition        Authorization map
                                                 Business framework
                                                 Business control diagram
                                                 c3 method; class diagram
                                                 Classification diagram
                                                 Communications diagram
                                                 Competition model
                                                 DW-transformation
                                                 E-business scenario diagram
                                                 Extended event driven process chain (eEPC)
                                                 Event diagram
                                                 Function allocation diagram
                                                 Function/organizational level diagram
                                                 Industrial process
                                                 Information flow diagram
                                                 Input/output diagram
                                                 Knowledge structure diagram
                                                 Material flow diagram
                                                 Office process
                                                 Privileges diagram
                                                 Process selection diagram, Process matrix
                                                 Product/Service exchange diagram
                                                 Role diagram, rule diagram
                                                 SAP ALE models
                                                 Screen design
                                                 UML Models
                                                 Value-added chain diagram
                  Design Specification           Access diagram
                                                 Program flow-chart
                                                 Program structure chart
                                                 Screen diagram
                                                 Data flow diagram
                  Implementation                 Hardware/software allocation diagram


DATA VIEW – WHAT, WHEN
This view comprises the data processing environment as well as the mes-
sages triggering functions or being triggered by functions.
OUTPUT VIEW -WHAT
Output view contains all physical and non-physical input and output, in-
cluding funds flows.
ARIS PROCESS VIEW- WHAT, HOW, WERE, WHO, WHEN, WHY:
Relationships among the all views, as well as the entire business process,
are modelled and documented in this view.
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures                          45




                                                                        FIGURE 7: The Zachman architecture
                                                                              46




FIGURE 8: Main business aspects within the model of enterprise architecture
                                                                              Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
47




                                                                        TABLE 2: Characteristics of the Zachman concept in the building enterprise architecture
                                                                         Views         Data (what)     Process (How)           Place (Where)     People (Who)              Time (When)                      Motivation (Why)
                                                                         Levels
                                                                         Business      High-level      High-level business     Locations         Stakeholders related      Events related to each           Business objectives
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures




                                                                         function      data classes    functions               related to each   to each function          function                         and performance
                                                                         modelling     related to      (Enterprise areas)      function                                                                     measures related to
                                                                         (Enterprise   each function                                                                                                        each function
                                                                         areas)
                                                                         Business      Business data   Business processes      Locations         Organization roles        Events related to each           Policies, procedures,
                                                                         process                       (Business Dynamics      related to each   and responsibilities in   process                          and standards for
                                                                         models                        Model)                  process           each process                                               each process
                                                                         Logical       Logical data    Logical representa-     Logical network   Logical represen-         Logical events and their trig-   Policies, procedures,
                                                                         models        models          tion of IS (System      model             tation of access          gered responses constrained      and standards
                                                                                                       Dynamics Model)                           privileges constrained    by business events and their     associated with a
                                                                                                                                                 by roles                  responses                        business role model
                                                                         Physical      DBMS type       Specifications of       Specification     Specification access      Specification of triggers to     Business rules
                                                                         models        requirements    applications that       of network de-    privileges to specific    repsond to system events         constrained by IS
                                                                                       constrained     operate on particular   vices and their   platforms and             on specific platforms and        standards
                                                                                       by logical      technology platforms    relationships     technologies              technologies
                                                                                       data models     (Function Dynamics      within physical
                                                                                                       Model)                  boundaries
                                                                         As built      Data            Programs coded to       Network devices   Access privileges         Timing definitions coded         Business rules con-
                                                                                       definition      operate on specific     configured to     coded to control          to sequence activities on        strained by specific
                                                                                       constrained     technology platforms    conform to node   access to specific        specific platforms and tech-     technology standards
                                                                                       by physical                             specifications    platforms and             nologies
                                                                                       data models                                               technologies
                                                                         Functioning   Data values     Functioning com-        Sending and       Personnel and key         Timing definitions operating     Operating charac-
                                                                         enterprise    stored in       puter instructions      receiving mes-    stakeholders working      to sequence activities           teristics of specific
                                                                                       actual data-                            sages             within their roles and                                     technologies
                                                                                       bases                                                     responsibilities
48                            Obesity Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, and Treatmen




FIGURE 9: Business Process Improvement

     In addition to the five views (vertical dimension), ARIS involves a
concept of different description levels (horizontal dimension). As it is pre-
sented in Figure 5, these five levels represent design aspects according to
the well-established software engineering lifecycle.
     The source point of this concept is the business strategy and strategic
goals (level 1) defined in accordance with the vision and mission of the
business system. Goals and global business processes (enterprise areas),
resources and potential effects of IS implementation supported by new
ICT technologies, are determined during the phase of strategic planning.
The second phase, requirements definition (level 2), is related to busi-
ness process modelling and ICT requirements specification (generally
 databases, application software, hardware, networks, etc.) This is the
most important phase of integral system development, since the model of
business technology represents the starting point in IS development and
its implementation. Thanks to developed methods (especially ARIS and
Casewise Corporate Modeler), it is possible to use different diagrams for
business process modelling. This is especially important considering the
fact that the business process is a complex unit and it is difficult to show
all its aspects using one model (diagram). The third phase, design spec-
ification (level 3), features the beginnings of gradual transformation of
business descriptions into ICT objects. The logical IS model is developed
and ICT components described in more detail (database models, hardware
and network specifications, software modules, etc.) Actual IT products are
still irrelevant. Phase 4, implementation description (level 4), contains de-
scriptions of the technological model of the future system, and business
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures   49



requirements are implemented into actual hardware and software compo-
nents. These phases of IS development are known as “buildtime” phases.
Subsequently, the completed system becomes operable, meaning it is fol-
lowed by an operations phase, known as “runtime”.
    Thus, this dimension establishes the physical linkage from business
strategy to information technology through translation from a strategic to
an operational level. The implementation of business models in informa-
tion systems represents a modern approach in the development of integral
business systems. The ARIS architecture accomplishes this by linking its
business aspects (ARIS VIEWS) with the phase concept (ARIS LEV-
ELS). In this way, the views of meta-business process model are valid for
all descriptive levels. Figure 6 shows the ARIS architecture of an integral
business system. This ARIS “House” illustrates the 15 component of this
framework.


2.3.2.1 ARIS MODELLING TECHNIQUES

The ARIS framework is supported by the tool of the same name and the
methodology containing various modelling techniques. These modelling
techniques (and their relationship with additional techniques) enable the
development, analysis and optimization of enterprise architecture. In table
1, adequate modelling techniques for each ARIS component are recom-
mended.
    ARIS provides an extensive number of model types to build complex
enterprise architectures. These model types represent different modelling
methods. Though each model type has its own modelling objects (entity
types, classes, functions or objectives), all objects are integrated in one
comprehensive meta-model. This meta-model is the conceptual founda-
tion of ARIS and inter-relates each and every model type.


2.3.3 THE ZACHMAN FRAMEWORK

The Zachman concept is another framework for modelling, evaluation, op-
timization, management and documenting of the integral business system.
50                             Obesity Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, and Treatmen



Figure 7 shows the Zachman architecture of the integral business system
[1, 10]. Table 2 shows basic characteristics of the Zachman architecture
with respect to development and implementation of the business model
into the IS model.
    Meta-classes of the business process (aspects of business modelling)
are also divided into individual views in the Zachman architecture in or-
der to reduce the business model complexity. Main description views in
Zachman’s concept are: data-process-place-people-time-motivation. The
phase concept of this architecture includes a number of levels in relation
to the ARIS architecture. Buildtime lifecycle in the Zachman architecture
contains the following phases: business function modelling-level 1; busi-
ness process models- level 2; logical models (IS model)- level 3; physical
models (IS model)-level 4; “As Built” IS models-level 5. Runtime phase
is related to functioning enterprise-level 6.


2.4 COMPARISON AND EVALUATION OF ARIS AND ZACHMAN
FRAMEWORKS - FINDING THEIR COMPLEMENTARITY

In this chapter we compare the ARIS and the Zachman frameworks and
determine their complementarities. The following criteria are defined in
order to accomplish this:

     a) Consistent framework for modelling, analyzing and optimizing the
         enterprise architecture;
     b) Two dimensional structure;




FIGURE 10: Vertical comparison and evaluation of ARIS/Zachman frameworks
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures        51



   c) Drill-down approach;
   d) Multi-user repository;
   e) Adequacy of using ARIS modelling techniques within Zachman’s
       framework.


2.4.1 CONSISTENT FRAMEWORK FOR MODELLING,
ANALYZING AND OPTIMIZING THE ENTERPRISE
ARCHITECTURE

ARIS/Zachman frameworks supported by adequate integrated tools and
methods enable improvement teams to build a complete visual model of
the enterprise architecture (address the organization in its entirety). Main
business aspects within the model of enterprise architecture are business
processes, the people that perform them, the location where they occur,
applications that support the business processes and manipulate relevant
data and used technology (the IT hardware and network). These business
aspects are shown on Figure 8.




FIGURE 11: Horizontal comparison and evaluation of ARIS/Zachman frameworks
52                               Obesity Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, and Treatmen




FIGURE 12: Drill down approach

    In co-relation with the above, the ARIS/Zachman frameworks sup-
ported by integrated tools and methods link together the business process,
organizational aspects, IT architecture and data modelling through a multi-
user repository. Organizational/hierarchical modelling: form a top-down
view of the organization within the scope of improvement initiatives;
structures organizational entities and their roles in the realization of busi-
ness processes.
    Business process modelling/analysis/simulation [2,4]: visualize and
improve business processes using easy-to-understand modelling notation;
ensure jobs flow through departments, systems, suppliers from initial cus-
tomer enquiry through to final delivery of product/service; analyze the
“AS-IS” model, design the “TOBE” model (shown on Figure 9); to ac-
complish this, they use various assessment procedures, reference models,
and of special importance, simulation methods, which research the dy-
namics of business processes in order to locate inefficiencies and quantify
the benefits of “what-if” scenarios.
    There are numerous reasons which point to the importance of creating
models of business processes. Here are some of them:
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures           53




FIGURE 13: ARIS modelling techniques within Zachman’s framework

   • To get a picture of the existing process and all its aspects (business process
     meta-classes),
   • To measure, monitor and evaluate business processes (quality, expenses,
     time, flexibility, allocation of resources, redundancy, “what-if” assessment,
     etc.),
   • To make an adequate optimization of the business process in question using
     various methods (reference models, best practices, simulation, benchmark-
     ing)
   • To structure the ISO 9001:2000 quality management system,
   • To allow for the development of own integrated IS or to customize standard
     software solutions.

   IT Architecture modelling: optimizes how the business applications,
hardware, networks and data structures align to support or automate the
business processes; design where and how to integrate or replace existing
systems to maximize ROI (return on investment).
   Data flow modelling: analyzes how information is shared across an
organization to perform business processes; create a hierarchical set of
data flow diagrams (DFDs) to show data flows at every level of operations.
                                                                                54




FIGURE 14. Business system management supported by ARIS/Zachman architectures
                                                                                Obesity Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, and Treatmen
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures    55



    Data modelling: analyzes and improves the use of data at each step
of business process; implement data design or analyze how existing data
structures support the business.


2.4.2 TWO-DIMENSIONAL STRUCTURE

Both approaches have a similar design paradigm, as they both include
a twodimensional framework. The six vertical dimensions (descriptive
views) in Zachman’s framework are analogous to the views in the ARIS
concept. Thus, both frameworks decrease the complexity of modelling the
business technology and facilitate modelling within the following perspec-
tives: what, how, where, who, when, why. In addition, the six horizontal
dimensions (descriptive levels) in Zachman’s framework are analogous
to the levels (software lifecycle concept) in the ARIS concept. Their vital
importance is to connect the complete business model with the IS model.


2.4.2.1 VIEWS – REDUCTION OF COMPLEXITY IN MODELLING
BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY

According to Zachman’s framework, we can distinct 6 aspect of business
technology: data, time, network, people, function and motivation. The
ARIS concept is primarily focused on business processes, data, functions
and organization (shown on Fig. 4). Data and functions correspond direct-
ly with the Zachman’s Framework. The time aspect of Zachman’s frame-
work is implicitly part of the data view in ARIS concept, because the mod-
elling object “event” represents stages of business objects in terms of time
and logical sequence. In this context, messages trigger the functions or
being triggered by functions. The organization view in ARIS concept cap-
tures both, people and location (network) on different levels of modelling.
In addition, objective diagrams within the function view in ARIS cover the
motivation field in Zachman’s framework. All vertical description views
of Zachman’s framework can be found in ARIS framework. Determined
complementarities of ARIS and Zachman frameworks according to this
criterion are shown on Fig. 10.
56                          Obesity Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, and Treatmen



    ARIS framework includes the integrative and the dynamic process
view. Integrating the other views constitutes the process view. This leads
to a high level of consistency of the enterprise architecture.
    The four main ARIS views (organization, data, function, process) en-
sure that enterprise architectures can be captured in its completeness and
from various aspects. These aspects as the main business drivers within
the enterprise architecture are: business (processes, organization, loca-
tion), applications, information and technology.


2.4.2.2 LEVELS – INTEGRATION OF BUSINESS MODEL AND IS
MODEL

Descriptive levels (horizontal dimension of both frameworks) ties the
business model and the IS model. In that context, we can place these lev-
els in two categories: the business level and the IS level. According to
Zachman’s framework, we differentiate between 6 levels, while the ARIS
framework supports 5 levels. Complementarities of ARIS and Zachman
frameworks recognized according to this criterion are shown in Fig. 11.
    The “Scope (contextual)” level in u Zachman’s framework corresponds
to the “Business strategy (business goals)” level of the u ARIS framework.
Strategic goals are formed within these levels, as well as global business
areas (enterprise areas), and global effects of IS implementation are esti-
mated. The “Enterprise model (conceptual)” level in Zachman’s frame-
work corresponds to the “Requirements definition” level of ARIS, and this
level is significant due to detailed modelling of business processes and
planning of information needs, which are determined within the said level.
Listed levels all refer to the business level. Furthermore, the development
of the integrated business system is furthered by the development of the
logical IS model (level 3 in both frameworks). Levels like “Technological
model of the system” and “Full system integration” in Zachman’s frame-
work correspond to the “Implementation description” level of the ARIS
concept. These levels refer to the IS level. Both approaches support the
runtime level, “Functioning system”.
    Both approaches allow drilling down from a strategic to an operational
level by providing a map, which covers the complete cycle from strategy
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures     57



to implementation of information systems. These lifecycle concepts for
information systems connect the described levels (areas) and support their
interrelations.


2.4.3 DRILL DOWN APPROACH

Drilling down approach enables us to navigate down from high-level over-
views to low-level processes, so we can present architecture at the appro-
priate level of detail.
    Multi-level process modelling allows us to develop process models
from the global hierarchy structure; first in the higher level models (busi-
ness level), then in the lower levels (IS level). Each level of process mod-
elling is supported by the relevant data model and the model of techno-
logical architecture. This can be observed in most detail on the physical
level of IS. Fig. 12 shows the drill down approach supported by the ARIS/
Zachman frameworks.
    In addition, drill across approach enables us to link from the end of one
business process to the start of the next.


2.4.4 MULTI-USER REPOSITORY

Both frameworks (ARIS and Zachman) are developed so that they can
incorporate integrating tools and modelling techniques which are grouped
in a single, unique data base—the multi-user repository. When we create
the business object representing a certain business aspect (process, orga-
nization, data, application, IT architecture), we save its main attributes in
the data base (capture key business knowledge). That same object may
be used by any member of the project team in any model that the object
appears in (reuse objects). This provides a coherent approach to business
improvement, where all users are working with a common set of objects
representing the enterprise. The functionality also induces reuse of best-
practice processes across the organization.
    Due to the possibility related to reusing objects throughout models,
keeping models up-to-date is quick and easy. We can update an object in
58                            Obesity Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, and Treatmen



any one part of a model, for all other occurrences of that object to instantly
be updated. In this way, we can identify all the areas of the organization
that would be impacted by changing one component of the business.


2.4.5 ARIS MODELLING TECHNIQUES CAN BE UTILIZED
WITHIN ZACHMAN’S FRAMEWORK

Of great importance for more effective enterprise architecture manage-
ment are the methods and the tools supporting the concepts, i.e. frame-
works for enterprise architecture. The ARIS framework is supported by
the said methods and integrating tools. There are methods and tools sup-
porting the Zachman’s framework as well (for example, the Corporate
Modeler/Casewise). Since the goal of this paper is to determine certain
points of complement between the ARIS and Zachman frameworks, this
Chapter deals with the possibilities of using ARIS modelling techniques
within Zachman’s framework. ARIS is able to capture a complete pic-
ture of data, applications, organizations and processes based on integrated
modelling techniques and tools. The ARIS concept can be regarded as
complementing Zachman’s concept and captures its dimensions in a very
similar way. According to the two-spanned congruent dimensions of the
ARIS and the Zachman frameworks, it is possible to utilize ARIS mod-
elling techniques within the Zachman framework. Figure 13 shows how
some of ARIS modelling techniques (as shown in Table 1) can be suitable
within Zachman’s framework. ARIS’ main advantage lies in the integra-
tive process/control view (integrating all modelling objects of the other
views). Overall, both approaches are highly complementary.


2.5 BUSINESS SYSTEM MANAGEMENT SUPPORTED BY ARIS AND
ZACHMAN FRAMEWORKS

The goal of the paper comes through in this chapter as defining the general
phases (levels) of the business system management and examining the
applicability of ARIS and Zachman frameworks as complementary archi-
tectures to these levels. General process management system phases may
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures      59



be described through the following levels [4,5,11]: at level 1 (process de-
sign/redesign); at level 2 (process planning and control); at level 3 (work-
flow control); at level 4 (application system). Figure 14 shows the global
model for business system management supported by ARIS/Zachman
architectures.
    Complementary frameworks for enterprise architectures such as ARIS
and Zachman frameworks support the business system management from
organizational engineering to IT implementation, including continuous
process improvement. This all becomes possible through the use of inte-
grated software tools and methods. Phases of a business system manage-
ment may be described/listed as follows:
    Process design/redesign: business processes are modelled using vari-
ous modelling techniques, and they cover all aspects of business model-
ling; various methods for optimizing, evaluating and ensuring the quality
of the processes are also available.
    Process planning and control: current business processes are planned
and controlled by means of different methods for scheduling and capacity,
cost analysis methods (activity based costing (ABC)), and other methods
for quality control and business process success.
    Workflow control: converts business processes into IT tools. Gener-
ally, it is not possible to administer an entire business process with one ap-
plication software system. Often, a variety of systems for sales, purchas-
ing, manufacturing, accounting is necessary. It therefore makes sense to
allocate the responsibility for comprehensive process control to an explicit
system level rather than distributing it across several systems. This phase is
called “workflow”. Workflow systems pass the documents to be processed
from one work place to the next. In general, business technology flows are
made up of data exchanged by business processes and the defined source
and destination of their exchange; business processes are just key points
in the transformation of information and data. At this phase, ARIS/Zach-
man architectures and compatible workflow modelling techniques provide
prototyping functionality and interfaces with different workflow systems.
    Application systems: documents delivered to the workplaces are spe-
cifically processed, i.e. functions of the business process are executed us-
ing computer-aided application systems-ranging from simple processing
systems to complex standard software solution modules-business objects
60                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



and java applets. Traditional standard software solutions are transaction
driven, integrated business application systems. The main idea of compo-
nentware is to assemble software systems from individual standard com-
ponents developed by various vendors. Today, new application software
is generally developed using object oriented technologies. At this phase,
generic business objects for logistics solutions are available, in addition to
interfaces for starting standard software solutions.
    Process design/redesign and process planning/control phases refer to
the business level, whereas workflow control and application system phas-
es refer to the IS level. With software installed at all levels of business sys-
tem management, the ARIS/Zachman life cycle model is applicable to all
levels (phases). Therefore, these architectures can be used for managing
business processes from organizational engineering to IT implementation,
including continuous process improvement.
    Phases (levels) of business system management are interlinked by two-
way communication. Using the top down approach, the model of business
processes is implemented into the relevant IS (phase concept of integral
business system). Accordingly, the business system model is the starting
point of IS development. Using the bottom up approach, one achieves
feedback from lower levels of management toward the higher ones, such
as process control and process evaluation levels. Feedback is sought (and
achieved) in order to facilitate new optimization and continuous improve-
ment of business processes, i.e. the entire system (continuous system im-
provement). For example, process control delivers information on the ef-
ficiency of current processes. Workflow control reports actual data on the
processes to be executed (amounts, times, organizational allocations) to
the process control level. Each new optimization of business processes
(business process reengineering) requires new business concepts which
will be implemented into the relevant IS during the next (new) cycle.


2.6 CONCLUSION

Enterprise architectures provide the platform for business system manage-
ment. They are an important starting point for various initiatives requiring
IT support based on clearly specified business objectives. Building and
Evaluation of Aris and Zachman Frameworks as Enterprise Architectures    61



managing enterprise architectures will not be successful without a stable
and consistent enterprise architecture framework supported by compatible
integrated tools and methods.
    ARIS and Zachman enterprise architecture frameworks pave the way
for engineering, planning and controlling business processes, optimization
and continuous business process improvement. These concepts aid in cap-
turing a wide range of descriptive aspects of business processes, allocat-
ing relevant methods to them. Understanding the what, how, who, where,
when and the why is very important for the build-time life-cycle concept
of IS. This paper analyzes the main aspects of the meta-business process
for both concepts (called the ARIS/Zachman views). Views of said archi-
tectures decrease the complexity of business process modelling. However,
the ARIS/Zachman architectures surpass the process architecture and en-
hance it using the phase concept, which starts with the business level and
ends with the IS implementation level (called the ARIS/Zachman levels).
    Furthermore, the paper contains the definitions of criteria for the com-
parison and evaluation of these two concepts, aimed at finding certain
complementarities and advantages of each of the concepts. The criteria are
categorized thusly: a consistent framework for modelling, analyzing and
optimizing the enterprise architecture; two dimensional structure; drill-
down approach; multi-user repository; and modelling techniques.
    Both approaches were developed independently, but they are highly
complementary. The ARIS framework is able to depict all dimensions and
levels of the Zachman framework. In comparison to the Zachman frame-
work, ARIS has a particular advantage. ARIS includes the integrative pro-
cess/control view that integrates all modelling objects of the other views.
This leads to a high level of consistency of the enterprise architecture.
    By analyzing the details of the ARIS/Zachman architectures comple-
ment, the paper aims to offer an analysis of their applicability through the
all phases (levels) of the business system management (business and IS
levels). In accordance with the above, the paper further strives to define
the global model for business system management supported by the ARIS/
Zachman architectures. With software installed at all levels of business
system management, the ARIS/Zachman life cycle model is applicable
to all levels (phases). In conclusion, these architectures can be used for
62                                    Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



managing business processes from organizational engineering to IT imple-
mentation, including continuous process improvement.


REFERENCES:

 1.  Hokel, T.A.: The Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture :An Overview,
     Available from: http://www.frameworksoft.com/web-sitedownloads/FSI-Enter-
     prise-Architecture-Overview-Paper.pdf, Copyright 1993-2005, Accessed: 2005-04-
     20.
 2. Perkins, A. (1997): Enterprise Information Architecture, White Papers, Available
     from: http://www.ies.aust.com, Accessed: 2005-04-15.
 3. IDS Scheer (2005): Enterprise Architectures and ARIS Process Platform, White Pa-
     pers, Available from: http://www.changeware.net/doc/wp_ea.pdf, Accessed: 2005-
     12-10.
 4. Scheer, A.W. (1999): ARIS – Business Process Frameworks, 3rd edition, Berlin et
     al.
 5. Scheer, A.W. (1999): ARIS – Business Process Modeling, 3rd edition, Berlin et al.
 6. Schekkerman,J. (2005): Trends in Enterprise Architecture 2005: How are Organiza-
     tions Progressing?, EA Survey, Institute for Enterprise Architecture Developments,
     Available from: http://www.enterprise-architecture.info/Images/EA%20Survey/En-
     terprise%20Architecture%20Survey%202005%20IFEAD%20v10.pdf, Accessed:
     2005-12-10.
 7. Spiekermann, S.(2004): System Analysis and Modelling with ARIS, Available from:
     http://www.wiwi.hu-berlin.de/~sspiek/ITSD_VL5.ppt, Accessed: 2005-04-10.
 8. Sowa,JF., Zachman J.A.(1992): Extending and formalizing the framework for infor-
     mation systems architectures, IBM Systems Journal, 31(3), pp.590-616.
 9. Ulrich F.(2002): Multi-Perspective Enterprise Modeling (MEMO) – Conceptual
     Framework and Modeling Languages,Proceedings of the 35th Hawaii International
     Conference on System Sciences Available from http://csdl2.computer.org/comp/pro-
     ceedings/hicss/2002/1435/03/14350072.pdf; Accessed: 2005-12-13.
 10. Zachman,J.A. (1996): Concepts of the Framework for Enterprise Architecture,
     White Papers, Available from: http://www.ies.aust.com
 11. Business Process Management Exchange (2004), Report, Available from:
     http://www.iqpc.com/binary-data/IQPC_CONFEVENT/pdf_file/6565.pdf,             Ac-
     cessed:2005-04-20.
CHAPTER 3



AN INTEGRATED ENTERPRISE
ARCHITECTURE FRAMEWORK FOR
BUSINESS-IT ALIGNMENT
NOVICA ZARVIĆ and ROEL WIERINGA




3.1 INTRODUCTION

Businesses describe their enterprise architecture using an Enterprise Ar-
chitecture Framework (EAF), which is a structure for documenting the
architecture of their IT systems. Usually, each business uses its own EAF,
which may or may not be documented. If undocumented, the EAF is a
kind of implicit conceptual metamodel of the architecture of their IT sys-
tems. However, when different businesses want to cooperate, they have
to relate their EAFs to each other, and this means they should document
their EAFs. While doing so a common understanding of each others EAFs
is needed. We do not claim that businesses should replace the EAF they
work with and that all change to the same EAF, but as far as existing EAFs
are built on different abstraction mechanisms it is necessary to understand
each others frameworks in order to be able to communicate in a reasonable
way. An EAF, capable to integrate existing frameworks, is useful for this
task, because it can show how the integrated EAFs relate to each other.


This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent. Zarvic
N and Wieringa RJ An Integrated Enterprise Architecture Framework for Business-IT Alignment.
In: Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering
(CAiSE'06), 5-9 Jun 2006, Luxembourg (2006).
64                                Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    Very little has been written to date about EAFs. Langenberg and Weg-
mann [1] map the research field but make no attempt at comparing EAFs.
Schekkerman [2] lists a lot of EAFs without comparing them. Tang et al.
[3], finally, compare EAFs but do not attempt to integrate them. In this
paper we compare and integrate some of the well-known EAFs. Section 2
discusses and defines the terms Enterprise Architecture and Enterprise Ar-
chitecture Framework. Section 3 presents a particular framework, called
GRAAL framework, and shows how the other frameworks relate to it.
Section 4 then presents our integrated framework and discusses the impli-
cations for business-IT alignment in value constellations.


3.2 DEFINING ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE AND FRAMEWORKS

We start from the concept of a system as any coherent collection of ele-
ments [4]. Software systems are systems, the set of all applications of an
organisation is a system, and organisations are systems too. We define
architecture of a system as "the structure of a system, consisting of the re-
lationships among its components, the external properties of those compo-
nents, and the way these create emergent properties with added value for
the environment." Like the IEEE architecture definition [5], we consider
there to be a single architecture of a system. There can be many different
views of an architecture [6], each of which documents a different aspect
of the architecture, but we think that there is a single structure which is
the combination of all views. Note also that the architecture of a system is
not just the structure of the system, but it includes the way in which this
structure creates an added value for the environment of the system [7].
    The concept of Enterprise Architecture (EA) is defined by various
sources as the structure of the IT systems of an enterprise, or even of the
entire enterprise, or sometimes as an analysis and documentation of this
structure rather than the structure itself [8,9,10,11]. We define an EA sim-
ply by restricting ourselves to IT systems in an enterprise context: "An
enterprise architecture is the structure of an enterprise, consisting of the
relationships among its ICT systems, the external properties of those ICT
systems, and the way these create emergent properties with added value
for the enterprise." The term EAF, finally, is used mostly to indicate a list
An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Business-IT Alignment            65



of important abstraction mechanisms, such as perspectives, viewpoints,
architectures, dimensions, etc. To be neutral with respect to the abstrac-
tion mechanisms used, we define an enterprise Architecture Framework as
"a documentation structure for Enterprise Architectures." A company can
use an EAF to structure descriptions of architectures in such a way that
these descriptions can be compared in a meaningful way, to control the
design of interfaces among IT systems, to create a repository for storage
and retrieval of EA documentation, or as a set of guidelines that assists the
development of an EA [12,13,11,14]. In this paper, we look at its role in
connecting IT systems of different enterprises.


3.3 A COMPARISON OF EA FRAMEWORKS

The GRAAL Framework. To compare EAFs, we use one framework as
reference, namely the GRAAL framework used in our architecture re-
search [15,12,16,17]. The GRAAL (Guidelines Regarding Architecture
Alignment) framework derives from a framework for information systems
development methods [18,19] and has been used in the GRAAL project1
to compare architecture alignment in different organisations in the Neth-
erlands.
    The GRAAL framework divides an organisation and its IT into a num-
ber of layers, where each layer contains entities (systems in the general
sense) providing services to entities in the layers above it. From the bot-
tom up we distinguish the physical infrastructure layer, the software in-
frastructure layer, the enterprise system layer (i.e. applications and infor-
mation systems), the enterprise, and its environment (See the examples
in Fig. 1). Each company may add more detail to a particular layer, such
as for example distinguish different infrastructure domains, or distinguish
enterprise systems into information systems and applications. These are
refinements, and the GRAAL framework contains only the greatest com-
mon divisor of all these company-specific frameworks. The essential char-
acteristic of the GRAAL layers is that entities at one layer provide services
to entities at higher layers.
    The second GRAAL dimension is that systems at each level have cer-
tain aspects. Foremost among these is that each system provides services
66                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



(to systems in higher layers); each service should provide some added
value (utility) and does this by engaging in behaviour over time, during
which data is exchanged with other systems over communication chan-
nels. (We restrict our attention to systems that exchange data.) And these
services are delivered at a certain level of quality.
    The GRAAL framework contains three other dimensions. The decom-
position dimension says that each system is decomposed into subsystems,
that are encapsulated in it. The system life dimension says that each sys-
tem goes through stages in its life, from conception to disposal. The refine-
ment dimension says that each system can be described at different levels
of abstraction, from very abstract (few details) to very detailed.


3.3.1 THE ZACHMAN FRAMEWORK [13,20].

The rows in the Zachman framework represent the perspectives of dif-
ferent roles on the system (Fig. 1(a)). The planner considers the scope of
the system in relation to the environment, the owner considers the role of
the system in the enterprise, the designer considers the software needed
to achieve the business goals, and the builder considers the infrastruc-
ture needed to build the system. So far, this corresponds to layers in the
GRAAL framework. The subcontractor role moves however to subsystems
of a system, and this is moving along another GRAAL dimension, namely
the decomposition dimension. Because decomposition can be done at any
level in the GRAAL framework, it should not be placed at the lowest level
only, as Zachman does.
    The data, function and network aspects of Zachman correspond to the
GRAAL aspects of data, service and communication. Zachman's time as-
pect corresponds roughly to the behaviour aspect in GRAAL, because the
behaviour as a func- tional property of a system is the ordering of prod-
uct interactions in time [21, p. 40]. The people aspect is represented in
GRAAL's enterprise layer, because people are part of the enterprise and
therefore of the business aggregation hierarchy. Finally, the motivation as-
pect from Zachman corresponds to the utility aspect of GRAAL, because
the utility of an entity at any layer for entities at higher layers is the moti-
An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Business-IT Alignment            67



vation why this lower-level entity exists. We conclude that the Zachman
framework can be mapped into the GRAAL framework.


3.3.2 THE FOUR-DOMAIN ARCHITECTURE [22]

This framework distinguishes four domains (Fig. 1(b)). The process do-
main includes processes, procedures, business tools and dependencies re-
quired to support business functions. This corresponds to the behaviour as-
pect of entities at the enterprise level. The information/knowledge domain
includes business rules, data, all types of information, definitions, inter-
relationships, etc. and corresponds to the aspects communication and data,
in the GRAAL framework, also at the enterprise level. The infrastructure
domain includes facilities, hardware, system software, networks, etc. This
corresponds to the software infrastructure and physical infrastructure lay-
ers from GRAAL. It spans even the quality aspect of GRAAL, because
reliability and availability are elements expected to be documented with-
in the infrastructure domain. The organisation domain includes business
people and their roles and responsibilities, organisational structure as well
as interrelationships to all kind of stakeholders. This corresponds partly
to the utility and service aspect of enterprise-layer entities in the GRAAL
framework (who does what for whom?). The organisational structure and
relationships are part of the system decomposition dimension of GRAAL,
which is not shown in our figures. Note that the Four-Domain Architecture
was developed for managing EAs and to support frameworks such as the
Zachman's. Iyer and Gottlieb also distinguish architecture design from ar-
chitecture use and split each of the cells of Zachman's framework into two
subcells, corresponding to these two stages in the life of an architecture.
This corresponds to the system life dimension of GRAAL.


3.3.3 TOGAF [14]

TOGAF is, compared to all other frameworks presented in this paper, the
most comprehensive one, because TOGAF offers a complete guide for the
68                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



development of an EA and comes up with an architectural development
method. Such a step-by-step guide is absent at Zachman and GRAAL.
TOGAF distinguishes four kinds of architectures, namely business archi-
tecture, data architecture, application architecture and technology archi-
tecture, where data architecture and application architecture is sometimes
referred to as information systems architecture. We consider these archi-
tectures as the highest-level building blocks to be documented. The map-
ping to GRAAL is straightforward (Fig. 1(c)).


3.3.4 RM-ODP [23]

RM-ODP (Reference model for open distributed processing) provides five
viewpoints (Fig. 1(d)), where a viewpoint is a subdivision of the specifica-
tion of a complete system, established to bring together those particu- lar
pieces of information relevant to some particular area of concern during
the design of the system" [24]. A viewpoint in RM-ODP can span aspects
of one or more viewpoints in GRAAL and vice versa. The RM-ODP en-
terprise viewpoint focuses on the purpose, scope and policies of the sys-
tem and provides the overall environment in which the system will be
built. This corresponds roughly to the enterprise and enterprise environ-
ment layers in the GRAAL framework. However, the RM-ODP enterprise
viewpoint can also specify more technical entities like operating systems
or database systems [25], which lie in GRAAL on the software infrastruc-
ture layer. This is not represented in Fig. 1(d).
    The information viewpoint is a viewpoint on the system and its envi-
ronment that focuses on the semantics of the information and information
processing performed. This corresponds roughly to the data aspect on the
enterprise system layer in GRAAL. The computational viewpoint enables
distribution through functional decomposition of the system into objects
which interact at interfaces. In GRAAL this viewpoint corresponds to the
decomposition dimension. It is not shown in Fig. 1(d). The engineering
viewpoint focuses on the mechanisms and functions required to support
distributed interaction between objects in the system, which corresponds
roughly to the communication aspect on the same layer. The technology
viewpoint focuses on the choice of technology in the system. It is used to
An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Business-IT Alignment      69




FIGURE 1: Comparison between GRAAL and other well know frameworks
70                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



build technology specifications of particular configurations of hardware
elements, software elements and networks. The technology viewpoint cor-
responds to the physical infrastructure and software infrastructure layers
in GRAAL.


3.4 DISCUSSION AND FURTHER WORK

The paper described briefly five frameworks and compared them. The
basis of the comparison was the GRAAL framework. This section sum-
marizes our results.


3.4.1 ABSTRACTION MECHANISMS

The frameworks use different abstraction mechanisms. GRAAL and Zach-
man use dimensions, but the other frameworks populate some of these
dimensions. The GRAAL dimensions Aspects and Service layers corre-
spond roughly to the Zachman dimensions Aspects and Perspectives. The
GRAAL dimensions Decomposition, System life, and Refinement are not
mentioned as such by Zachman, although he does include a decomposition
perspective (subcontractor). As we have seen, the abstraction mechanisms
of the other frameworks, namely the domains, architectures and view-
points are mostly a combination of the system aspects dimension and the
service layers in GRAAL. The abstraction mechanisms used by GRAAL
and Zachman are at a metalevel with respect to the others, which explains
the relationship between the different frameworks. EAFs at a higher level
of abstraction can integrate frameworks that use lower level abstraction
mechanisms.


3.4.2 THE INTEGRATED ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE
FRAMEWORK

Our analysis makes clear that to find an integrated framework, we can
build on GRAAL. We just extend GRAAL with a number of domains,
An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Business-IT Alignment             71



which we place on the appropriate layers. Figure 2 shows the resulting in-
tegrated EAF (IEAF). In the IEAF we merged the two infrastructure layers
for simplicity. Many EAFs, like RM ODP or the Four-Domain architecture
also do not have a distinction between the two on their highest level of
abstraction. This serves to integrate such frameworks more easily. The
enterprise network domain contains sets of interacting business actors that
are profit-and-loss responsible, such as independent businesses, or busi-
ness units within a large corporation. Therefore it is especially interesting
for networked business constellations. The organisation structure domain
of the IEAF contains the decomposition of an organisation into whatev-
er elements are recognised, such as units, departments, employee roles,
etc. The business process domain consists of business processes and the
communication and information domains consists of human or automated
communication channels and the information passed through them. The
services domain consists of IT services, and the behaviour domain consists
of software behaviour. The infrastructure domain consists of all software
and hardware needed to facilitate the higher layers. Note that the IEAF has
the advantage that each layer is not fix but °exible. This means that, if nec-
essary, additional domains can be added to an IEAF layer, which goes so
far that domains can even span several layers as shown in Fig. 2. Because
the layers are not fix they can be viewed as dimensions.
    The implication of the IEAF for business-IT alignment is that each
domain is an area of design knowledge, and that the alignment problem
must be decom- posed into these domains. In the case of interorganisa-
tional business-IT alignment, the additional implication is that the EAFs
of the partner companies can be mapped to each other using the IEAF as
common reference. Our research implies that each of these EAFs can be
mapped to the IEAF and that this is the way the EAFs should be mapped
to each other. Further, the IEAF forms a basis for communication between
different businesses cooperating in a networked value constellation.


3.4.3 EVALUATION

In design science the evaluation phase is very important. "Design science
addresses research through the building and evaluation of artifacts" [26].
                                                                                                         72




FIGURE 2: An Integrated Enterprise Architecture Framework (IEAF) for networked business constellations
                                                                                                         Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Business-IT Alignment           73



The GRAAL framework, as our built artifact, was used to analyse the
EAFs of five different organisations in the Netherlands, each having a
different EAF. All the information from those EAFs could be incorporated
without information loss into the GRAAL framework. We consider this as
a first validation of the GRAAL framework. The IEAF, as our simplified
artifact, inherited most of its documentation structure from the GRAAL
framework. For the evaluation of our artifacts case studies were used, like
described by Hevner et al. [26, page 86].
    As we have seen during the comparisons in Sec. 3, the abstraction
mechanisms, namely domains, architectures and viewpoints of the other
frameworks are mostly a combination of the systems aspect dimension
and the service layers in GRAAL. Therefore dimensions, like the lay-
ers in the IEAF, are at a higher level of abstraction than the abstraction
mechanisms used by most of the other EAFs. We also identified that the
frameworks use a fixed number of abstraction mechanisms. The number
of domains in the IEAF (which is not fixed) was identified and situated on
the appropriate layers after having examined the frameworks used by our
industrial partners for documenting their enterprise architectures. They
covered all the information documented. Therefore it is true that it is an
integrated EAF.
    Corroboration of the IEAF is also provided by an independent investi-
gation of IT architect roles [27]. The architect roles distinguished by most
companies coincide with the domains identified in the IEAF. Further vali-
dation is provided by a preliminary investigation of the EAFs of several
companies that were compared with the IEAF and could all be mapped to
it without loss of information.


3.4.4 SUMMARY AND FUTURE RESEARCH

The frameworks described in this paper use different abstraction mecha-
nisms, but can nevertheless be mapped into the GRAAL framework with
some degree of approximation. The result is an integrated EAF (IEAF).
The IEAF serves as a reference point between different organisations, and
enables them to understand eachother's frameworks. The presence of the
domains provide an additional useful utility. In the future we will investi-
74                                      Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



gate cross-organisational integration problems using the IEAF as our con-
ceptual framework.


REFERENCES

 1.    Langenberg, K., Wegmann, A.: Enterprise Architecture: What Aspects is Current
       Research Targeting? Technical report, EPFL (2004) http://icwww.epfl.ch/publica-
       tions/documents/IC_TECH_REPORT_200477.pdf.
 2.    Schekkerman, J.: How to survive in the jungle of Enterprise Architecture Frame-
       works. Trafford (2004)
 3.    A. Tang and J. Han and P. Chen: A Comparative Analysis of Architecture Frame-
       works. Technical report, Swinburne University of Technology (2004) http://www.
       swin.edu.au/ict/research/technicalreports/2004/SUTIT-TR2004.01.pdf.
 4.    Blanchard, B.S., Fabrycky, W.J.: Systems Engineering and Analysis. Prentice-Hall
       (1990)
 5.    IEEE Architecture Working Group: Definition of Architecture. http://www.pithecan-
       thropus.com/~awg/public_html/ieee-1471-faq.html (2002)
 6.    Bass, L., Clements, P., Kazman, R.: Software Architecture in Practice. Addison-
       Wesley (1998) Integrated Enterprise Architecture Framework 9
 7.    Wieringa, R.: Architecture is Structure plus Synergy. http://graal.ewi.utwente.nl/
       WhitePapers/Architecture/architecture.htm (2004)
 8.    West, D., Bittner, K., Glenn, E.: Ingredients for Building Effective Enterprise
       Architectures. http://www-128.ibm.com/developerworks/rational/library/content/
       RationalEdge/nov02/EnterpriseArchitectures_TheRationalEdge_Nov2002.pdf
       (2002)
 9.    Schekkerman, J.: The Economic Benefits of Enterprise Architecture. Trafford (2005)
 10.   Perks, C., Beveridge, T.: Guide to Enterprise IT Architecture. Springer (2003)
 11.   Bernard, S.A.: An Introduction to Enterprise Architecture. Authorhouse, Blooming-
       ton, Indiana (2004)
 12.   Wieringa, R.: The GRAAL Architecture Framework. http://graal.ewi.utwente.nl/
       WhitePapers/Framework/framework.htm (2004)
 13.   Zachman, J.: A framework for information systems architecture. IBM Systems Jour-
       nal 26(3) (1987)
 14.   The Open Group: The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF) - Version 8,
       Enterprise Edition (2002)
 15.   van Eck, P., Blanken, H., Fokkinga, M., Grefen, P., Wieringa, R.: A Conceptual
       Framework for Architecture Alignment Guidelines. http://graal.ewi.utwente.nl/
       GRAAL_whitepaper_20021017.pdf (2002)
 16.   Wieringa, R., Blanken, H., Fokkinga, M., Grefen, P.: Aligning Application Archi-
       tecture to the Business Context. In: Conference on Advanced Information System
       Engineering (CAiSE 03), Springer (2003) 209{225 LNCS 2681.
 17.   Wieringa, R., van Eck, P., Krukkert, D.: Architecture Alignment. In Lankhorst, M.,
       ed.: Enterprise Architecture at Work. Springer, Berlin (2005)
 18.   Wieringa, R.: Requirements Engineering. John Wiley, Chichester, England (1996)
An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Business-IT Alignment                        75


 19. Wieringa, R.: A Survey of Structured and Object-Oriented Software Specification
     Methods and Techniques. ACM Computing Surveys 30(4) (1998) 459{527
 20. Sowa, J., Zachman, J.: Extending and formalizing the framework for information
     systems architecture. IBM Systems Journal 31(3) (1992) 590{616
 21. Wieringa, R.: Reactive Systems. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco (2003)
 22. Iyer, B., Gottlieb, R.: The Four-Domain Architecture: An approach to support enter-
     prise architecture design. IBM Systems Journal 43(3) (2004) 587{597
 23. International Organization for Standardization: RM ODP - Open Distributed Pro-
     cessing Reference Model - ISO/IEC 10746-1, ISO/IEC 10746-2, ISO/IEC 10746-3
     and ISO/IEC 10746-4. (http://isotc.iso.org/livelink/livelink/fetch/2000/2489/Ittf_
     Home/PubliclyAvailableStandards.htm)
 24. Vallecillo, A.: RM-ODP: The ISO Reference Model for Open Distributed Process-
     ing. (citeseer.ist.psu.edu/277001.html)
 25. Joyner, I.: Open distributed processing: Unplugged! http://homepages.tig.com.
     au/~ijoyner/ODPUnplugged.html (1997)
 26. Hevner, A., March, S., Park, J.: Design Science in Information Systems Research.
     MIS Quarterly 28(1) (2004) 75{105
 27. Wieringa, R.: An inventory of architect roles and competencies. In: IT Practitioners
     Conference, Barcelona (2006) http://www.opengroup.org/public/member/proceed-
     ings/q106/.
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 4



ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE: NEW
BUSINESS VALUE PERSPECTIVES
M. DE VRIES and A. C. J. VAN RENSBURG




4.1 INTRODUCTION

In the 1970s and 1980s, business processes were redesigned roughly once
every seven years. This provided ample time to alter information systems.
In the 1990s the rate of change started to increase rapidly, and information
systems lagged behind. Today IT departments struggle to keep up with the
rapid change of business processes (Wagter, van den Berg, Luijpers & van
Steenberg [1]).
    Looking at the history of enterprise architecture, different eras become
apparent:
    The mainframe era required a centralised approach. The need for EA
was minimal as a limited set of resources had to be managed. However, the
centralised IT departments failed to meet the demands of business users.
    As technology evolved and became more accessible, organisational
units began to evolve, each one deploying its own systems to improve
service. The decentralised approach led to an expansion of system com-
plexity and a loss of functionality between departments.



This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent. de Vries
M and van Rensburg ACJ. Enterprise Architecture: New Business Value Perspectives. South African
Journal of Industrial Engineering 19,1 (2008).
78                                Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    The loss of control led to ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) systems
as a solution to complex, multiple, fragmented, and non-interoperable leg-
acy systems. But these ERP systems were very costly, demanded ongoing
maintenance, and required major system modifications to address business
processes. Also, mergers and acquisitions once again diversified and com-
plicated the system landscape (Theuerkorn [2]).
    The complex system landscapes of today led to the need to manage the
evolution of system and technology environments, which in turn led to the
emergence of a new profession called Enterprise Architecture (EA).


4.2 ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE




4.2.1 DEFINITION AND VALUE PROPOSITION

EA is a management practice that aims at improving performance of en-
terprises. EA gained impetus with the USA Clinger-Cohen Act (CCA) of
1996. This act assigned the CIO the responsibility of “developing, main-
taining, and facilitating the implementation of a sound and integrated In-
formation Technology Architecture” (Schekkerman [3]). The Information
Technology Architecture (ITA) had to ensure that existing information
technology was maintained and new information technology was acquired
to achieve the agency’s strategic goals and information resources manage-
ment goals.
    In the past, EA was the responsibility of the IT unit(s) in a compa-
ny. However, many IT architecture efforts were remote from reality, and
were represented in overlycomplex diagrams. Companies defined strategy
piece-meal, which delivered separate IT solutions for each strategic initia-
tive, rather than delivering IT capabilities. This resulted in IT being a con-
stant bottleneck. Standalone systems were created, causing poor customer,
supplier, and employee process coordination. Data were also patchy, error-
prone and not up to date (Ross, Weill, & Robertson [4]). Currently compa-
nies realise that EA is not an IT issue, but a business issue.
Enterprise Architecture: New Business Value Perspectives                                           79




                                                           FIGURE 1: Conceptual framework for EA
80                                   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    According to Ross et al [4] EA should strive at providing “…the high-
level logic for business processes and IT capabilities”. They realised that
EA is not so much to achieve a particular end state as it is to serve as a
blueprint for a company’s direction. EA should provide a “holistic and
integrated view of the strategic direction, business practices, information
flows, and technology resources” of the company (Bernard [5]). The main
EA concepts are:

     • strategic planning deliverables that direct EA objectives;
     • a technology charter (enterprise objectives, principles and guidelines and
       derived technology objectives, principles and guidelines);
     • a technology roadmap (milestones to evolve the system landscape) that is
       derived from the technology charter;
     • project requirements that are identified to meet the technology milestones;
     • a methodology (including methods, tools and standards) that is used to sup-
       port the evolution of the system landscape; and
     • a framework that classifies EA models to communicate to various stake-
       holder groups.


4.2.2 RESEARCH PROBLEM AND GOAL OF THE STUDY

Although EA offers numerous benefits and value propositions, many or-
ganisations perceived EA as another black hole that provided a low re-
turn on investment if measured by the traditional financial measurement
system. EA practitioners tried to improve the EA practices, frameworks,
methodologies, and tools to reduce the number of artefacts and/or to ac-
celerate the implementation of EA governance mechanisms (Theuerkorn
[2] and Wagter et al [1]). Although Ross et al [4] realised the importance
of using EA as a blueprint in directing a company, they still failed to dem-
onstrate how EA objectives should be measured or how they could be
converted to tangible value.
    EA creates value on different management levels in the organisation
across multiple domains (e.g. governance, strategy, business processes,
information, applications, technology, workforce management, security,
and standards). Literature also indicates that EA as a management pro-
gramme complements various other areas. Some of these include strategic
planning, strategy execution, quality management, IT governance (e.g.
Enterprise Architecture: New Business Value Perspectives                   81



complementing COBIT – Control Objectives for Information and related
Technology), IT Service Delivery and Support (e.g. supporting the key
processes of ITIL – IT Infrastructure Library), and IT Implementation
(supporting the implementation of best practices) (Lankhorst [6]).
    An integrated approach is required to demonstrate how EA creates tan-
gible value on both enterprise level and strategic business unit (SBU) lev-
el, across different domains. Kaplan & Norton [7,8,9] provide numerous
tools to create synergies, alignment, and integration of intangible assets
on different organisational management levels. The next section describes
how intangible assets create value on both an enterprise level and SBU
level. The management level perspectives are then used to discuss generic
EA objectives, their relation to other strategic objectives, and links to per-
formance measurement.


4.3 DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVES ON VALUE CREATION

During the same time that EA was initiated as a management practice,
Kaplan & Norton [7] identified a major shortcoming in the traditional
measurement systems. These overemphasised achieving and maintaining
short-term financial results (i.e. high ROI) that lead to overinvestment in
short-term fixes and underinvestment in long-term value creation – espe-
cially underinvestment in intangible and intellectual assets that generate
future growth. Kaplan & Norton [7] contributed to the new understanding
of what creates value for organisations. Intangible assets (e.g. motivated/
skilled employees, responsive and predictable internal processes, and sat-
isfied customers) are some of the most important sources of long-term
value creation. Unfortunately traditional financial measurement systems
merely focused on tangible assets.
    A more balanced measurement system was proposed to incorporate
four perspectives: financial, customer, internal processes, and learning
and growth (Kaplan & Norton [7]). They believed that companies had to
invest in these four domains to create both short-term financial improve-
ment and long-term profitable growth. They also realised that companies
that wanted to survive and prosper in the information age competition had
to use measurement and management systems that are derived from their
82                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



strategies and capabilities. The balanced scorecard (BSC) was developed
to account for the different measurement perspectives, and provided a sys-
tematic process of implementing and obtaining feedback about strategy.
    With the balanced perspective on organisational measurement, Kaplan
& Norton [8] posed new value-creation perceptions concerning intangible
assets. They assert that intangible assets are usually bundled, seldom create
value by themselves, and do not have a value that can be isolated from the
organisational context and strategy. Intangible assets are expected to help the
organisation accomplish the strategy; hence action plans should be aligned
around strategic themes. Integrated bundles of investments should be linked
to the strategic themes instead of managing standalone projects. Each in-
vestment or initiative is “only an ingredient in the bigger recipe” (Kaplan &
Norton [8]). Economic justification should only be determined by evaluat-
ing the return from the entire portfolio of investments in intangible assets.
Kaplan & Norton [9] also realised that the conglomerate and multidivisional
organisation structures of today do not only achieve growth through expan-
sions from the core business, technologies, and capabilities, but also through
acquiring and merging unrelated businesses. Senior executives of these con-
glomerates need to add superior knowledge and skills to the newly-owned
organisations to make the merger or acquisition worthwhile. The value of
the collection of companies should thus be more than if the companies oper-
ated independently without the benefit of the corporate office.
    Value creation on a corporate level consequently differs from value
creation at a strategic business unit (SBU) level. Corporate offices need to
create enterprise-derived value, creating alignment and synergy between
SBUs. On the other hand, SBUs need to show how their internal capabili-
ties and assets are used to create customer-derived value. Different per-
spectives on value creation are demonstrated in Figure 2. The next two
sections emphasise value-creation strategies at a corporate level and re-
lated EA value propositions.


4.4 STRATEGIES TO CREATE CORPORATE SYNERGIES

Various strategies could be used to create synergies on a corporate level.
A few examples include:
                                                                    Enterprise Architecture: New Business Value Perspectives




FIGURE 2: Building the enterprise scorecard (Kaplan & Norton [9])
                                                                    83
84                                   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



     • Financial perspective: using effective merger and acquisition policies or
       generating synergies by using centralised resource allocation and financial
       management.
     • Customer perspective: leveraging common brand or customer relationships
       across different business units and retail channels.
     • Internal process perspective: gaining economies of scale by sharing com-
       mon processes and services or gaining economies of scope by integrating
       business units across an industry value chain.
     • Learning and growth: creating synergies by sharing human, information,
       and organisation capital across multiple units (Kaplan & Norton [9]).

    Ross et al [4] created an EA value proposition primarily in terms of
the internal process perspective (gaining economies of scale by sharing
common processes/ services or integrating processes). They believe that
EA objectives should be defined with regards to the enterprise operat-
ing model. The operating model is an actionable view of the company’s
strategy that outlines the expectations for integration and standardisation
across business units. The operating model is thus defined in terms of two
dimensions:

     • Business process standardisation – the extent to which the company ben-
       efits by having business units run their operations the same way.
     • Business process integration – the extent to which different business units
       are dependent on one another for accurate and timely data. Different com-
       binations of these dimensions are portrayed in Figure 3.

    The researcher used the operating model parameters to identify generic
EA objectives within the areas of process management, data sharing, ap-
plication management, and infrastructure. Figure 4 provides a proposed
set of EA objectives for a required operating state.
    Ross et al [4] also complemented this model with a methodology for
implementing the required operating model. The methodology acknowl-
edges different levels of EA maturity and suggests a phased (project-by-
project) approach. The methodology also includes some element of inte-
gration with other intangible assets (such as organisational learning and
leadership requirements). It is proposed that the operating model approach
could be further enhanced by mapping the EA objectives (related to a spe-
cific operating model) to a corporate strategy map.
Enterprise Architecture: New Business Value Perspectives               85




FIGURE 3: Characteristics of four operating models (Ross et al [4])




   To demonstrate the concept, the author mapped EA objectives for the
unification operating model to a corporate strategy map. Additional EA
objectives (as found in Schekkerman [3], Theuerkorn [2], Ross et al [4],
Wagter et al [1], Boar [10], Iyamu [11]) were also included to demonstrate
a comprehensive strategy map for EA capital (see Figure 5). The strategy
map indicates that most EA objectives support the creation of process syn-
ergies and learning & growth synergies between SBUs.
86                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




FIGURE 4: EA objectives per operating model (based on the four operating models
identified by Ross et al [4])
Enterprise Architecture: New Business Value Perspectives                87



4.5 USING STRATEGIC THEMES TO CREATE CORPORATE
SYNERGIES

Kaplan & Norton [9] also report the effective use of corporate strategic
themes to create synergy between business units. Examples of strategic
themes include operational excellence, and complete solutions to targeted
customers. The corporate strategic themes are used in combination with
the corporate BSC to cascade strategic objectives to individual SBUs.
SBU managers are then obliged to phase out local projects that are not
contributing to one or more of the strategic themes.
     The purpose is to create alignment and integration among the diverse
and dispersed business units. Strategic themes in the corporate scorecard
have the ability of allowing decentralised units to seek local gains while
still contributing to corporatewide objectives. Due to the diversity of the
business units, not all units are expected to contribute to all the themes.
Kaplan & Norton [8]) agree with Treacy & Wiersma [12] that a single
SBU usually focuses on one strategic theme, as it is impossible to excel in
all areas simultaneously.
     They identified three main strategic areas:

   1. Operational excellence: the best total costs.
   2. Customer intimacy: the best total solution/customised mix of prod-
      ucts and services to solve customers’ problems.
   3. Product leadership: excel in the offering of products and services.

    Hax & Wilde [13] articulated a fourth strategic area, called ‘system
lock-in’, in which companies provide a system platform that becomes an
industry standard.
    Kaplan & Norton [8] combined the strategic areas with the four score-
card perspectives (financial, customer, internal processes, and learning
& growth) to discuss the different objectives that would be required for
each strategic focus area. An SBU usually selects one strategic focus area
(e.g. operational excellence) to direct the selection of primary strategic
objectives within the four scorecard perspectives. Finally, strategy maps
are used to link the different objectives (within the four perspectives) in
cause-and-effect relationships. The learning and growth perspective ob-
88                                  Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



jectives (cause) need to support the internal process objectives (effect).
Furthermore, the internal process objectives (cause) need to enable the
achievement of the customer objectives (effect), while the customer ob-
jectives (cause) need to contribute to the accomplishment of the financial
objectives (effect).
    Kaplan & Norton [8] identified four categories of value-creating inter-
nal processes:

     •   Operations management processes;
     •   Customer management processes;
     •   Innovation processes; and
     •   Regulatory and social processes.

   Different process objectives are required for each strategic focus area.
The different process objectives are discussed and argued in the next two
sections.


4.5.1 PROCESS OBJECTIVES PER FOCUS AREA




4.5.1.1 OPERATIONAL EXCELLENCE/LOW TOTAL COST

This focus area requires highly competitive processes combined with con-
sistent quality, ease and speed of purchase, and excellent product selec-
tion. Customer management processes require ease of access for custom-
ers. Accessible order processes and superb post-sale services are required.
The SBU would perform market research to understand the most preferred
range of products and services by the largest segments of customers. SBUs
that pursue this strategic focus are product followers, not leaders, and do
not invest a great deal in product and service innovation. They innovate on
processes rather than products. They also emphasise regulatory and social
processes to avoid accidents and environmental incidents that are costly to
the company (Norton & Kaplan [8]).
Enterprise Architecture: New Business Value Perspectives                               89




                                                           FIGURE 5: EA objectives linked to a corporate model
90                                Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



4.5.1.2 CUSTOMER INTIMACY

SBUs offer ‘customer solutions’ value propositions that stress objectives
related to the completeness of the solution (selling multiple bundled prod-
ucts and services), exceptional service, and a quality relationship. The
company tries to deepen the relationship with current customers to sell
multiple related products and services. Innovation processes focus on
finding new ways to create value for customers, such as providing alterna-
tive ways for customers to access the company’s products and services.
Regulatory and social processes are focused on gaining regulatory ap-
proval to offer services that cut across traditional industry barriers (Norton
& Kaplan [8]).


4.5.1.3 PRODUCT LEADERSHIP

SBUs that emphasise product leadership provide products with features and
functionality that leading-edge customers are willing to pay for. The value
proposition includes outstanding performance, accuracy, size, or power con-
sumption. Product leadership SBUs extend superior functionality of prod-
ucts into multiple market segments. Their key internal processes are in the
innovation cluster. Flexibility and improvement of operating processes are
more important than low-cost production. Customer management objectives
include the identification of requirements from leading-edge customers, as
well as educating customers about the benefits of new/advanced products.
Regulatory and social processes must avoid the adverse side effects that may
occur when they introduce new products. SBUs should emphasise objec-
tives related to product safety, employee and customer health, and environ-
mental impacts of new products (Norton & Kaplan [8]).



4.5.1.4 LOCK-IN

The new economy information-based industries, such as computer hard-
ware, software, internet, and telecommunications, led to lock-in strategies,
Enterprise Architecture: New Business Value Perspectives                  91



creating high switching costs for customers. SBUs that pursue a lock-in
strategy require powerful innovation processes. They need to develop a
proprietary product or protected standard that serves as the basis for lock-
in. As complementors provide a source of sustainability, SBUs need to
acquire and retain complementors. They need to attract new customers
by lowering their switching costs. High margins from successful lockin
remove the pressure of having the most efficient operating processes.
Two critical regulatory objectives must be pursued: protecting proprietary
products from imitation and use by competitors, and preventing product-
use by unauthorised customers (Norton & Kaplan [8]).


4.5.2 OPERATIONAL EXCELLENCE: THE DOMINANT THEME?

In the past, many SBUs (as well as industrial engineers) focused primarily
on the area of operational excellence. They emphasised the improvement
of existing processes that would lead to short term financial improvement.
Various process/quality/productivity improvement programmes were de-
veloped and implemented (e.g. ISO 9001, Six Sigma, European Founda-
tion for Quality Management, Capability Maturity Models, and Supply
Chain Management programs). Norton & Kaplan [7] believe, however,
that some SBUs may benefit more in the long term by anticipating cus-
tomer needs or delivering new services that target customers would value.
Conversely, other business units may benefit most if they focus on their
innovation processes, creating entirely new products and services.
    Ross et al [4] believe that a SBU needs to recognise its core operations
and digitise these to enable organisations to exploit their foundation for
execution, which should lead to agility and profitable growth. The ratio-
nale is that digitising core business processes helps in automating some
routine activities, making sure that these are done reliably and predictably.
Management could then focus their attention on higher-order processes
(serving customers, developing new products, seizing new opportunities).
Their definition of core business processes thus implies a focus on a single
process area, namely operational management. Norton & Kaplan [8] agree
that many SBUs first stabilise their operations and delivery processes to
produce consistent output in conformity to specifications. The definition
92                                Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



of quality then shifts from conforming to specifications to meeting cus-
tomers’ expectations. One could reason that an organisation’s strategic fo-
cus area will change to customer intimacy/product leadership/lock-in as
the organisation reaches a certain level of maturity.


4.6 A NEW VALUE-CREATION APPROACH

Intangible assets do not have a value that can be isolated from the organ-
isational context and strategy. They are expected to help the organisation
to accomplish the strategy. EA, used in combination with the BSC, creates
the context on a corporate level to ensure that intangible assets (especially
value-creating processes and information capital) are integrated with other
intangible assets and aligned around the strategic themes of the organ-
isation. EA initiatives should be treated as part of an integrated bundle
of investments, linked to strategic themes, instead of managing them as
standalone projects. Economic justification should only be determined by
evaluating the return from the entire portfolio of investment in intangible
assets.
    EA thus has the potential to produce corporate synergies between stra-
tegic business units, especially creating internal process synergies and
learning & growth synergies. Furthermore, EA objectives primarily sup-
port the operational excellence theme, which may be further differentiated
using operating model parameters. EA objectives on the corporate level
could then be cascaded to SBU level and division level to ensure align-
ment with the corporate scorecard objectives (Figure 6).


4.7 AN ANGLO PLATINUM EXAMPLE

Anglo Platinum is the world’s leading primary producer of platinum, and
accounts for about 38% of the world’s newly-mined production. Opera-
tions comprise seven mines, three smelters, a base metals refinery, and
a precious metals refinery, situated in the Bushveld Complex north-west
and north-east of Johannesburg. Anglo Platinum embarked on one of the
most successful EA initiatives in the world; some critics consider them to
Enterprise Architecture: New Business Value Perspectives                  93



be in the top 5% globally [14]. The following narrative explains how An-
glo Platinum followed an approach similar to the proposed valuecreation
approach.
    During 2004 corporate management restructured and effectively de-
cided to move away from a diversified operating model to a replication
operating model by centralising control over business process designs and
providing clear corporate guidelines. Moving towards a replication oper-
ating model would enhance process synergies between the different busi-
ness units. Corporate management also defined strategic themes to drive
their strategic objectives. The most prominent themes were operational
excellence and social upliftment.
    The Group Information Collaboration Technology (ICT) division of
Anglo Platinum received the mandate to identify value-creation process
objectives as well as information and technology objectives according to
the required operating model and aligned to the operational excellence
theme. Contrary to the traditional IT department role of service provider,
the role of Group ICT was to act as a decisionmaking body in defining
business process requirements and information quality/requirements. The
division, employing 120 people—predominantly business managers and
a few technology experts—embarked on strategic work sessions to define
strategic drivers and themes in directing their divisional strategic objec-
tives. Finally, a strategy map was used to demonstrate the cause-and-effect
links between their strategic objectives. Although these objectives embod-
ied multiple EA objectives, EA did not feature as a separate theme or man-
agement approach. The prominent EA objectives were:

   • Standardisation of business processes to reduce complexity.
   • Governance of standardised processes to ensure implementation and adher-
     ence on an operational level.

    The EA objectives primarily focused on the business architecture layer
of the enterprise, and were combined with other projects (e.g. business
process improvement and information value-chain initiatives) to form an
integrated bundle of projects aligned to the operational excellence stra-
tegic theme. The standardisation and stabilisation of business processes
provided a platform for continuous improvement. Simulation is currently
considered as an innovation mechanism to drive continuous improvement.
94                                  Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




FIGURE 6: A value-creation approach for EA
Enterprise Architecture: New Business Value Perspectives                             95



4.8 CONCLUSION

In the past, many organisations overemphasised short-term return on in-
vestment rather than long-term financial improvement. This also had a
negative effect on the perceived value of EA. Being an intangible asset,
EA has the potential to unlock value if perceived in the context of strategy
and long-term profitable growth. The corporate BSC and strategy map
were used to demonstrate EA potential in creating process synergies and
learning & growth synergies. It was also found that EA objectives pri-
marily support an operational excellence theme, while the subset of EA
objectives is mainly determined by the operating model of the specific
enterprise.
    This research provided the context for EA planning in an enterprise.
The suggested approach requires alignment between different intangible
assets according to the theme of operational excellence. Further research
will be done to demonstrate the alignment of EA with other intangible as-
sets as part of the planning stages of theme-related initiatives.


REFERENCES

 1.   Wagter, R., van den Berg, M., Luijpers, J. & van Steenberg, M. 2005. Dynamic
      Enterprise Architecture – How to make it work. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken,
      New Jersey.
 2.   Theuerkorn, F. 2005. Lightweight Enterprise Architectures. Auerbach Publications,
      New York.
 3.   Schekkerman, J. 2004. How to survive in the jungle of Enterprise Architecture
      frameworks. Second edition, Trafford Publishing, Canada.
 4.   Ross, J.W., Weill, P. & Robertson, D.C. 2006. Enterprise Architecture as strategy:
      Creating a foundation for business execution. Harvard Business School Press, Bos-
      ton, Massachusetts.
 5.   Bernard, S.A. 2005. An introduction to Enterprise Architecture EA3. Second edi-
      tion, Authorhouse, Bloomington, USA.
 6.   Lankhorst, M. 2005. Enterprise Architecture at work. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Ger-
      many.
 7.   Kaplan, R.S. & Norton, D.P. 1996. The Balanced Scorecard. Harvard Business
      School Press, Boston, Massachusetts.
 8.   Kaplan, R.S. & Norton, D.P. 2004. Strategy maps: Converting intangible assets into
      tangible outcomes. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, Massachusetts.
96                                      Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



9.    Kaplan, R.S. & Norton, D.P. 2006. Alignment – using the Balanced Scorecard to
      create corporate strategies. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, Massachusetts.
      2006.
10.   Boar, B. H. 1999. Constructing blueprints for Enterprise IT Architectures. John Wi-
      ley, New York.
11.   Iyamu, T. 2002. Enterprise Architecture as an enterprise change agent. Thesis in
      partial fulfilment of the requirements for Masters in Information Management, Uni-
      versity of the Western Cape.
12.   Treacy M. & Wiersma, F. 1995. The discipline of market leaders: Choose your cus-
      tomers, narrow your focus, dominate your market. HarperCollins, London.
13.   Hax, A. & Wilde, D. 2001. The Delta Project: Discovering new sources of profit-
      ability in a networked economy. New York, Palgrave.
14.   Macgregor, S. 2007. EA enduring competitive advantage. Newsletter. June.
15.   Scott, A.B. 2005. An introduction to Enterprise Architecture, second edition. Autho-
      rhouse, Bloomington, United States of America.
          PART II

OPEN ISSUES AND NOVEL IDEAS
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 5



PATTERN-ORIENTED APPROACH
FOR ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE:
TOGAF FRAMEWORK
MOHAMED TALEB and OMAR CHERKAOUI




5.1 INTRODUCTION

In recent years, many industrial firms have adopted architectures called
enterprise architecture (EA). The Enterprise Architecture has matured
from offering a lot of functionalities to like providing a clear represen-
tation of business processes and information systems, improving the IT
governance, planning changes and optimizing resources.
    Several definitions have been suggested by several authors. For ex-
ample, The Institute for Enterprise Architecture Developments [1] “Enter-
prise Architecture is a complete expression of the enterprise; a master plan
which acts as a collaboration force between aspects of business planning
such as goals, visions, strategies and governance principles; aspects of
business operations such as business terms, organization structures, pro-
cesses and data; aspects of automation such as information systems and da-
tabases; and the enabling technological infrastructure of the business such
as computers, operating systems and networks,” Giachetti and MIT Center
[2,3] “Enterprise Architecture is a rigorous description of the structure of


This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent. Taleb M
and Cherkaoui O. Pattern-Oriented Approach for Enterprise Architecture: TOGAF Framework. Jour-
nal of Software Engineering and Applications, 5,1 (2012), pp. 45-50. DOI: 10.4236/jsea.2012.51008.
100                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



an enterprise, which comprises enterprise components (business entities),
the externally visible properties of those components, and the relation-
ships (i.e. the behavior) between them. Enterprise Architecture describes
the terminology, the composition of enterprise components, and their re-
lationships with the external environment, and the guiding principles for
the requirement (analysis), design, and evolution of an enterprise”, the
Enterprise Architecture Center of Excellence [4] “Enterprise Architecture
explicitly describing an organization through a set of independent, non-re-
dundant artifacts, defining how these artifacts interrelate with each other,
and developing a set of prioritized, aligned initiatives and road maps to un-
derstand the organization, communicate this understanding to stakehold-
ers, and move the organization forward to its desired state”, and Ross et al.
[5] “Enterprise Architecture is the organising logic for business processes
and information technology (IT) infrastructure reflecting the integration
and standardization requirements of the company’s model.”
    All these definitions introduce the main architectural components
(processes, systems, technologies, components and their relationships)
and covers methods to represent them, including both functional and non-
functional requirements, by means of a set of views.
    Enterprise Architecture provides various benefits, such as 1) Well-es-
tablished solutions to architectural problems of organizations; 2) Help in
documenting architectural design and implementation decisions; and 3)
Facilitation of collaboration and communication between users.
    A number of industry standard approaches have been proposed for de-
fining enterprise architecture, such as the Zachman Framework for En-
terprise Architecture [6] and The Open Group Architecture Framework
(TOGAF) [7].
    In this technological context, we are borrowing, adapting and refining
the so popular and powerful patterns-oriented development to enterprise
architectures. The following are some of enterprise architectures challeng-
es that we are addressing specifically while adapting the pattern-oriented
approach to TOGAF framework. Furthermore, for a novice designer or a
software engineer who is not familiar with this mosaic of guidelines, it is
hard to remember all design guidelines, let alone using them effectively.
Pattern-Oriented Approach for Enterprise Architecture                     101



    In this paper, we introduced different categories of design patterns as a
vehicle for capturing and reusing good analyses, designs and implementa-
tion applied to TOGAF framework.

5.2 BACKGROUND WORK

Introduced by the architect Christopher Alexander in 1977 [8], design pat-
tern can viewed as a building block that we compose to create a design.
A single pattern describes a problem, which appears constantly in our en-
vironment, and thus described the hart of the solution to this problem, in
a way such as one can reuse this solution for different platform, without
ever doing it twice in same manner [8]. For the cross-platform application
development, patterns are interesting for three reasons; see also [9] for a
more general discussion on patterns benefits:

   • They come from experiments on good know-how and were not created ar-
     tificially;
   • They are a means of documenting architectures (out of building or soft-
     ware, enterprise in general);
   • They make it possible in the case of a cross-platform development in team
     to have a common vision

    Similar to the entire Enterprise Architecture community, the TOGAF
community has been a forum for vigorous discussion on pattern languages
for design, evaluation, and building a good architecture for the enterprises.
The goals of the patterns is to share successful the design solutions among
professionals and practitioners, and to provide a common ground for any-
one involved in the design, development, enhanced usability testing, or the
use of different systems. Several practitioners and designers have become
interested in formulating various patterns of the same or different catego-
ries in the enterprise architecture destined to organizations
    The idea of using patterns in TOGAF Framework is not new. Differ-
ent pattern collections have been published including patterns for layout
design [10-12], for navigation in a large information architecture as well
as for visualizing and presenting information. In our work, we investigate
102                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



categories of Patterns as a solution for cross-platform Enterprise Architec-
ture and in particular, to solve the following design challenges
    TOGAF [7] is an architecture framework that enables to design, eval-
uate, and build the right architecture for an organization. It is a mature
Enterprise Architecture framework that is widely adopted by enterprises.
TOGAF framework doesn’t specify the architecture style—it is a generic
framework TOGAF can be used in developing architecture. It consists of
three main parts: The Enterprise Continuum, The TOGAF Resource Base
and The TOGAF Architecture Development Method (ADM). ADM pro-
posed a number of architectures shown and described below in Figure 1.

   • Preliminary phase: This phase allows defining an Organization-Specific
     Architecture framework and the architecture principles. According the
     Dave Hamford [14], this phase is not a phase of architecture development;
   • Phase A—Vision Architecture: This phase allows defining the scope of the
     foundation architecture effort, creating the vision architecture supporting
     requirements and constraints and obtaining approvals to proceed;
   • Phase B—Business Architecture: This phase enables developing the de-
     tailed business architecture for analysing the gaps results;
   • Phase C—Information System Architecture: This phase enables describing
     the Information Systems Architectures for an architecture project, includ-
     ing the development of Data and Application Architectures;
   • Phase D—Technology Architecture: This phase enables developing a tech-
     nology infrastructure that is used as a foundation for identifying all compo-
     nents that will support the development, implementation and deployment
     processes;
   • Phase E—Opportunities and Solutions: This phase enables identifying op-
     portunities and solutions and implementation constraints to deliver a more
     consistent architecture implementation;
   • Phase F—Migration planning: This phase allows choosing and prioritizing
     all work packages, projects and to create, evolve and monitor the detailed
     implementation and migration plan providing necessary resources to enable
     the realization of the transition architectures;
   • Phase G—Implementation Governance: This phase allows providing an ar-
     chitectural oversight of the implementation;
   • Phase H—Architecture Change management: This phase allows establish-
     ing procedures for managing change to the new architecture;•
   • Phase Requirement Management: This phase allows managing architecture
     requirements throughout the Architecture Development Method (ADM),
     i.e., defining a process whereby requirements for enterprise architecture are
     identified, stored, and fed into and out of the relevant ADM phases
Pattern-Oriented Approach for Enterprise Architecture   103




FIGURE 1: TOGAF framework [7]
104                              Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    By combining different categories of patterns, the professionals and
experts can utilize pattern relationships and combine them in order to pro-
duce an effective and coherence design solution by using fully service-
oriented approach that TOGAF has adopted. As a result, patterns become
a more effective vehicle that supports design reuse and building organiza-
tional capabilities.


5.3 THE PROPOSED PATTERNS TAXONOMY FOR TOGAF
FRAMEWORK

We propose at least ten categories of design patterns used to combine them
to produce pattern-oriented enterprise architecture by applying the com-
position rules described in Section 4. Together, these patterns with their
relationships provide an integrative solution to address the multifaces of
TOGAF Framework (Figure 2):

   1. Specification Patterns. This category of patterns allows understand-
      ing and clarifying the adopted strategy context, goals, and business
      architecture principles to the stakeholders in order to coordinate,
      and integrate the specifications of different activities at different
      levels of the organization.
   2. Vision Patterns. This category of patterns describes a clear and
      stimulating vision of architecture to develop for addressing its re-
      quirements and constraints, and to meet the defined goals and ob-
      jectives. These patterns communicate share the information with
      stakeholders on the signification of aimed goals by the vision and
      emphasize its importance.
   3. Process Patterns. This category of patterns coordinates the actions
      and operations that related together, in serial or in parallel manner,
      in order to reach a common objective. The actions are the activities
      executed par human. The operations are the activities executed and
      controlled automatically by a software system. When a process is
      composed only with operations, then we called it an automated
      process.
Pattern-Oriented Approach for Enterprise Architecture                    105



   4. Governance Patterns. This category of patterns describes the man-
      ner that all architectures of TOGAF framework are well-governed
      and managed successfully by taking into account and addressing
      both potential risks and potential value of the enterprise architec-
      ture. These patterns provide and inform the proper functioning of
      these various architectures, and specially their deployment and in-
      teraction. Theses architectures are linked by sequential interdepen-
      dencies form. Indeed, they exchange together to produce the de-
      sired outcomes. Information must propagate between the involved
      architectures during the execution to harmonize their efforts to ob-
      tain better governance.
   5. Migration Planning Patterns. This category of patterns describes
      and explains the important strategies of migration plan that were
      proven with execution. This effective plan consists of four key
      steps such as definition of needs, design, implementation, and
      tests. In addition, these patterns have to address the details of over-
      all aspects through these strategies to ensure the optimal quality
      of the migrated functionalities of systems by including the best
      practices in order to develop the detail of the target organizational
      architecture.
   6. Usability Patterns. This category of patterns focuses on dealing
      with the relationships between internal software attributes and ex-
      ternally visible usability factors and how these patterns can lead
      to a methodological framework for improving the “Opportunities
      and Solutions” architecture, and how these patterns can support the
      integration of usability in the software design process. In addition,
      these patterns expose knowledge that has been gained from differ-
      ent projects by many experts over many years.
   7. Architecture Patterns. This category of patterns describes and gives
      information about the type of technological infrastructure to develop.
      Indeed, these patterns will support and enable the different business
      services implementation and deployment by using Service-Oriented
      Architecture (SOA) components of TOGAF framework.
   8. Information Patterns. This category of patterns describes different
      conceptual models and architectures for organizing the underlying
106                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



       content across multiple pages, servers and computers. Such pat-
       terns provide solutions to questions such as which information can
       be or should be presented on which device.
   9. Business Patterns. This category of patterns describes a communi-
       cation between the vision of organization with its business subjects
       with its objectives and its environment model such as actors, roles,
       and business service or functional or information or decomposition
       diagrams, business interaction, business footprint, product lifecy-
       cle diagram and all business processes involved.
   10. Interoperability Patterns. This category of patterns is useful for de-
       coupling the organization of these different categories of patterns
       as outlined in Figure 2, for the way information is presented to the
       user, and for the user who interacts with the information content.
       Patterns in this category generally describe the capability of differ-
       ent architectural programs to exchange data, via a common set of
       exchange formats considered as a service, to read and write under
       the same file formats, and to use the same protocols

    Communication and interoperability patterns are useful for facilitating
the mapping of a design between architectures of TOGAF framework
    Gamma et al. [13] offer a large catalog of patterns for dealing with such
problems. Examples of patterns applicable to interactive systems include:
Adapter, Bridge, Builder, Decorator, Factory Method, Mediator, Memen-
to, Prototype, Proxy, Singleton, State, Strategy, and Visitor.


5.4 PATTERN COMPOSITION RULES

A creation of an Enterprise Architecture pattern oriented design exploits
several relationships between patterns. Based on previous work [15], we
identify five types of relationships.

   1. Similar is a relationship, which applies to the same category of pat-
      terns. Two patterns (X, Y) are similar, or equivalent, if, and only
      if, X and Y can be replaced by each other in a certain composition.
      This means that X and Y are patterns of the same category and
Pattern-Oriented Approach for Enterprise Architecture   107




                                                          FIGURE 2. Pattern-oriented TOGAF framework
108                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



        they provide different solutions to the same problem in the same
        context. For example, the Index Browsing and Menu Bar patterns
        are similar. They both provide navigational support in the context
        of a medium-sized.
   2.   Competitor is a relationship that applies to two patterns of the same pat-
        terns category. Two patterns (X, Y) are competitors if X and Y cannot
        be used at the same time for designing the same artifact relationship
        that applies to two patterns of the same pattern category. Two patterns
        are competitors if, and only if, they are similar and interchangeable. For
        example, the Web patterns Convenient Toolbar and Index Browsing are
        competitors. The Index Browsing pattern can be used as a shortcut tool-
        bar that allows a user to directly access a set of common services from
        any interactive system. The Convenient Toolbar, which provides the
        same solution, is generally considered more appropriate.
   3.   Super-ordinate is the basic relationship to compose several patterns
        of different categories. A pattern X is a super-ordinate of pattern
        Y, which means that pattern Y is used as a building block to create
        pattern X. An example is the Home Page pattern, which is gener-
        ally composed of several other patterns.
   4.   Subordinate. If pattern X is super-ordinate of Y and Z then Y and Z
        are sub-ordinate of X. This relationship is important in the mapping
        process of patternoriented design from an architecture to another
        one. For example, the Convenient Toolbar pattern is a sub-ordinate
        of the Home Page pattern for either a PDA or desktop platform.
        Implementations of this pattern are different for different devices.
   5.   Neighboring. Two patterns (X, Y) are neighboring if X and Y belong
        to the same pattern category. For example, the sequential and hier-
        archical patterns are neighboring because they belong to the same
        category of patterns, and neighboring patterns may include the set of
        patterns for designing a specific page such as a home page.


5.5 AN ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE

This section describes the design patterns illustrating and clarifying the
core ideas of the pattern-oriented approach and its practical relevance.
Pattern-Oriented Approach for Enterprise Architecture                     109



This case study illustrates how patterns are used to formalize and design
the requirements of various architectures constituent TOGAF framework
    In what follows, we have introduced some concrete examples of this
mosaic of patterns that we have been using. These examples have shown
also the need to combine several types of patterns to provide solutions to
complex problems. The list of patterns is not exhaustive. There is no doubt
that more patterns are still to be discovered, and that an endless number
have yet to be invented
    Interoperability patterns are fundamental patterns to facilitate the com-
munication between requirements management phase and other architec-
tures of TOGAF framework. Example of patterns that can be considered
to ensure the interoperability of architectures include Adapter, Bridge,
Builder, Decorator, Facade, Factory Method, Mediator, Memento, Proto-
type, Proxy, Singleton, State, Strategy, Visitor [13]
    The Adapter pattern is very common, not only to remote client/serv-
er programming, but to any situation in which there is one class and it
is desirable to reuse that class, but where the system interface does not
match the class interface. Figure 3 illustrates how an adapter works.
In this figure, the Client wants to invoke the method Request() in the
Target interface. Since the Adaptee class has no Request() method, it
is the job of the Adapter to convert the request to an available match-
ing method. Here, the Adapter converts the method Request() call into
the Adaptee method specificRequest() call. The Adapter performs this
conversion for each method that needs adapting. This is also known as
Wrappering.


5.6 DISCUSSION

The types of TOGAF architectures that are recommended for some the
most popular patterns and which can be used to redesign of development
systems for different architectures
    In this paper, we have introduced a pattern-oriented design method that
essentially exploits different categories of patterns. This approach is a sig-
nificant improvement over non-structured migration methods currently in
use, for the following reasons:
110   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




                                              FIGURE 3: Adapter pattern.
Pattern-Oriented Approach for Enterprise Architecture                         111



   • The method provides a standardized table of patterns, thereby reducing the
     redesign effort and ensuring consistency in redesign.
   • The method helps designers in design choices associated with (1) the size
     of the source architecture and target architecture and (2) the amount of in-
     formation to maintain in migrating from the source architecture to the target
     architecture
   • The method is simple enough to be used easily by novice designers, as
     compared to reengineering which currently requires a considerable degree
     of expertise and abstract reasoning ability

    Pattern-oriented approach offers the very useful ability of easily build-
ing multiple architecture-specific designs. However, the current state of
the art in patterns and cross-architecture research is not yet mature enough
to handle all the requirements of pattern-oriented design. More research
must be addressed to define the multiple levels of abstraction of patterns
and to create a clear, well-structured taxonomy of patterns. The simpli-
fied taxonomy presented in Section 3 is a starting point. Thus, within a
pattern-oriented framework, the simplified “redesign and design” method
proposed here is currently the most practical approach for migration of
systems between architectures.


5.7 CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have identified and proposed ten categories of patterns,
providing examples, for a patternoriented architecture for TOGAF frame-
work to demonstrate when a pattern is applicable or required during the
design process, how it can be reused and the underlying best practices to
come up with reusable design solutions
    Our experiences highlighted also that in order to render the patterns un-
derstandable by novice designers and engineers who are unfamiliar with
enterprise architecture, patterns should be presented to developers using a
flexible structure to represent patterns, to make it easy for both the pattern
authors, reviewers and users
    One of the major problems we can find is that mastering and apply-
ing several types of patterns require indepth knowledge of both the prob-
lems and forces at play and most importantly must ultimately put forth
battletested solutions. As such, it is inconceivable that pattern hierarchies
112                                   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



will evolve strictly from theoretical considerations. Practical research and
industry feedback are crucial in determining how successful a pattern-ori-
ented design framework is at solving real-world problems. It is therefore
essential to build an “academia-industry bridge” by establishing formal
communication channels between industrial specialists in patterns, enter-
prise architecture design patterns such as TOGAF framework as well as
pattern researchers. Such collaboration will lead, at to a common termi-
nology which essential making the large diversity of patterns accessible to
common TOGAF framework designers
    Future work will require the classification of each pattern and the il-
lustration of each of them in UML class and sequence diagrams for each
architecture of TOGAF framework. Next, some relationships will have to
be defined between patterns so that they can be combined to create mod-
els based on the resulting patterns. Also, the design patterns need to be
evaluated using different evaluation standards and methods and the formal
descriptions of the proposed patterns using the formal language such as
XML and its derivatives to increase the number of these formal descrip-
tions which is also conducive to the future engineering application.


REFERENCES

 1.  Institute for Enterprise Architecture Developments, 2011. http://www.enterprise-
     architecture.info/
 2. R. E. Giachetti, “Design of Enterprise Systems, Theory, Architecture, and Methods,”
     CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2010.
 3. P. Weill, “Innovating with Information Systems: What Do the Most Agile Firms in
     the World Do?” 6th e-Business Conference, Barcelona, 2007.
 4. Enterprise Architecture Center of Excellence, 2011. http://eacoe.org/index.shtml
 5. J. W. Ross, P. Weill and D. C. Robertson, “Enterprise Architecture as Strategy,”
     Harvard Business Press, Boston, 2006.
 6. J. A. Zachman, “A Framework for Information Systems Architecture,” IBM Systems
     Journal, Vol. 26, No. 3, 1987, pp. 276-292. doi:10.1147/sj.263.0276
 7. Open Group, 2008. http://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/togaf9-doc/arch/index.
     html
 8. C. Alexander, S. Ishikawa, M. Silverstein, M. Jacobson, I. Fiskdahl-King and S.
     Angel, “A Pattern Language,” Oxford University Press, New York, 1977.
 9. F. Buschmann, “What is a Pattern?” Object Expert, Vol. 1, No. 3, 1996, pp. 17-18.
 10. J. Tidwell, “Common Ground: A Pattern Language for Human-Computer Interface
     Design,” 1997. http://www.mit.edu/~jtidwell/common_ground.html
Pattern-Oriented Approach for Enterprise Architecture                              113


 11. T. Coram and J. Lee, “Experiences—A Pattern Language for User Interface De-
     sign,” 1998. http://www.maplefish.com/todd/papers/experiences
 12. M. V. Welie, “The Amsterdam Collection of Patterns in User Interface Design,”
     1999. http://www.cs.vu.nl/~martijn/patterns/index.html
 13. E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson and J. Vlissides, “Design Patterns: Elements of
     Reusable Object-Oriented Software,” Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1995.
 14. Dave Hornford, SOA/TOGAF Tutorial, 2010. https://www.opengroup.org/confer-
     ence-live/uploads/40/22062/hornford.pdf
 15. F. J. Budinsky, M. A. Finnie, J. M. Vlissides and P. S. Yu, “Automatic Code Genera-
     tion from Design Patterns,” IBM Systems Journal, Vol. 35, No. 2, 1996, pp. 151-171.
     doi:10.1147/sj.352.0151
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 6



A NEW CONTENT FRAMEWORK
AND METAMODEL FOR ENTERPRISE
ARCHITECTURE AND IS STRATEGIC
PLANNING
MOUHSINE LAKHDISSI and BOUCHAIB BOUNABAT




6.1 BACKGROUND

With the complexity of today’s information systems and the necessity to
make the existing IT assets more agile to provide for the constant business
change, the task of governing and planning for IT assets become a key
success factor for IT.
    Information Systems Strategic Planning is the discipline that deals
with this task. Unfortunately, it hasn’t evolved with the same speed as oth-
er fields in the IT sphere. Most of the techniques, approaches and methods
related to IT Strategic Planning date back to the '80s or '90s and are most
often oriented business strategic planning rather than IT strategic planning
[1}. As a matter of fact, they don’t take into account the complexity of to-
day’s information system and their diversity. Furthermore, this field lacks
from a formal, rigorous and agreed upon methodology and suffers from
the absence of tools to support, structure and industrialize the discipline



This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent.
Lakhdiss M and Bounabat B. A New Content Framework and Metamodel for Enterprise Architecture
and IS Strategic Planning. International Journal of Computer Science Issues 9,2 (2012), ISSN (On-
line): 1694-0814.
116                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    Enterprise Architecture is a really promising discipline aimed at cap-
turing the as-is architecture of an enterprise, defining the target and the
roadmap to get from existing to desired state. In that way, it is tightly
related to ISSP and it can provide a framework to fill the gap and con-
tribute in structuring and formalizing ISSP field. Enterprise Architecture
benefits from a standardization effort as well as from tool support. Deliv-
erables and artifacts are generally well defined and structured in the exist-
ing frameworks.
    Existing Enterprise Architecture frameworks are of different types.
While some frameworks like Zachman [2] define a taxonomy for architec-
ture artifacts, others like TOGAF [3], tend to describe a process to produce
architecture deliverables [4]. The main concept underlying both the pro-
cess and the taxonomy is the metamodel to describe architecture elements
and to produce architecture deliverables.
    This metamodel is often either very poor to describe fully the architec-
ture or not well structured to define the dependencies and the relationships
between elements. We think that in order to define a more rigorous and
structured methodology for ISSP, it is necessary to define a rich and struc-
tured metamodel covering both architecture elements (processes, applica-
tions, data..) and transformation elements (programs, projects, budgets).
This metamodel is the main focus of our work aimed at defining a new
methodology for ISSP.
    Our aim in this paper is to demonstrate the insufficiencies, deficien-
cies and inconsistencies in existing ISSP methods and show how a new
methodology based in part on the Entreprise Architecture practice could
be proposed to address these problems. The metamodel we project to de-
fine could be used as a platform for describing the architecture, evaluating
it and defining the needed transformations and planning them in term of
programs/projects.
    The second section presents ISSP and EA, compares the two disci-
plines and tries to bridge the gap between them. The content framework
and the underlying metamodel is introduced in the the third section as
a way to combine ISSP and EA. The fourth section describes the sug-
gested metamodel and content framework. A comparison is made in the
fifth section with existing metamodels before presenting future work and
directions.
A Content Framework for Enterprise Architecture                            117



6.2 IT STRATEGIC PLANNING AND ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE




6.2.1 IT STRATEGIC PLANNING

Strategy is defined by Chandler as “The determination of the basic long-
term goals and objectives of an enterprise and the adoption of courses
of action and the allocation of resources necessary for carrying out these
goals” [6] and by Porter as “The art to build durable and defendable com-
petitive advantage” [7].
    One of the most complete definitions was given by [8], “A fundamental
framework for an organization to assert its vital continuity, while, at the
same time, forcefully facilitating its adaptation to a changing environment.”
    For most of the definition, strategic planning is focused on three main
questions:

   • Where we are?
   • Where we want to go?
   • How to get there?

    IS Strategic planning has been defined by [9] as the process of iden-
tifying a portfolio of applications/projects that can help an organization
achieve its business strategy. Its focus is on defining the IT roadmap in
term of key initiatives, projects and transformations to be made on the
existing information system with two main intentions:

   • How to align information systems with business needs and overall strategy?
   • How to use information technology to change and impact the business?

    Due to the complexity of today’s information systems and the diversity
of enterprise’s technology approaches, many methods have been defined to
structure the ISSP process and techniques have been defined to address some
aspects of the discipline. [10] classifies ISSP methods into two categories:

   • Impact methods: trying to make It help create a positive impact and drive
     the change of the business
118                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



   • Alignment methods: where the main focus is on aligning IT to respond to
     business needs and to help achieve strategic goals

    Among the methods used in IT Strategic Planning we can cite Critical
Success Factors (CSF) [1] which could be considered as an impact and
alignment method, Business Systems Planning (BSP) [1], Porter’s Value
Chain [7], and Scenarios [1]. Methods can be grouped together to con-
stitute a methodology. Methodologies used for ISSP include those of the
CCTA (12) and Boar (13).
    Many IT vendors and consultancy organizations use proprietary meth-
ods and/or methodologies, some of which are adaptations of open source
approaches. Examples are Arthur Andersen’s Method/1 and Coopers and
Lybrand’s Summit [9]. It is also well known that organizations often de-
velop their own in-house methodologies, often based on open or propri-
etary methods or approaches [9]


6.2.2 ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE

ISO/IEC 42010: 2007 defines ‘‘architecture’’ as: ‘‘the fundamental orga-
nization of a system, embodied in its components, their relationships to
each other and the environment, and the principles governing its design
and evolution.’’ The Open Group defines it as [3]: “A formal description
of a system, or a detailed plan of the system at component level to guide
its implementation. The structure of components, their inter-relationships,
and the principles and guidelines governing their design and evolution
over time”
     An architecture is typically made up of:

   • a picture of the current state
   • a blueprint, vision or detailed description for the future
   • a road-map on how to get there

   Enterprise Architecture appeared in the eighties thanks to John Zach-
man who introduced the framework that bears his name. This framework
consists of taxonomy for producing architecture artifacts from different
viewpoints and perspectives. As a matter of fact, Enterprise Architecture
A Content Framework for Enterprise Architecture                                 119



has been defined by Zachman [2] as a "set of descriptive representations
(i.e. ‘models’) that are relevant for describing an Enterprise such that it can
be produced to management’s requirements (quality) and maintained over
the period of its useful life".
    Several other frameworks appeared subsequently, most of them initiat-
ed by government bodies like TAFIM (Technical Architecture Framework
for Information Management), DODAF, MODAF or FEAF especially due
to the requirement of the Clinger-Cohen Act.
    IT consulting firms created their own EA frameworks, based on the
feedback from projects they undertook. Gartner as well as Cap Gemini or
Accenture have their own EA frameworks which could be more accurately
considered as EA practices as stated by [4].
    The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF) started with TA-
FIM and reproduced practices and techniques used in other framework
to constitute an EA framework of reference in the IT industry. TOGAF
is with Zachman the two most used EA frameworks according to [5].
TOGAF consist of:

   • A architecture development methodology describing the process
   • A set of guidelines and techniques supporting the methodology
   • A content framework with a metamodel describing the products (deliverables)
   • Reference models that provide best practices to compare with
   • A structure and description of the architecture repository (enterprise
     continuum)
   • A capability framework for architecture governance and implementation

    TOGAF could be used in combination with Zachman where TOGAF
defines the process and Zachman the deliverables. Archimate [11] defines
a notation for architecture elements but also defines its own metamodel for
architecture description.
    Enterprise Architecture could be used for different needs and in vari-
ous contexts. It can operate as:

   • A method to describe the enterprise as a whole with different levels and
     views of enterprise elements and their relationships. In this way it relates to
     Enterprise Modeling as was stated by Lillehagen et al.[17]
   • A way to align the IS environment with the business reality and the stra-
     tegic goals or to assess this alignment as described by Bounabat[18] and
     Elhari[19]
120                                  Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



   • A modelling structure to define the vision for IS evolution or to describe in
     detail the IS to-be state
   • A process to plan the migration between the as-is situation and the to-be state.

   All these EA use cases could be related to a step or a phase in term of
process or deliverables of ISSP.


6.2.3 COMPARISON AND CORRELATION

A theoretical comparison of IT Strategic Planning and Enterprise Archi-
tecture was conducted by Wilton [20] and Beveridge and Perks [21]. These
comparisons concluded that both ISSP and EA share the same intent and
scope. Wilton [22] gave a more empirical comparison based on a survey
which led to establishing a significant correlation between the two activi-
ties in term of topics they cover.
    The main difference that was highlighted by Wilton [22] is that ISSP
tends to be process-oriented with little specification of deliverables and
content while EA is product-oriented in that it defines the way the as-is and
to-be state are described and modelled.
    We think that this difference tends to disappear due to the progress
made in the field of Enterprise Architecture. As a matter of fact, with
frameworks like TOGAF the gap is being bridged with a detailed process
to produce architecture deliverables.
    Furthermore, we think that other differences are to be considered. One
of the main differences that still exists and that is related to the Enterprise
Architecture practice is the fact that there is no concrete link between the
architecture description and the programs/projects defined in the roadmap.
This lack of correlation makes it difficult to address the strategic planning
main objective which is planning for IT transformations with existing En-
terprise Architecture frameworks.


6.2.4 BRIDGING CONCEPT: TRANSFORMATION

A project is defined by (PMBoK) as “A project is a temporary endeavor
undertaken to create a unique product, service or result.”
A Content Framework for Enterprise Architecture                            121



    This definition underlines the fact that a project is intended to create a
product/service or result. It doesn’t mention the elements that the project
will impact whether they are new elements created or existing element
transformed.
    A project—in the context of ISSP and EA—could be defined as a set
of transformations (including creations) applied on architecture elements.
These elements could be business elements, application elements, data el-
ements or technical elements or a combination of them.
    Elements are the basic constituents of architecture like applications,
processes, servers, databases...etc. These elements are combined to create
architecture models and diagrams. The transformations of these elements
are combined as well to create ISSP’s projects and programs.


6.3 IMPORTANCE OF A FRAMEWORK AND METAMODEL

The ISO/IEC 42010: 2007 definition of architecture as “the fundamental
organization of a system, embodied in its components, their relationships
to each other and the environment, and the principles governing its design
and evolution.’’ highlight unequivocally the importance of the organiza-
tion of elements and their relationships. This structure is defined through
a metamodel of architecture elements.
    Enterprise Architecture is supposed to produce architecture artifacts.
These artifacts are based on an architecture content framework as defined
by TOGAF or an architecture map.



6.3.1 CONTENT FRAMEWORK

The content framework defines the layers, views, questions and aspects
that architecture description deals with. The importance of this framework
is that it organizes, classifies and links architecture elements and artifacts.
It is also interesting because it ensure the coherence and exhaustively of
the metamodel.
    The content framework is classically defined as a bidimensional grid
with lines representing layers or views and columns representing concerns and
122                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



classifications. The content framework defines elements of the metamodel
in a high level way emphasizing the global structure rather than the de-
tailed model.


6.3.2 METAMODEL

The metamodel is the backbone of architecture description and methodol-
ogy. The metamodel guarantees the exhaustiveness of overall architecture
work and the coherence and alignment of architecture layers.
   It is similar in form to a Conceptual Data Model or a Class Diagram
in UML. It is important in term of objects definition, attributes definition
and relationships.

   • Objects definition ensures the exhaustiveness and coverage of aspects as
     standardization and integration.
   • Attributes provide the way to perform diagnosis and analysis on existing
     and future assets. Attribute can also cover aspects like security and perfor-
     mance necessary to the evaluation process.
   • Relationships are very important to perform Gap Analysis inside the same
     layer and for alignment needs between layers.




6.4 EXISTING CONTENT FRAMEWORKS AND METAMODELS

Many metamodels have been defined explicitly or implicitly by EA frame-
works. They are of different natures and focus depending on their intent.
Some of them are poor in term of business or IS content. Others don’t take
into account some aspect tightly related to EA and ISSP like:

   •   Requirements
   •   Strategy
   •   Standards
   •   Program and projects

    We described in our paper [23] each metamodel (TOGAF, Zachman,
Archimate, EA Tools) with a critical view of each one. The summary of
this analysis is presented in table 2.
A Content Framework for Enterprise Architecture                    123




FIGURE 1: New content framework: Neoxia Architecture Map (NAM)



6.5 PRESENTATION OF A NEW CONTENT FRAMEWORK AND
METAMODEL



6.5.1 NEW CONTENT FRAMEWORK : NEOXIA
ARCHITECTURE MAP

We introduce here a new content framework that is based on feedback
from consulting projects on EA and ISSP. We call it NEOXIA Architecture
Map. In this content framework we differentiate between
124                                Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



   • Static element: tending to describe an element in a static most often hier-
     archical way
   • Dynamic element: focusing on the dynamic view of the same element We
     also distinguish between three natures of element:
   • Structure elements: like organization and network
   • Function elements: like services or functions
   • Content element: like data or storage


6.5.2   NEW METAMODEL: NEOXIA CONTENT METAMODEL

The content metamodel is the mechanism by which we suggest to mix
architecture and strategic planning element base on transformations. The
content metamodel follows the overall structure of the content framework
and could be illustrated as in the figure below.




FIGURE 2: New Metamodel : NEOXIA Content Metamodel (NCM)
A Content Framework for Enterprise Architecture                              125



   The suggested metamodel is composed of five layers:

   •   Strategy
   •   Business
   •   Information Systems
   •   Technology
   •   Strategic planning

     All layers are interrelated with static and dynamic element of the three
natures: function, structure and content. Every layer is connected with the
layer below with a realization link. A process is automated in an applica-
tion which uses a database and are both deployed in a server. This de-
pendence is fundamental to align the IS with the Business Architecture
and the Technology with the IS Architecture. This link allows us also to
analyze the gap between layers in term of coverage to make it possible to
fill this gap in the strategic plan.
     The metamodel could be also represented as package and class dia-
grams. We focus in Figure 3 on the strategic planning layer.
     The central concept is “Transformation” which is a migration from
an as-is state to a to-be state of an architecture element. An architecture
element could be any architecture object of the metamodel (ex: process,
application, Hardware server…etc). A transformation is operated either:

   • A realization of a strategic objective: this allows us to align the to-be IS
     situation with the strategy and to justify the strategic plan investments
   • A consequence of an IT or business requirement (principle, standard, rule,
     constraint) defined by the organization
   • A result of a gap analysis: in that case the gap is observed on one or more
     architecture elements and the transformation is a way to fill the gap.

We have as a result three types of transformations :

   • Alignment transformation
   • Requirement transformation
   • Gap transformation

    Many transformations are grouped into projects which are managed
through programs.
                                                                           126




FIGURE 3: Highlevel class diagram of the package “IT Strategic Planning”
                                                                           Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
A Content Framework for Enterprise Architecture                                           127



6.6 COMPARISON WITH EXISTING CONTENT FRAMEWORK
AND META MODELS

The suggested metamodel defines the detailed structure and relations of
architecture elements starting from strategy and requirement and going
through the different levels (Business, Information Systems and Infra-
structure) with the necessary link with Strategic Planning element like gap
analysis, program and project.
    In addition of giving a more detailed structure for IS and infrastruc-
ture levels which are often poorly defined, the main contribution of this
metamodel is the link it establishes between architecture elements and
strategic planning elements.
    We summarize a theoretical comparison of our metamodel with exist-
ing metamodels presented in section 4.

TABLE 2: Comparison of the new metamodel with existing ones
                              New         TOGAF      Archimate   Zachman      EA tools
                              metamodel                                       metamodels
                              NCM
 Requirement                  Yes         No         No.         Undergoing   Partially Yes
 Strategy                     Yes         Yes        No          Yes          No
 IT Planning                  Yes         No         No          No           Yes to some
                                                                              extent
 Link between projects and    Yes         No         No          No           No
 architecture
 Standards                    Yes         No         No          No           Yes. (Not
                                                                              native)
 Strategy definition          Yes         Yes        No          Yes          Yes
 Business description         Detailed    Detailed   Detailed    Average      Poor
 IS description               Detailed    Poor       Average     Detailed     Detailed
                                                                              (Depending
                                                                              on tool)
 Infrastructure description   Detailed    Poor       Average     Detailed     Detailed
                                                                              (Depending
                                                                              on tool)
 Tool support                 No          Partial    Yes         Partial      Yes
 Methodology support          No, Un-     Yes        Yes         No           No
                              dergoing
 Independence                 Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          No
128                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



6.7 CASE STUDY AND IMPLEMENTATION

The framework and metamodel described above were used in a IT Strate-
gic Plan in the financial market regulation agency to describe as-is and to-
be IT state and to define the migration plan in term of projects and trans-
formations. The IS Strategic Plan was part of an e-government strategy to
make all interaction between stakeholders in the market based on internet
and Electronic Data Interchange which make the underlying architecture
complex enough to provide for a good testing environment.
    The whole existing and future information systems component and ar-
chitecture were described and modeled based on the content framework
described above and using the proposed metamodel. This description lead-
ed to a thorough visibility on existing and future state for all stakeholders
of the project which was necessary to take the right decisions concerning
the evolution scenarios. Moreover, a program of project was defined with
for each project a set of transformations of architecture element from an
existing to a future state. This was very beneficial for impact analysis,
projects dependencies and load estimation of the projects.


6.7.1 IMPLEMENTATION

The implementation in our context has a double goal:

   • To make sure the metamodel is realist and feasible
   • To constitute a platform for a future ISSP tool (which is a much needed
     tool in IT Governance) The idea is to build a tool that makes it possible to :
   • Describe graphically and in term of properties all architecture elements of
     our metamodel
   • Define the dependencies and links between these element based on the
     metamodel
   • Store all elements and their dependencies in a repository
   • Generate inventories, matrices and reports from the repository

   Two scenarios of implementation were possible:

   • Customize the metamodel and content framerwork of an existing EA tool
   • Implement a new tool probably based on an open source existing one
                                                           A Content Framework for Enterprise Architecture




FIGURE 4: New Metamodel : NEOXIA Content Metamodel (NCM)
                                                           129
130                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    We explored both options with the e-Government Regulation Agen-
cy case study which allowed us to measure the degree relevance of the
metamodel.
    The first option was carried out through a customization of Sybase
Power AMC aimed at adapting its metamodel to NCM. Even if the tool is
quite flexible, we have encountered a problem concerning the predefined
objects of Power AMC which are difficult to customize as well as some
dependencies which are hard to implement. Figure 4 shows some screen-
shots of the customization screens.
    We then explored building our specific tool based on the Eclipse Plat-
form (Eclipse RCP, EMF and GEF). The tool is based on an XML storage
of the model (values of attributes of objects). In Figure 5, are displayed
some screenshots describing how we can create an architecture element
with its graphical representation and its properties.


6.8 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We think that based on this proposed metamodel, a new methodology
could be defined to cope with the needs of ISSP and to complement and
enrich existing EA metamodels. The metamodel described was already
used successfully in consulting projects in the public and private sector
and was able to capture more meticulously architecture element and to
support the process of IS Strategic Planning.
    The metamodel could be enriched to highlight crossover architecture
aspects like security, performance and integration. These aspects are very
important in evaluating existing IT assets and in defining their target state.
    A planned continuation of this work is to continue on developing a
basic modeling tool (or adapt an existing one) based on this metamodel
and content framework with support to Enterprise Architecture as well as
IS Strategic Planning techniques and activities. The tool will allow to put
into practice the Metamodel and to demonstrate the added-value of the
methodology.
    Another extension is to formalize diagnosis and evaluation techniques
into the meta model to make sure the whole IS Strategic Planning process
is automated.
                                                           A Content Framework for Enterprise Architecture




FIGURE 5: New Metamodel : NEOXIA Content Metamodel (NCM)
                                                           131
132                                     Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



REFERENCES

1.    Pant S., Hsu C.: Strategic Information Systems Planning: A Review, 1995 Informa-
      tion Resources Management Association International Conference.
2.    Zachman J. : A framework for Information Architecture, IBM Systems Journal, 38,
      2&3, 1987.
3.    The Open Group .: “TOGAF as an Enterprise Architecture Framework”, http://
      www.opengroup.org/architecture/togaf8-doc/arch/
4.    Sessions R. : “A Comparison of the Top Four Enterprise-Architecture Methodolo-
      gies”, http://msdn.microsoft.com/enus/library/bb466232.aspx (2007)
5.    Schekkerman J. : Trends in Enterprise Architecture 2005: How are Organizations
      Progressing?
6.    Chandler, Alfred A., Jr. (1962), Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History
      ofAmerican Industrial Enterprise, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
7.    Porter, M. E. (1985). Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Per-
      formance, Collier Macmillan, New York, N.Y.
8.    Arnoldo C. Hax (1996), “Strategy Concept and Process: A Pragmatic Approach”,
      Barnes and Noble, bn.com
9.    Lederer, A. L. and Sethi, V. (1988). The Implementation of Information Systems
      Planning Methodologies, MIS Quarterly, September 1988, 445- 461.
10.   Vitale, M., Ives, B. and Beath, C. (1986), “Identifying Strategic Information Sys-
      tems,” Proc. 7th Int’l Conf. Inf. Sys., San Diego, December 1986, pp. 265-276.
11.   Archimate (2009), “Archimate 1.0 Specifications," http://www.opengroup.org/ar-
      chitecture/togaf8-doc/arch/
12.   CCTA (1999). IS Strategy: process and products, Format Publishing Limited,
      Norwich.
13.   Boar, B. (2001). The Art of Strategic Planning for Information Technology, John
      Wiley and Sons, New York, NY.
14.   DODAF, U.S. DoD (2003). DoD Architectural Framework Version 1.0,
15.   http://www.teao.saic.com/jfcom/ier/documents/DOD_architecture_framework_vol-
      ume1.doc,
16.   Lillehagen F., Karlsen D., Enterprise Architectures – Survey of Practices and Initia-
      tives, Rapport Computas 2005.
17.   Bounabat, B. (2006), “Enterprise Architecture Based Metrics for Assessing IT Stra-
      tegic Alignment”, European Conference On Information Technology Evaluation
      (ECITE), 2006.
18.   Elhari K., Bounabat. B (2010), “Strategic Alignement Assessement Based on Enter-
      prise Architecture”, ICIME 2010
19.   FEAF, 1999, “Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework Specification”, http://
      www.whitehouse.gov/omb/e-gov/fea/
20.   Wilton, D. (2001). The Relationship Between IT Strategic Planning and Enterprise
      Architectural Practice, Journal of Battlefield Technology, 1, 18-22.
21.   Perks, C. and Beveridge, T. (2003). Guide to Enterprise IT Architecture, Springer-
      Verlag, New York.
A Content Framework for Enterprise Architecture                                  133


 22. Wilton, D. (2007). The Relationship between IS Strategic Planning and Enterprise
     Architectural Practice: a Study in NZ Enterprises, Information Resources Manage-
     ment Association (IRMA), Vancouver.
 23. Lakhdissi M, Bounabat B (2011). “Toward a novel methodology for IT Strategic
     Planning”. Proceeding of ICIME 2011, p 277-287



There is one table that does not appear in this version of the article. To
view it, please visit the original version of the article as cited on the front
page of this chapter.
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 7



AGENT-ORIENTED ENTERPRISE
ARCHITECTURE: NEW APPROACH
FOR ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE
BABAK DARVISH ROUHANI and FATEMEH NIKPAY




7.1 INTRODUCTION

Enterprise architecture is a new approach to aligning business and IT with-
in an organization for competitiveness. Enterprise Architecture is a com-
prehensive system that encompasses all activities aspects of an organiza-
tion [12]. The exact and specific relationship among the components of
the organization's architecture is an Enterprise Architecture's advantage,
which is implemented by the Enterprise Architecture's program. In other
words, the duty of enterprise architecture is to implement the enterprise
architecture's structure in an organization. Comprehensive coverage of
an organization's activities, causes enterprise architecture structure seems
complex and ambiguous, so to avoid problems and to identify a suitable
model, existence of a framework in enterprise architecture is vital. Utiliz-
ing a suitable framework facilitates the analysis of organization structure
in order to determine the current status, optimal conditions and also defin-
ing the transfer functions [2][13].



This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent. Rouhani
BD and Nikpay F. Liver and Muscle in Morbid Obesity: Agent-Oriented Enterprise Architecture: New
Approach for Enterprise Architecture. International Journal of Computer Science Issues, 9,6 (2012),
ISSN (Online): 1694-0814.
136                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    Different attitudes in enterprise architecture are established since EA
is introduced by John Zackman. After a while, the framework provided
by Zackman was separated into more specialized framework such as fed-
eral, financial and military. Each of these frameworks has the capability to
cover the organization's activities in their own professional field. Combi-
nation of Service Oriented Architecture, Enterprise Architecture and Agile
Architecture creates Enterprise Architecture based on services and Agile
Enterprise Architecture. All these efforts were made to augment EA and
increase success rate of EA's programs in an organization.
    Since software architecture has a very constructive role in the suc-
cessful implementation of enterprise architecture, so it's vital to utilize
the new software architecture for the enterprise architecture which has
already been tried by service-oriented architecture and Agile Architec-
ture. Nowadays Agent-oriented architecture which has obtained its own
special place in all software's aspects including analysis, design and
implement, can obtain great success in projects with huge and complex
structure [2][5][6].


7.2 AGENT-ORIENTED ARCHITECTURE

Agent-oriented architecture is formed based on the fact 'agent', which has
the capability of autonomy in decision making, team work, work passively
and being goal oriented.
    These characteristics form the software operate dynamically and make
appropriate decisions based on common interaction with each other in
case of each event and then take appropriate reaction. Some agent-based
system's applications are as follows:

   • Solving problems that are inherently large and complex and requires a dis-
     tributed mechanism for resolving them.
   • Reduce processing costs (utilizing a large numbers of inexpensive proces-
     sors is better than an expensive and powerful ones).
   • To provide interactive between Legacies Legacy systems.
   • Applications where their focus is on scalability.
   • Providing solutions for problems that are inherently distributed. For ex-
     ample: Workflow Management, air Traffic Control
Agent-Oriented Enterprise Architecture                                          137



    As it is obvious in agent definition an agent has the ability to perform
an activity encapsulated in a flexible and independent environment in or-
der to fulfill design goals. The environment is a place where the agents
interact with each other and resolve operational and information require-
ments of each other's [7][8].


7.3 EXISTING ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE PROBLEMS

Most organizations during implementation enterprise architecture are
faced with below problems [2]:

   •   Deflected and scattered focuses
   •   Project teams, are not familiar with existing enterprise architecture.
   •   Project teams; do not follow the enterprise architecture.
   •   Project teams; do not cooperate with the enterprise architects.
   •   The architectures are obsolete
   •   Less attention to architectural models
   •   Non-routine programs
   •   The tendency to do all this extra work just because it is good for the orga-
       nization.

    There are various theories for software development and each of them
has been tested. The important point to mention is that agent-oriented ar-
chitecture has the capability to solve all these problems. Agent-oriented
architecture can deal with obstacles and solved problems from the begin-
ning to the end of a project by defining agents as independent elements
with ability to perform proper interaction with each other. The agent-ori-
ented architecture has capabilities to focus on the business architecture.


7.4 PROPOSED APPROACH

By considering these points:

   • The agents are the existence of solutions that have well-defined intervals.
   • Agents operate in special environments and sense inputs of the environment's
     state through their sensors and operate on that environment by their effectors.
138                                  Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



   • Agents are designed for specific roles.
   • Agents are independent and have control over the interior situation and
     their own behavior.
   • Agents are able to provide flexible solution. It is necessary to be reactive to
     what happens in the environment surrounding, which helps them achieve
     their goals. It is necessary to have very active agents in order to get initial
     values and data to fulfill new goals.

    Agent-oriented architecture has capabilities to solve current problems
of enterprise architecture by its characteristics [7][8].


7.4.1 WHY AGENT-ORIENTED?

As EA makes a revolution in business and information of an enterprise,
so it's vital to utilize an appropriate method in order to reduce complex-
ity and manage this complex organization better. In this part the reasons
are stated that why agent oriented architecture is a solution for EA's
problems.

   • Agent-oriented analysis is an appropriate method to divide the problem in
     complex systems.
   • The main agent oriented abstracts is a useful tool in modeling complex
     systems.
   • Agent oriented viewpoint is appropriate for detection and communication
     management of the organization. It is suitable for dependency management
     and the interaction exists in a complex system.

    For example, if financial sub-system faces changes due to tax and legal
laws, in a centralized and complex system all other sub-systems are af-
fected and in many cases cause improper behavior in system. If the system
is formed based on agent oriented capabilities, these kinds of problems
rarely occurs, and active agents reconstruct overall system structure by
means of defined structure automatically or in team activities. The system
can overcome the problems of non-pre-defined changes, by its dynamic
structure [4].
Agent-Oriented Enterprise Architecture                                   139




7.4.2 AGENT-ORIENTED ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE

In the complex system, relations between systems components are changed
continuously, thus they require a set of components to acts as a conceptual
unit when they are observed at different levels of abstraction. This view
is quite compatible with experience of agent oriented viewpoints, by this
definition it's obvious that facilities are provided for clear organizational
communication.
    There are various types of organizational communication in complex
systems which are important for two reasons: First, a number of separate
components can form a group together, secondly, they make it possible to
fully explain the existence of high levels connections and defined their de-
tails (Figure 1) [9]. The effect of organizational communication and struc-
tures on systems' behavior, illustrate the importance of a flexible manage-
ment .these communication are continuously changing and ability to adapt
dynamically to new circumstances is often necessary. As it was mentioned
before the first entity are the existence in agent oriented systems. So clear
structures and flexible mechanisms of are the centrality of agent oriented
patterns.




FIGURE 1: sample of complexity structure in complexity systems
140                                Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    If this ability is combined with computing mechanism, it would en-
able agent oriented systems to change according to their requirements and
also, make many middle forms which are necessary to produce complex
systems more rapidly. This means that agents or organizational groups can
be produced relatively independent of each other, and this would ensure
appropriate growth and proper coordination.
    When the project teams works with assumption that they can do any-
thing they want, and utilize any technology to make change in results, the
result is that the works and data are duplicated and reusing them rarely
happens. Systems won't work properly and they are incompatible with
each other and cause each other to fail and increase costs dramatically.
    A bad reality that exists is that almost a few number of software sys-
tems operate in a close environment while they should communicate with
several and sometimes hundred other systems. In an organization, appli-
cation must be effectively cooperate with other systems, as a result the
application must be developed a little in order to prevent harmful effects
on other systems .also they should be produced ideally to take advantage
of systems and increase shared infrastructure. Each system must be con-
structed so it can fit in the existing environment of an organization, and it's
better to represents future viewpoint in it. Such information should be reg-
istered in the enterprise architecture, current and future models in respect.
The purpose of agent oriented EA is to ensure proper implementation of
activities and providing dynamic structure in implemented system .to sum
up agent oriented EA is result oriented and make the activities successful
by utilizing clear definition of an agent's goals and providing an appropri-
ate environment.
    Agent oriented enterprise architecture is a method to define all aspects
and different viewpoints of a busy and complex organization where un-
predictable change in mission and technology are thoroughly impressive.
These changes are unpredictable so the organization has not the ability to
create and develop a specific plan to deal with them. Thus, agent-oriented
enterprise architecture is capable to define organization's current situa-
tion and desire state by means of agent-oriented models, techniques and
methods. Formulation and implementation of transfer pattern is one of
enterprise architecture principles and is planned well in agent-oriented en-
terprise architecture. According to Agents abilities such as autonomy and
Agent-Oriented Enterprise Architecture                                      141



interaction they can capable to cover all aspect of Enterprise Architecture.
For reaching to this purpose define some items as well are very important
(figure 2).
    Those items are [9]:

   •   Defining accurate information/activity environment
   •   Determining accurate relation between enterprise systems (inter systems)
   •   Determining accurate performance and interaction between agents
   •   Determining accurate agent activities domain


7.5 CONCLUSIONS

Utilizing agent-oriented enterprise architecture is appropriate for organi-
zations with complex missions and where missions are highly dependent
on each other. Generally, by means of agent-oriented architecture's pat-
terns, in Enterprise Architecture, an organization will be able to perform
the following:

   • Increasing the likelihood of successful implementation of Enterprise Ar-
     chitecture
   • Changes in the organization's plans
   • Increase competitiveness against other organizations.




FIGURE 2: Focal vision of multi agent system
142                                   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



     • Development of the lateral structures through proper implementation of
       Enterprise Architecture
     • Development of long term and medium term organizational goals
     • The development of enterprise data structures
     • Stability in the development of enterprise plans


REFERENCES

1.  Babak Darvish-Rouhani, Sadegh Kharazmi, " Presenting New Solution Base On
    Business Architecture For Enterprise Architecture", IJCSI International Journal of
    Computer Science Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 3, No 1, May 2012, ISSN (Online): 1694-
    0814
2. Babak Darvish Rouhani, Hossain Shirazi, Ali Farahmand Nejad, Sadegh Kharazmi.
    “Presenting a Framework for Agile Enterprise Architecture”, 1st International Con-
    ference of IEEE Information Technology 2008 (IT2008), Gdańsk, Polnad.
3. Yan Zhao, Ph.D., Director, Enterprise Architecture, CGI Federal ; “Enterprise Ser-
    vice Oriented Architecture (ESOA) Adoption Reference”IEEE International Confer-
    ence on Services Computing (SCC'06)-2006
4. N. R. Jennings, K. Sycara and M. Wooldridge (1998) “A Roadmap of Agent Re-
    search and Development” Int Journal of Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Sys-
    tems 1 (1) 7-38.
5. Namkyu Lim, Tae-gong Lee, Sang-gun Park; “A Comparative Analysis of Enter-
    prise Architecture Frameworks based on EA Quality Attributes”; 10th ACIS Interna-
    tional Conference on Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligences, Networking and
    Parallel/Distributed Computing; 2009
6. Gonc¸alo Antunes, Jos´e Barateiro, Christoph Becker, Jos´e Borbinha, Ricardo
    Vieira;” Modeling Contextual Concerns in Enterprise Architecture”; 15th IEEE In-
    ternational Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference Workshops, 2011
7. Jaelson Castro, Manuel Kolp, John Mylopoulos; “DEVELOPING AGENT-ORI-
    ENTED INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR THE ENTERPRISE”; Proceedings
    Second International Conference On Enterprise Information Systems, Stafford, UK,
    July 4-7, 2000
8. LIU Xiang; “A multi-agent-based architecture for enterprise customer and supplier
    cooperation context-aware information systems”; Third International Conference on
    Autonomic and Autonomous Systems (ICAS'07), 2007
9. M. Wooldridge (1997) “Agent-based software engineering” IEE Proc. on Software
    Engineering, 144 (1) 26-37.
10. A. Wegmann, On the Systemic Enterprise Architecture Methodology (SEAM), in:
    International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems (ICEIS), 2003.
Agent-Oriented Enterprise Architecture                                             143


 11. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, IEEE STD 1471, Recommended
     Practice for Architectural Description of Software-Intensive Systems, The Institute
     of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., New York, New York, 2000.
 12. J. Schekkerman, "How to Survive in the Jungle of Enterprise Architecture Frame-
     works," Trafford, 2004.
 13. J.Zachman, A framework for information systems architecture, IBM Systems Jour-
     nal 26 (3) (1987).
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 8



ADaPPT: ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE
THINKING FOR INFORMATION
SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT

HANIFA SHAH and PAUL GOLDER




8.1 INTRODUCTION

Much progress has been made in recent years in developing structures
to describe the enterprise and to facilitate the development of informa-
tion systems that appropriately complement the strategy of the enterprise.
Despite the success of the enterprise architecture approach there are still
major problems in achieving organisational change and in driving the re-
alignment of IT systems. The complexity of modern organisations in terms
of the business, legal and technological environment demands an architec-
tural approach. Businesses are faced with ongoing and continual change
to which they must respond in order to ensure success and even survival.
The increasingly competitive environment demands a customer-focused
approach. All of these factors contribute to the complexity and uncertainty
faced by organisations resulting in an inability to be appropriately respon-
sive to both internal and external events. Underlying this complexity and
uncertainty is the gap between an organisation's business objectives and
its underlying IT infrastructure. There is a need for information that is


This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent. Shah H
and Golder P. ADaPPT: Enterprise Architecture Thinking for Information Systems Development. In-
ternational Journal of Computer Science Issues, 8,1 (2011), ISSN (Online): 1694-0814.
146                              Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



timely and understood in order to facilitate appropriate analysis and to
appreciate the relevant impacts of decisions made. Organisations are con-
tinually faced with the challenge of their IT delivering the business value
demanded and responding speedily to the changing business needs.


8.2 ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURAL THINKING

An EA approach can help to provide a vehicle for organisational com-
munication. Improving communication and discussion between business
and IT staff enabling a shared understanding of the business and its sup-
porting infrastructure that can facilitate improved decision making and
more effective deployment of change. The approach provides a basis for
standardisation and agreed notations and representations, processes and
information become more transparent. Project costs can become more
stable and better predicted, the time taken to bring about change either by
enhancing current services or by offering new ones can be reduced.
    Clearly identifying the key components through an enterprise architec-
ture approach of business processes, information, technology applications
and organisation and how these relate to each other facilitates focussing
on the appropriate component as required in a particular situation. EA can
be used to manage complexity and describe the interdependencies in a us-
able manner.
    EA can facilitate a better return on an organisations investment by pro-
viding a means to identify cost saving opportunities, gaps and inconsis-
tencies as well as facilitating the installed systems and applications being
exploited. An enterprise architecture approach leads to improved scoping
and coordination of programmes and projects.


8.3 THE CHALLENGE OF CHANGE

It is commonplace to identify the forces of change to which modern busi-
nesses are exposed. It is relevant to discriminate between forces for change
that affect the business being carried out and those which affect only the
way the business is delivered. A new computer system leaves organisa-
ADaPPT: Enterprise Architecture for Information Systems Development      147



tional models unchanged but may change the data models and applications
used to support them. A change in market or a merger will change the or-
ganisational model itself. The pressures for change on the organisation are
such that a process of continual evolution even revolution is affecting all
organisations. This means that the construction of an enterprise architec-
ture is not a single event generating a static description of a the organisa-
tion which thereafter impedes the process of change. On the contrary the
continual evolution of the enterprise architecture is a process in parallel
with the evolution of the business strategy. The question should be asked
how do we architect the business to meet its evolving strategic needs and
the answer should lie in the continual evolution of the architecture. The ar-
chitecture is the interface between the strategic, what the enterprise wants
to do, and the operational, what it does.
    Strategic change in the organisation can lead to evolutionary changes
in the enterprise architecture but may require more radical change. For
example the merging of two organisations may require the integration of
their existing enterprise architectures into a new common EA. This is a
similar problem to the evolving enterprise architecture one but is likely
to require more substantive change. For example we may not be able to
assume that the concept ‘Customer’ is exactly the same in the two merg-
ing organisations so may need to examine this at some detail in order to
achieve successful integration. However in an organisation that is evolv-
ing from concrete to virtual trading, the concept of customer may be un-
dergoing equally significant change and the significance of this change
may be overlooked in the assumption that it is evolutionary.
    An organisation has a business strategy at a particular time; corre-
sponding to this strategy it has (or is in the process of developing) the
corresponding enterprise architecture for delivering this strategy. That
existing enterprise architecture describes and specifies a number of busi-
ness processes, data objects and applications which ‘operationalises’ the
architecture. Next the business introduces a new strategy, corresponding to
this we have desired enterprise architecture and its corresponding business
processes, data objects and applications. The practical problem becomes
how do we migrate from one EA to the next? Moreover we would want to
know the series of architectures (or roadmap) that would take us through
the required transitional architectures. How do we identify the changes
148                                Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



necessary in business processes, data objects, and applications required
and how do we manage the transitions.
    The following examples serve to highlight what is needed in the man-
agement of organisational change through evolving enterprise architec-
tures.

   • We need to be able to examine the ontology of concepts—what is a cus-
     tomer?
   • We need to be able to identify the dynamics of the elements—how does a
     customer come into existence, what determines the life of a customer, how
     is it terminated?
   • We need to be able to identify the agents responsible—who authorises the
     creation of a customer, who determines when a customer is no longer?
   • We need to be able to specify the business rules related to the behaviour of
     customers and agents.

    Existing methodologies and tools do not help use with these problems
they are mainly focused on the storage and retrieval of data, and the speci-
fication of data manipulation processes. An enterprise architectural ap-
proach can facilitate this thinking.
    Enterprise architecture has been widely adopted as a means to cope
with the ever-increasing complexity of organizations and to ensure that the
technical resources are appropriately employed and optimized [1]. EA is
the fundamental organization of the system, embodied in its elements, their
relationships to each other and to the environment and the principles guid-
ing its design and evolution [2], [3]. Enterprise architecture is described
as organizing logic for business processes and IT infrastructure, reflecting
the integration and standardization requirements of the company’s operat-
ing model in order to achieve business agility and profitable growth [4].
Currently, there exist a number of professional societies and organizations
that are working on the definition and the management of enterprise archi-
tecture such as The Open Group, Microsoft, and IBM. Indeed, EA repre-
sents much more than IT architecture. It is an integrated and holistic vision
of how the business processes across the enterprise, people, information,
applications and technologies align to facilitate strategic objectives. EA
frameworks identify the scope of EA and decompose various elements
of the architecture onto structured layers/levels and elements. Several EA
ADaPPT: Enterprise Architecture for Information Systems Development    149



frameworks have been adopted for operational use in many private and
governmental organizations.
    EA emerged as an idea in 1980 and is embodied in the early EA frame-
work developed by Zachman (1987) [5]. EA has re-emerged as a means to
cope with the ever-increasing complexity of organizations. This re-emer-
gence is closely related to the evolution of new business trends and to
the evolution of IT, particularly to the advances in Internet technologies.
These business trends comprise globalization, mergers and acquisitions,
e-commerce, as well as the increasing importance of customer relation-
ship management (CRM) and supply chain management. IT trends, on
the other hand, comprise the advances in Internet technologies, hardware
platform, application servers, and workflow servers. Due to the increasing
importance of EA, certification opportunities in EA are being offered by
several companies such as The Open Group and IBM in order to standard-
ize an open method for IT architecture to solve business problems.
    An EA approach is beneficial in aligning business and IT resources and
in conforming to fundamental principles and common methodologies that
govern the entire life cycle of the IS development process. In that sense,
architectural frameworks are considered to be a convenient way to support
such methodologies, and to separate roles that facilitate and implement
these methodologies as needed. Still, there are many organizational and
technical EA challenges.


8.4 ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE FRAMEWORK

EA frameworks identify the scope of the enterprise architecture and de-
compose various elements of the architecture onto structured levels and
elements [6]. More formally, EA frameworks describe a method for de-
signing IS in terms of a set of building blocks and how these blocks fit
together. Several EA frameworks such as ARIS [7] and DODAF [3] have
been adopted for operational use in many organizations. For example, the
Federal EA [8], has been adopted by the US government as a business-
driven framework in order to optimize some strategic areas. These areas
include budget allocation, information sharing, performance measure-
150                             Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



ment, and component based architecture. More specifically, EA frame-
works contain a list of recommended standards and compliant products
that are used to implement the building blocks for an IS. EA frameworks
are useful in terms of simplifying architecture development and ensuring
complete coverage of the designed solutions through a common terminol-
ogy. In that sense, these frameworks are language independent by provid-
ing generic concepts and common terminology through which different
EA stakeholders can communicate without making any assumptions about
each others’ language. Pragmatically, EA frameworks play a dual role.
Firstly, they serve as implementation tools; secondly, they can serve as
organisational planning tools.


8.5 THE ADAPPT APPROACH

ADaPPT was developed in work with organisations using the AL-
TAR (Achieving Learning Through Action Research) methodology [1].




FIGURE 1: ADaPPT Approach.
ADaPPT: Enterprise Architecture for Information Systems Development   151



ADaPPT has four domains (elements) (We call these elements because
just as the ancients believed that every thing was composed of the four
basic elements, Fire, Water, Air, Earth, so ADaPPT believes that every
business activity combines the basic elements of, People, Process, Data,
Technology): people, processes, technology and data.


8.5.1 ADAPPT: ALIGNING DATA, PEOPLE, PROCESSES, AND
TECHNOLOGY

There are two main views in ADaPPT: a organisational view and an imple-
mentation view. The model recognises that everything the enterprise does
involves people, processes, technology and data and that these need to be
aligned.

    “A process driven by people consumes resources (technology) and
    generates data.”

    In the ADaPPT framework the term people represents not only indi-
vidual people but groups within the organisation, departments, sections
etc. and also roles such as marketing manager etc. In as much as they can
initiate actions and be responsible for the processes of the organisation.
The term agent is also used.
    In ADaPPT process means all activity and actions within the organisa-
tion. This includes high level business processes—marketing, production
etc.; middle level activities—launching new products etc; operational ac-
tivities—checking an invoice—etc.
    In ADaPPT technology includes all services, material and equipment
used by the organisation. This includes computer and IT hardware and
software, raw materials and processed product.
    In ADaPPT data means all information both static and dynamic within
the organisation such as management targets, performance measures and
operational data: customer details etc.
    The organisational view in ADaPPT recognises that the nature the en-
terprise varies throughout the organisational hierarchy:
152                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



   • Strategic
   • Tactical
   • Operational

    As we climb the hierarchy processes become less well defined, soft
data becomes more important, the scope of responsibility becomes wider.
ADaPPT does not attempt to be a complete framework for all enterprise
needs it is focused on the business/technology issues.
    The implementation view recognises that there is a spectrum from
business through application to infrastructure. This can apply equally to
each domain. For example data can be viewed at: the business level ex-
pressed as E-R and other data models; at the application level expressed as
data structure diagrams; at the infrastructure level expressed through allo-
cation of data on storage devices. If we consider the interactions between
views we will see that the implementation view and the business views are
independent of each other. Thus an operational level business problem will
need to be addressed at the business level as a specification of the business
problem, at the application level as design of the solution to the problem
and at the infrastructure level by provision of software and other resources
to implement the solution.
    The ADaPPT framework thus has four domains each of which can be
described with a three by three matrix of views.

      “This is because enterprise planning is a complex process involving
      many thousands of elements. The ADaPPT approach aims to organise
      and simplify the process of thinking about and managing these thou-
      sands of elements.”


8.5.2 ADAPPT AS IMPLEMENTATION TOOL

ADaPPT in common with other EA frameworks provides a comprehen-
sive representation of IS in terms of its building blocks. In this context,
ADaPPT relates the necessary IS aspects/dimensions such as business pro-
cesses, data, and organization units to different perspectives at certain lev-
els of abstraction. These perspectives rely mainly on the difference in EA
ADaPPT: Enterprise Architecture for Information Systems Development      153



stakeholders’ views of the architecture that span different level of details.
EA frameworks, as components specification tools, encompass the docu-
mentation of the architectural layers, architectural domains, architectural
models, and architectural artefacts.
    Typically, EA frameworks such as ADaPPT are decomposed to three
architectural layers, which are business layer, application layer, and tech-
nology infrastructure layer [9]. The business layer describes the business
entities such as business processes and relevant business information,
and how these entities interact with each other to achieve enterprise wide
objectives. The application layer determines the data elements and the
software applications that support the business layer. The technology in-
frastructure layer comprises the hardware platforms and the communica-
tion infrastructure that supports the applications. Such layers are naturally
characterized by information aspects, behavioural aspects, and structural
aspects. As organizations consist of several units, the structural aspects
determine the static decomposition of these units to several sub-units. The
behavioural aspects show behaviour manifested in the sequence of activi-
ties and business processes performed to produce the needed services.
These units exchange information in order to carry out business tasks.
Each layer is naturally composed of several domains that reflect the in-
formation, behavioural, and structural aspects of the organizations. These
domains specify the architectural aspects such as process architecture,
product architecture, information architecture, technical architecture, and
application architecture. Indeed, these domains are the means to separate
the architectural concerns and reflect the view of different EA stakehold-
ers to the architecture. For example, the process domain, which is a part
of the business layer, describes business processes or business functions
that offer the products or services to an organization. These architectural
domains are typically described and documented by different architectural
models such as business process models, value chain diagrams, and orga-
nization charts. Architectural models serve as a basis for documenting the
different architectures by annotating the artefacts and their inter-relation-
ship that are needed to model an organization from different perspectives.
Architectural artefacts represent the necessary constructs and architectural
elements such as data, business processes, resources, and events that rep-
resent the real world objects needed to design distinct model types.
154                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




8.5.3 ADAPPT AS IMPLEMENTATION TOOL

ADaPPT in common with other some other EA frameworks provide a
holistic view of EA through the hierarchical layering, which implies the
alignment between, business, application, and technology infrastructure
layer. As such, business decisions and architecture planning can be made
in the context of whole instead of standalone parts. In other words, EA
frameworks such as ADaPPT make use of the abstractions in order to
simplify and isolate simple IS aspects/dimensions without losing sense of
the complexity of the enterprise as a whole. As an organisation planning
tools, ADaPPT entail baseline architecture, future architecture, architec-
tural roadmaps, and transition plans. Baseline architecture, which is also
known as ‘as-is’ view, encompasses the documentation of different lay-
ers and the existing components (models, diagrams, documents etc). This
architecture serves as a baseline for identifying the relationships between
different components and the gaps that should be filled for better organiza-
tional performance. Target architecture, which is also referred to as the ‘to
be’ view, specify the new EA components and the strategic initiatives that
should be carried out for the sake of bridging the gaps and ensuring com-
petitive advantage. This architecture should also identify the IT resources
and technological infrastructure that are needed for supporting the new
EA components in order to integrate the organization structure, business
processes, data, and technical resources. Architectural roadmaps represent
the intermediary EA alternatives of the baseline architecture generated in
the process mitigating the risks and analyzing the existing gaps in order
to shift to the target architecture. These roadmaps annotate the architec-
tural milestones performed prior to reaching the target architecture. EA
transition plans are merely specifications of an ‘as-is’ and ‘to-be’ view in
terms of managing the feasibility of architectural transition such as risk
assessment, gap analysis, and the supporting resources of the transition.
More specifically, transition plans document the activities that need to be
undertaken to shift from the baseline architecture to the target architec-
ture. Such plans are means to determine the desired future state of the en-
terprise wide goals, business processes, technical resources, organization
units, and data.
ADaPPT: Enterprise Architecture for Information Systems Development    155




FIGURE 2: ADaPPT and Zachman Framework.




8.5.4 ADAPPT AND OTHER EA FRAMEWORKS AND TOOLS

A range of tools can be used to model the architecture appropriate to the
different views. Where appropriate familiar tools are used across several
views so we do not need 36 different models as in the Zachman [5] ap-
proach eg E-R modelling is used for the Data Domain and UML can be
used in the Process Domain Business and Application Views. Figure 2 il-
lustrates a mapping between the Zachman approach and ADaPPT.
    One of the leading EA toolset is ARIS [7]. Whilst a toolset may sup-
port many frameworks it will also have an implicit ontology. ARIS is a
complex tool with an underlying Process Model. ARIS manages com-
plexity with four Views: Data View, Organization View, Function view,
Product Service View. ARIS supports a detailed process oriented view of
the organisation. However the basic units of ARIS fit easily within the
ADaPPT framework. There is no inconsistency in using ADaPPT as an EA
Framework and ARIS as the toolset to support the management and opera-
tion or the Enterprise's Architecture Repository. The four ARIS views are
apparently consistent with the ADaPPT framework. However it is worth
examining some of the lower level ARIS concepts to see if this apparent
alignment in high level concepts is reflected in the detail (see Figure 3).
    In ADaPPT it is possible to use conventional diagramming tools such
as MS Visio or complex EA diagrammers or even full blown modellers
156                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




FIGURE 3: ARIS concepts within ADaPPT Domain.




such as IDS Sheer. It is the way the different elements combine which cre-
ates business value. The main relationships in ADaPPT (see figure 4) are:

   • People: Initiate processes, Use data, Specify technology
   • Processes: Run on technology, Use technology, Generate data
   • Data: Stored on technology

    These can be represented in the various EA tools. These main rela-
tionships are important. Representing, exploring and planning related
to these elements is facilitated by, recognising and taking account of
the main relationships and their content from organisational and imple-
mentation perspectives as appropriate for the particular context under
consideration.
ADaPPT: Enterprise Architecture for Information Systems Development    157




FIGURE 4: The main relationships in ADaPPT.




8.6 CONCLUSIONS

Our ongoing work is applying ADaPPT based enterprise architecture
thinking for information systems development in public and private sec-
tor organisations. It provides a strong foundation for understanding the
strategic, managerial and operational issues in aligning people, processes,
data and technology and also in developing strategic, managerial and op-
erational approaches while ensuring the alignment of people, processes,
data and technology in an IS context. It is being used as the basis for
understanding how knowledge management can be improved and new
technologies exploited by organisations. Providing a basis for enabling
158                                    Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



the conceptualising of holistic, integrated and detailed consideration as
appropriate to the development stage and stakeholder perspective.


REFERENCES

 1.   Author, Eardley WA and Wood-Harper AT (2007) ALTAR: Achieving Learning
      Through Action Research, European Journal of Information Systems, Vol 16 No 6,
      Pp. 761-770.
 2.   IEEE (2006), "IEEE Standards Association, IEEE Std 1471-2000 IEEE Recom-
      mended Practice for Architectural Description of Software-Intensive Systems,
      http://standards.ieee.org/reading/ieee/std_public/description/se/1471-2000_desc.
      html," 2006.
 3.   DOD (2006), "DOD Architecture Framework, Systems and Software Consortium,
      http://www.software.org/pub /architecture/dodaf.asp," 2006.
 4.   J. W. Ross, P. Weill, and D. C. Robertson (2006), Enterprise Architecture as Strat-
      egy: Creating a Foundation for Business Execution. Boston, Massachausettes: Har-
      vard Business School Press Book.
 5.   J. A. Zachman (1987) "A Framework for Information Systems Architecture," IBM
      Systems Journal, Vol. 26, No. 3.
 6.   Author and El Kourdi M (2007), Enterprise Architecture Frameworks, IEEE IT Pro-
      fessional, Vol 9, No 5.
 7.   A.-W. Scheer (1999), Business Process Engineering: Reference Models for Indus-
      trial Enterprises, 2nd ed. berlin: Springer.
 8.   FEA (2003) CIO, " Practical Guide to Federal Enterprise Architecture," Enterprise
      Architecture Program Management Office, http://www.feapmo.gov.
 9.   H. Jonkers R. v. Buuren, F. Arbab, F. d. Boer, M. Bonsangue, H. Bosma, H. t. Doest,
      L. Groenewegen, J. G. Scholten, S. J. B. A. Hoppenbrouwers, M. E. Iacob, W. Jans-
      sen, M. M. Lankhorst, D. v. Leeuwen, H. A. Proper, A. Stam, L. v. d. Torre, and G.
      E. V. v. Zanten, (2003), "Towards a Language for Coherent Enterprise Architecture
      Descriptions," in 7th IEEE International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing
      Conference (EDOC 2003). Brisbane, Australia, 2003.
CHAPTER 9



A NEW METHOD OF PERFORMANCE
EVALUATION FOR ENTERPRISE
ARCHITECTURE USING STEREOTYPES
SAMANEH KHAMSEH, FARES SAYYADI,
and MOHAMMAD HOSEIN YEKTAIE




9.1 INTRODUCTION

These days, most organizations use the recent advances of information
technology for making strategic decisions. Many organizations have com-
plex infrastructure with improper architecture, low efficiency, flexibility
and speed to transfer the information. Enterprise architecture is a set of
representations or models described in connection with a description of
an organization, and the primary objective is to manage and use necessary
items. Architecture includes a large number of documents, which describe
all parts of organizations (Deft, 2000). The problem with this description
is on how they all be noted and be used. Therefore, to create order and
organization of the enterprise architecture description, a framework needs
to be applied. There are some shortcomings on modeling notation to cover
all C4ISR products and enterprise is one of the most important challenges
facing the C4ISR architecture framework. The necessity of such a model-
ing notation where the use of a variety of symbols and language model-
ing for cover crops, causing confusion and inconsistency and architecture



This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent. Khamseha
S, Sayyadib F, and Yektaiec MH. A New Method for Performance Evaluation of Enterprise Architec-
ture using Streotypes. Management Science Letters 3 (2013), DOI: 10.5267/j.msl.2013.10.012.
160                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



work is hard and complicated. The task of mapping products is normally
accomplished using Enterprise Architecture Framework C4ISR, which is
established by unified modeling language (UML) as an object-oriented
approach (Sowa & Zachman, 1992). However UML is unable to express
the needs of vague and indeterminate instances because the needs of us-
ers for information systems is based on the formation, Therefore, access
to some of the system's requirements is a challenging task. In order to
overcome these shortcomings, the Fuzzy-UML is implemented (Zadeh,
1983; Bostan- Korpeoglu & Yazici, 2006). In any enterprise architecture,
the process name, process enterprise architecture and the three-phase de-
velopment strategy, planning, architecture and implementation of the ar-
chitecture need to be clearly specified. According to Lindsay et al. (2003)
analysis of enterprise architecture planning phase can be accomplished to
evaluate the behavior and the performance evaluation. Since most soft-
ware systems are unable to handle all necessary needs in evaluating en-
terprise architecture, to evaluate these kinds of systems they must first
create an executable model. In this paper, to do this, a fuzzy colored Petri
nets are proposed. There are many ways to create an executable model of
the software and its evaluation. However, the primary objective of this
paper is based on an execution model using stereotypes fuzzy UML dia-
grams. To evaluate the behavior of enterprise architecture, the fuzzy UML
diagrams are used. However, in this paper, to create executable models
of software systems, the existing stereotypes in the use case diagram, se-
quence and deployment are applied. One of the most important parameters
implemented to evaluate a software system is associated with reliability
of a system and a system with high level of reliability ensures long-term
performance. In other words, reliability is defined as the probability that a
system will work, properly under pre-defined circumstances. In this paper,
by using an executable model of the stereotypes created by the three fuzzy
UML diagram above, we improve reliability of the system (Kaisler et al.,
2005).
    The remaining paper is organized as follows: The second part of the
paper is devoted in enterprise architecture description. In the third part of
the paper, we propose a method to evaluate the reliability of enterprise
architecture. The fourth section of the paper evaluates the results and find-
ings of the proposed algorithm implemented on a case study and the
A New Method of Performance Evaluation Using Stereotypes                    161



results are addressed. Finally, in the fifth section of the paper, conclusions
and future work are described.


9.2 LITERATURE REVIEW

There are various techniques to evaluate the architecture and the aim of
this paper is to investigate the effect of architectural styles, which is essen-
tial that the techniques based on the models and simulations used to evalu-
ate the architecture. To use this technique, it is necessary to first develop
a model to analyze and to evaluate architectures. Both models are mainly
for work done: First, the architecture products are designed, under certain
modeling language, and products and architecture, are commonly created
by standard modeling language like UML. Next, using these products,
we create a model for evaluating the architecture. For the ARCHIMATE
model, architecture is evaluated in terms of performance. With the nor-
mal practices of the organizational model and its parameters, this model is
suitable for quantitative analysis of architecture. For the proposed model,
we can quantitatively analyze the architecture, the language, the charac-
ters and relationships are added to the context in which certain quantities
can be determined. There is a method developed by Levis (Shin et al.,
2003), which creates an executable model and the main advantage of this
method is that Architecture Modeling Language UML is implemented in
this model, which is a popular technique. In this way, the enterprise ar-
chitecture implemented C4ISR architecture products are produced in this
context and colored Petri nets are applicable for this methodology (Wa-
genhals et al., 2003). OSAN is one of the powerful language modeling
for evaluating the architecture, especially the architecture performance
evaluation. Bai et al. (2008) applied a model of the architecture caused.
The advantage of this modeling language is that the model fully supports
object-oriented programming. In recent years, much attention is devoted
on evaluating enterprise architecture. JavadPour and Shams (2009) used
C4ISR as an architecture framework with regard to the fixed frame as ar-
chitectural structure, to evaluate the performance of the software architec-
ture with different behaviors (different styles) with Network Colored Petri
Nets. Mozaffari et al. (2011) performed an investigation on enterprise
162                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



architecture to analyze and to evaluate enterprise architecture knowledge
of software architecture design, to achieve appropriate architecture. Reza-
ei and shams (2009) presented a solution, which extracts the enterprise
architecture federal enterprise architecture framework. They also defined
the maturity level of the enterprise architecture that includes a detailed as-
sessment of the existing architecture. Here is emphasize is on the uncertain
nature of the system providing a technique for increasing the reliability of
the system (Behbahaninejad et al., 2012).


9.3 THE PROPOSED METHOD

This article focuses on assessment of the performance of enterprise archi-
tecture using stereotypes UML. UML is a standard language for describing
semi-formal enterprise architecture, which is easy to address functional
needs and to address uncertainty we use fuzzy terms and develop F-UML
(Ma, 2005; 2011b). Since UML is not a formal model, evaluation of soft-
ware systems is not possible, directly and we need to have the access to the
actual model. In this case, for the structural aspects of system, we use case
diagram, sequence diagram and deployment diagram to show the behavior
of the physical aspects of the system resources (Bernardi & Merseguer,
2007). The proposed solution using stereotypes performance in F-UML is
suitable for modeling and evaluating the performance of enterprise archi-
tecture. Fig. 1 shows details of our implementation.


9.3.1 STEREOTYPES USED IN USE CASE

Generally, any user on the use case represents a sequence of requests in the
system. This graph has the following stereotypes:

      1- <<PAopenload>>: Used in cases where the request sequence is in-
      finite that Tags <<PAoccurrence>> that is, the time between two con-
      secutive requests shows.
      2- <<PAcolsedload>>: Used in cases where the request sequence is
      limited and contains the following tag:
A New Method of Performance Evaluation Using Stereotypes   163




                                                           FIGURE 1: The flowchart of the proposed algorithm
164                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



      1-2- PApopulation: Shows the total number of requests in the system.
      2-2- PAextDelay: Full time interval between a request and subsequent
      interaction with the system show.

For the proposed algorithm, the use case diagram and label the stereotype
<< PAclosedload >> PApopulation, PAextDelay, are used.


9.3.2 STEREOTYPES USED IN SEQUENCE DIAGRAMS

In this diagram, all existing interactions in the system are displayed. To
add efficiency considerations on the sequence diagram, the stereotype <<
PAstep >> is used. These stereotypes include all of the following labels on
system reliability assessment, which are used:

      1- Label size: It specifies the size of the message.
      2- Label demand: Rate will apply to the supply of services.
      3- Label PAhost: The name is a reference to the requested resource.
      4- PAprob: Indicates the likelihood of the message.
      5- PArep: Indicates the message is repeated.


9.3.3 STEREOTYPES USED IN DEPLOYMENT DIAGRAMS

Deployment diagram explains how to get a picture of the physical system
resources. In this diagram, for additional performance information, the
stereotype << PAhost >> uses labels that include the following:

      1- Label PArate: Shows the processing rate.
      2- Label Schdpolicy: Policy schedule shows.

   In our proposed algorithm, to assess the reliability of the system, we
will also use these two tags.
   To enhance system reliability, the proposed algorithm uses the redun-
dancy technique. To this end, each message is assigned to more than one
component for parallel execution. Therefore, if one component fails dur-
A New Method of Performance Evaluation Using Stereotypes                 165




FIGURE 2: The proposed stereotypes with tags




ing execution, by replacing the components of the same source, we will
prevent the failure process and, thereby, we will increase system’s reli-
ability.
    To add redundancy to the system, only two stereotypes, PArate, PAde-
mand, will be manipulated. Thus, if we have n elements from a source sys-
tem, then the deployment diagram, n will have to PArate and graphs can
be arranged from 1 to n to do pAdemand. The following figure illustrates
this better than the words:
    We need to calculate reliability:
    If the CPU processing rate is rpp (PArate), service request rate from the
source is rpd (PAdemand) name, the first step is to calculate the service
rate as follows:

                                                                    (1)
             
            


   Order of SR[I,x], the service rate of component i in the X source.
   The service rate for each component of the resources at run time to
get the message size z with y (size) of component i, going to X source is
calculated as follows,

                 
                                                                (2)
                
166                                     Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    To the T[i, x, y], y is the size of the message by the time ith component
of x as a source.
    Since the proposed algorithm increases the reliability of the system,
using the redundancy technique, the simulations is carried out and each
message may be processed by several sources. Let Tx,r represents the mini-
mum time of the message x, therefore we have,

                                                    (3)



    For the execution of a task, all messages must be executed, so the time
to run messages, to run the greatest time of task execution time will be
considered. However, if the messages are dependent on each other, the
total running time of all times, as summarized in the task. Namely,

          
                                		

	                           (4)
                                                  
                               
          



    A completion of a task cannot be longer than logged and system reli-
ability can be calculated as follows:

           
                                                                                 (5)
                  
         



    We represent the entire task entered into the system. Let T* be the
same as Treliability. Ti computation time to run the task with the number I as
follows,

L(true)=1, L(false)=0                                                            (6)

    Let Pi be the number of running task, which is calculated as follows,
A New Method of Performance Evaluation Using Stereotypes             167



         

                                                               (7)
         



where qj denotes the probability of the message with the number j of task
i, which will be calculated as follows:

qj = p(e)bp * p(d)                                                    (8)

where P(e) is the possibility that e constituents working during process-
es, P(d) is the probability that communications channels is likely to be
healthy, bp is the number of components and e is busy status.
    In our proposed algorithm, if a message is performed by multiple
sources, to calculate the reliability we have:

                       

                                                 (9)
                      




FIGURE 3: Parallel system with resource
168   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




                                             FIGURE 4: Use case of ATM
A New Method of Performance Evaluation Using Stereotypes    169




                                                           FIGURE 5: Sequence Diagram for ATM
170   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




                                            FIGURE 6: Deployment Diagram for ATM
A New Method of Performance Evaluation Using Stereotypes      171




                                                           FIGURE 7: The high-level model of ATM
                                                    172




FIGURE 8: Subpage OF verify card and wait for pin
                                                    Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
A New Method of Performance Evaluation Using Stereotypes   173




                                                           FIGURE 9: Subpage for wait pin
174   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




                                              FIGURE 10: Subpage for check balance
A New Method of Performance Evaluation Using Stereotypes   175




                                                           FIGURE 11: Subpage for Pick cash
176                              Heavy Metal Contamination of Water and Soil



9.6 CASE STUDY

We now apply the proposed algorithm to measure the reliability for some
case studies. As an example, an automated teller machine (ATM), due
to its complexity and the possibility of Product Architecture Framework
C4ISR is considered. After describing the problem, the executable product
model architecture (diagrams UML) is created. Then, using the proposed
method and simulation CPN tools, we calculate the applicable reliability.
An ATM with another entity, the Client (User) and the Bank is the inter-
action. One of the main operations of customers in the system operation
is associated with “withdraw money” transaction. In this case, first, the
user has to insert bankcard into the ATM system. The bank, the validity of
the card, and ATM banking system and the password are requested from
the customer. If the card is invalid, the system retrieves the customer's
bank ATM card, otherwise the credibility of the customer is the key. If
the password is invalid, the system returns the card to the customer. Oth-
erwise, it shows the available system options such as cash withdraw and
transfer funds. Customer-options “withdraw money from the account” is
selected and the system will issue the requested withdrawal amount. This
is a message that customer enters to withdraw some amount money and
the system checks whether there is enough money in the account or not.
When there is insufficient amount of fund, the system gives a warning
to customer, otherwise, a bank ATM, withdraw amount is deducted from
customer's account. Finally, the client application and the back end of the
card, the customer can return the card system. As stated earlier, the pat-
tern of sequence diagram between components, i.e. the interactions among
different components are plotted. The following sequence diagram of use
case “withdraw money” shows.
    Fig. 6 shows deployment diagram for ATM.
    Fig. 7-11 demonstrates details of our implementation to create an ex-
ecutable model of a home page CPNTOOLS
    However, after creating an executable model of sequential phase dia-
gram and phase diagram of the user, the system calculates the reliability.
Fig. 12 demonstrates the reliability computed by our proposed algorithm
and comparison the reliability with an existing method.
A New Method of Performance Evaluation Using Stereotypes                           177




                                                           FIGURE 12: Compared proposed method with previous method
178                                     Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



   As we can observe from Fig. 12, using the redundancy in the system
increases the reliability of the system, significantly.


9.7 CONCLUSION

In this paper, an algorithm was presented in the diagrams using stereotypes
of F-UML and the reliability of the system was measured. We first evalu-
ated the performance of the stereotypes and some diagrams including use
case and sequence were used for the deployment using the art of FUML
technique. The performance of the proposed algorithm was compared
with other algorithms. The redundancy technique has been employed to
increase the reliability of the system. After creating an executable model,
their algorithm on a case study has been implemented. The results indicate
that the proposed algorithm provides more reliable results compared with
other previous algorithms.


REFERENCES

 1.   BaI, X.H. (2008). An application with UML object-based Petri Nets for C4ISR ar-
      chitecture simulation validation. proceeding of a seventh international conference on
      machine learning and cybernetics, Kunming.
 2.   Behbahaninejad, P., Harounabadi, A., & Mirabedini, S.J. (2012). Evaluating software
      architecture using fuzzy formal models. Management Science Letters, 2, 469–476.
 3.   Bernardi, S., & Merseguer, J. (2007). Performance Evaluation of UML Design with
      Stochastic Well- Formed Nets. The Journal of Systems and Software, 80, 1843–
      1865.
 4.   Bostan-Korpeoglu, B., & Yazici, A. (2006). A fuzzy Petri net model for intelligent
      database. Data & Knowledge Engineering, 8, 112-122.
 5.   Deft, R. (1983). Organisation theory and design. New York: West.
 6.   Javadpour, R., & Shams, F. (2009). Performance evaluation of electronic city ar-
      chitecture using colored Petri nets. The 2nd Conference on Electronic City, Tehran,
      May 2009.
 7.   Kaisler, S. H., Armour, F., & Valivullah, M. (2005). Enterprise architecting: Critical
      problems. Proceeding of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on system sci-
      ences, 8(8), 224.2.
 8.   Lindsay, A., Downs, D., & Lunn, K. (2003). Business processes—attempts to find a
      definition. Information and software technology, 45(15), 1015-1019.
A New Method of Performance Evaluation Using Stereotypes                             179


 9.    Ma, Z. (2005). Fuzzy Information Modeling With the UML. Idea Group Publishing,
       153-176.
 10.   Ma, Z.M., Zhang, F., & Yan, L. (2011a). Fuzzy information modeling in UML class
       diagram and relational database models. Applied Soft Computing, 11, 4236-4245.
 11.   Ma , Z.M. , Yan , L., & Zhang , F. (2011b). Modeling Fuzzy information in UML
       class diagrams and object oriented database models. Fuzzy Sets & Systems, 186,
       26-46.
 12.   Rezaei, R., & Shams, F. (2009). Providing a comprehensive method for developing
       and evaluating enterprise architecture plan. The first Conference on Enterprise Ar-
       chitecture in Practice, Isfahan, Iran.
 13.   Shin, M. E., Levis, A. H., & Wagenhals, L. W. (2003). Transformation of UML-
       based system model to design/CPN model for validating system behavior. In Proc.
       of the 6th Int. Conf. on the UML/Workshop on Compositional Verification of the
       UML Models.
 14.   Sowa, J. F., & Zachman, J. A. (1992). Extending and Formalizing the Framework for
       Information Systems Architecture. IBM Systems Journal, 31(3), 590-616.
 15.   Wagenhals, L. W., Haider, S., & Levis, A. H. (2003). Synthesizing executable mod-
       els of object oriented architectures. Systems Engineering, 6(4), 266-300.
 16.   Zadeh, L.A. (1983). The role of fuzzy logic in the management of uncertainty in
       Expert System. Fuzzy Sets Systems, 11, 199-227.
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 10



SIX SIGMA DRIVEN ENTERPRISE
MODEL TRANSFORMATION
RAYMOND VELLA, SEKHAR CHATTOPADHYAY,
and JOHN P. T. MO




10.1 INTRODUCTION

The volatility of current business environment requires companies to
adapt to new processes and systems to satisfy customer requirements as
well as remaining competitive (Rho et al, 2001). Business enterprise is
inherently a complex entity. There are many risks involved in the changes
that an enterprise needs to go through in order to transform itself to a more
competitive form (Beasley et al, 2005). Typical risks include collabora-
tion, confidentiality, intellectual property, transfer of goods, conflicts, op-
portunity loss, product liability and others. Inappropriate actions can be
taken if the information is out of date (Kutsch & Hall, 2005) or the em-
ployee performance can be seriously affected (Lin & Wei, 2006). Kwon et
al (2007) reported that those enterprises going through significant organ-
isational change and downsizing of IT function was not simply reducing
the workforce in the IT department. It also eliminated communication and
information-processing conduits necessary for effective communication
and coordination.




This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent. Vella R,
Chattopadhyay S, and Mo JPT. Six Sigma Driven Enterprise Model Transformation. International
Journal of Engineering Business Management, 1,1 (2009), pp. 1-8. DOI: 10.5772/6787
182                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    The uncertainty in business environment presents many research oppor-
tunities implementing engineering changes in enterprises. Rouse (2005a)
found that value deficiencies and work processes defined the problem of
Enterprise Transformation and that many fundamental changes addressed
value from the perspective of the customer. Rouse also discussed how
the problem solving and decision making ability of management could
influence the outcomes of transformation, but did not elaborate on specific
tools to guide the transformation. Yin and Shanley (2008) proposed a three
dimensions model that could assist decision makers to merge or form al-
liances. Oberg et al (2007) presented the concept of “network pictures”
as the modelling framework to illustrate and analyse changes in manage-
rial sensemaking and networking activities following a enterprise change.
They concluded that following a major enterprise transformation manag-
ers may need to adapt their previous network structure in a radical way.
    The dynamics of enterprise change was analysed by Marino and Zabo-
jnik (2006). In their analysis, if new firms can enter the market quickly, it
is more likely that enterprise change is motivated by efficiency improve-
ment as opposed to increased market power. Thus, there is less reason to
challenge the change as it comes internally. However, many enterprises
that have problems making changes generally suffer from human or or-
ganisational resistance (Buhman et al, 2005; Corbett, 2007). It is clear
from these studies that issues on enterprise change should be dealt with in
a systematic fashion, supported by a methodology that assists the whole of
enterprise to transform.
    Enterprise modelling is best used to analyse the business in both manu-
facturing and service sectors in terms of complexities and context. Enter-
prise reference architectures provide a structure to understand enterprise
activities, for example, promote planning, reduce risk, implement new
standard operating procedures and controls, rationalizing manufacturing
facilities. Dewhurst et al (2002) identified five key design issues in con-
structing a generic enterprise model (GEM) when they attempted to “de-
sign” the enterprise model. Study of enterprise architecture requirements
in the last decade has been focused on how enterprises can be designed and
operated in relatively static, authoritative environment (Molina & Medina,
2003; Mo et al, 2006). These enterprise engineering researches shared a
common starting point, viz, stepwise, multi-dimensional enterprise mod-
Six Sigma Driven Enterprise Model Transformation                         183



elling and design methodologies have been applied. The rationale to use
enterprise engineering methodologies to guide these developments is to
minimize the impact of uncertainty to enterprise performances as well as
other associated processes (Ortiz et al, 1999).
    There are limitations in the present enterprise modelling methodolo-
gies when applying them to modelling enterprise transformation. Current
enterprise architectures are described tacitly with the assumption that the
present state of enterprise does not change during the life cycle of the “en-
terprise engineering project” (Chen et al, 2008). In recent years, six sigma
methodology (Jochem, 2006) has been embraced by many large and small
corporations. The process focus of six sigma can benefit an enterprise by
providing the means to develop a road map and initiate the required enter-
prise transformation that could become culturally more ingrained within
the organisation. This paper examines the traditional approach of enter-
prise transformation by enterprise modelling design and explores how six
sigma methodology can be used to facilitate a systematic enterprise mod-
elling process providing a culturally embedded framework for enterprise
transformation. We then propose a unified methodology incorporating six
sigma in enterprise transformation and illustrate our proposed methodol-
ogy by a case study.


10.2 ENTERPRISE TRANSFORMATION BY ARCHITECTURE
DESIGN

To achieve enterprise transformation, architecture design approach uses
the modelling formalism to create a baseline manufacturing enterprise
model. The Generalised Enterprise Reference Architecture and Method-
ology (GERAM), which is an annex of ISO 15704, is a combined effort
of an international task force (Williams et al, 1994). Based on a generic
enterprise reference architecture, an enterprise model is captured as a busi-
ness process engineering life cycle as shown in Figure 1.
   Details of the physical, information and human structures are recorded
by modelling formalisms and tools. For example, manufacturing processes
are recorded as material flow charts. Management practices are captured
as work flow diagrams. IT system architectures are captured in software
184                                  Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




FIGURE 1: The Generic Enterprise Reference Architecture



engineering tools, and so on. The methodology helps enterprise engineers
to encapsulate functions and processes within the enterprise. In a typical
enterprise improvement process, the current state of the enterprise is cap-
tured. The problems in the current state are identified. The generic meth-
odology helps the business process engineer to visualise “snapshots” that
lead to the identification of trends and changes in the enterprise architec-
ture (Figure 2). Over time, enterprise models are changed progressively.
The outcome is a new enterprise model that describes the desired state of
the enterprise at a particular time. The enterprise model outlines the ele-
ments of an enterprise engineering process that leads to suitable execut-
able reference architecture for an organisation to deliver the responsive-
Six Sigma Driven Enterprise Model Transformation                          185



ness. They are useful for enterprises where internal functions are clearly
defined and changes to parts of the system can be controlled at system
component boundaries. After the enterprise model is developed, simula-
tion technique can be used to evaluate the anticipated effect of enterprise
design decisions to system performance (Love & Barton, 1996).
    Traditional enterprise architectures are based on topdown approach.
They emphasized on consistency throughout the organization and will in-
volve all levels of employees. Normally, such a change is significant, since
the organisation must have felt substantial pressure for a change that is
more fundamental in nature. Changing the structure from current state to
future state is often too long for dealing with the problem that the change
intends to fix. The top-down approach also attracts inherent resistance to
change from lower parts of the organisation. Furthermore, due to the fast
changing business environment, the new model of the enterprise is a mov-
ing target. It takes a long time to progress from the current model to the
newly designed enterprise architecture. When the changes are done half
way through the transition, the enterprise designer is already under pres-
sure to make further changes to the design under the new environment.
    The enterprise architecture design approach focuses on designing the en-
terprise at different anticipated development stages using established enter-
prise design guiding principles (Uppington & Bernus, 2003). The success of
the new (future) enterprise depends on the “correctness” of the enterprise vi-
sion and well managed implementation. Although simulation technique can
assist in clarifying the effect of some design factors, there are many other
aspects of the enterprise that can be simulated or foreseen. The transforma-
tion is therefore risky and nonresponsive to external environment. There is
no systematic study of how an enterprise should be transformed to achieve
a less risky but progressive path. A new approach is required to assist enter-
prises not only in defining their enterprise model, but also on re-engineering
their processes and structures in a predictable way.


10.3 CHANGE PROCESSES IN SIX SIGMA

Everything in a business can be viewed as a process. Thus, an enterprise
can be viewed as a collection of integrated processes interweaved with the
186                                        Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



four views of the enterprise in Figure 1. A manufacturing enterprise re-
ceives an order, schedules the production, builds the product, delivers the
product and receives payment. A service enterprise receives a customer re-
quest, schedules a customer appointment, delivers the service and receives
payment. For process improvement, six sigma has been well recognised as
a powerful tool and as an imperative for achieving and sustaining opera-
tional and service excellence. While the original focus of six sigma was
on manufacturing, today it has been widely accepted in both service and
transactional processes (Jiju, 2004).

TABLE 1: DMAIC and DMADV processes
DMAIC                                            DMADV
D     Define the project goals and customer      D   Define the project goals and customer
      (internal and external) CTS deliverables       (internal and external) CTS deliverables



M     Measure the process CTS deliverables       M   Measure and determine customer needs
      to determine current performance using         and specifications
      verified measurements
A     Analyze and determine the root cause(s)    A   Analyze and characterize the process
      of the defects                                 options to meet the customer needs
I     Improve the process by eliminating         D   Design (detailed) and optimize the
      defects                                        process to meet the customer needs
C     Control future process performance         V   Verify the design performance and abil-
                                                     ity to meet customer needs


    Six sigma is a methodology for process improvement through reduced
variability and the elimination of defects. Six sigma addresses system de-
ficiencies using data to make decisions and formulating data driven solu-
tions (Smith, 2001). The tool set is a collection of well known methods and
techniques that is readily available. Intuition may be used to brainstorm,
but all decisions are made using measurable data benchmarked against a
set of Critical to Satisfaction (CTS) criteria, hence achieving measurable
financial returns to the bottom line of an organisation.
    Six sigma is structured as a sequence of processes. DMAIC and
DMADV are two streams of processes dealing with specific changes in
organisations. DMAIC methodology is used to improve existing products
or processes that are not performing to target or not meeting customer ex-
pectation. DMADV is used when the process or product does not already
                                                                            Six Sigma Driven Enterprise Model Transformation




FIGURE 2: Enterprise models at different phases of enterprise development
                                                                            187
188   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




                                            FIGURE 3: Spiral six sigma improvement cycle
Six Sigma Driven Enterprise Model Transformation                        189




FIGURE 4: Enterprise model transformations




exist and one is required or when an existing process can not be optimised.
Both streams consist of five steps as shown in Table 1. Six sigma processes
are best represented as a cyclic spiral continuous improvement methodol-
ogy (Figure 3).
    Six sigma is a tool that can create a new process or improve existing
processes. Its main scope of application has been on making incremental
changes to particular segments of an enterprise such as cultural change,
customer focus, process elements and statistical methods of improvement
(Goh, 2002). Extension of this scope to an enterprise wide improvement
is not common. Goel and Chen (2008) discussed business process re-en-
gineering in the context of integrating a global enterprise using six sigma.
They focussed on defining metrics for process analysis and refinement
with the appropriate identification and analysis of tools to make the pro-
cess transformation. However, the total picture of how the processes are
linked in the organisation and the selection of which process should be
transformed was not discussed.
    The overall objective of enterprise transformation is to improve or re-
define the inadequate business processes with appropriate tools to ensure
190                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



the process requirements are satisfied and that relevant targets such as cost,
delivery, productivity, and so on are met (McGinnis, 2007). Török (2008)
emphasises the need to begin with the strategic business level so as to
identify and confront the serious business challenges. These cascade to the
operational level which identifies potential six sigma projects where each
project then contributes to the strategic business requirement and result-
ing enterprise transformation. Rouse (2005b) argued that research in en-
terprise transformation should include transformation methods and tools,
which should represent, manipulate, optimize, and portray input, work,
state, output and value for the past, present and future of the enterprise.
Six sigma needs a clear, transparent integrated definition and description
of the processes of the enterprise for it to optimise and operate success-




FIGURE 5: GERAM alignment with six sigma
Six Sigma Driven Enterprise Model Transformation                        191



fully. Since enterprise architecture design approach uses tools and meth-
ods that take a bird’s eye view of an enterprise, we propose a methodology
combining the two approaches to maximise global improvement outcomes
during enterprise model transformation.


10.4 TRANSITION BETWEEN ENTERPRISE MODELS

Enterprise modelling provides a total enterprise view of processes, re-
sources and technology. The level of integration, duplication or inefficien-
cy in various processes may be derived through the development of the
“As Is” enterprise model. Figure 4 shows a generic roadmap for enterprise
model transformation. The existing business is represented with enterprise
model M1 (the “AS IS” model). The forecast requirement is for an enter-
prise model as represented by enterprise model Mn (the “TO BE” model).
    Enterprise modelling based transformation can be compared to six
sigma methodology with the life cycle views of GERAM. Figure 5 shows
how each of the five steps in six sigma would align with the phases of the
enterprise lifecycle view.
    In an “AS IS” enterprise model, the entire enterprise development is
described as a snapshot of processes overlaying the four views. Irrespec-
tive of which phase a process has been developed, each process is ex-
plored to details as if it has been fully designed, implemented, operated
and decommissioned. The enterprise is then regarded as fully described. If
there is no change in identification and concept, which are often influenced
by external parameters, the enterprise will progress through its lifecycle.
Actual performance for each process may be benchmarked against targets
thus highlighting processes with short fall performance. If the enterprise
chooses, these processes can then be identified as candidates for six sigma
projects, in which the processes are improved by focussing either on vari-
ability using the DMAIC process or redesigned using the DMADV pro-
cess.
    Six sigma has a narrow focus in its projects. Narrowness confines ob-
jectives in specific areas that maximise project support and ultimately aim
at a successful conclusion. Transformation projects are selected by iden-
tifying what is critical to satisfaction (CTS) for the customer and what
192                                  Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




FIGURE 6: Transition plan with six sigma



areas of the business are deficient. Six sigma methodology contains tools
to identify measurable deliverables required for customer satisfaction
and identifies areas, processes or inputs that influence these deliverables
(Smith & Fingar, 2003). Identifying and prioritizing these areas, processes
or inputs against relevant criteria is one method that can be used to select
six sigma projects that will lead to effective progressive enterprise trans-
formation. The “AS IS” enterprise model can have varying levels of model
maturity and granularity. Using six sigma, the business process engineer
can focus on the relevant area and develop the necessary detail within the
project scope. Thus, as shown in Figure 6, a six sigma project will take the
“AS IS” enterprise model as the basis that represents the current real world
condition and establish the relevant CTS criteria. This intuitive alignment
between the two methodologies encourages the integration of six sigma
methodology when generating new enterprise models. As the enterprise
model is measured and analysed, six sigma methodology continues to re-
Six Sigma Driven Enterprise Model Transformation                          193



fine CTS that will ultimately changes the concept and requirements of the
enterprise with a context shift of who the customer is. Thus, as the context
or view changes, this will enable the creation of, or improvement of, pro-
cesses resulting in the “TO BE” enterprise model.
    The added benefit of using six sigma is that a set of controls can be
established for the process and the enterprise which should be included in
the enterprise model. With dynamic market demands, the critical to quality
characteristics of today would not necessarily be meaningful tomorrow.
All CTSs should be critically examined at all times and refined as neces-
sary. For this reason, a control plan developed from the last stage of the six
sigma project should provide measures that indicate the performance and
continued relevance of the processes within the transformed enterprise
model. This can be an effective way of maintaining the enterprise model
and relevance of the business to changing conditions.


10.5 PROGRESSIVE ENTERPRISE TRANSFORMATION PROCESS

The issue of enterprise transformation is the uncertainty of future enter-
prise models, in other words, Mn may not be fully described! This means
the roadmap for transformation from M1 to Mn may not be defined until
very late in the project causing significant disruption of the transforma-
tion process and turbulence in the enterprise. Change from M1 to Mn is
normally significant due to the fact that an organisation will normally seek
advice from a wide variety of resources to achieve the new design. This
change is too abrupt and will impose significant organisational turmoil and
reduce the ability of the enterprise to compete against other organisations.
    Six sigma process has the advantage of self adjusting the system to suit
the need of changes. The question is how to integrate six sigma tools as the
method to make changes that are more than just continuous optimisation
of a process. Linking six sigma with Enterprise Modelling to transform
current state “AS IS” enterprise models to future state “TO BE” enterprise
models with a clear road map is required.
    If we follow the six sigma methodology, we will focus the transforma-
tion on process elements that have measurable CTS indicators relevant
                                                                                       194




FIGURE 7: Enterprise model transformations with progressive six sigma driven changes
                                                                                       Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
Six Sigma Driven Enterprise Model Transformation                           195



to internal business and external customer requirements. Therefore, as
discussed in Figure 6, the CTSs form the foundation for decision mak-
ing when redesigning or improving the process. The same indicators may
form the controls to ensure continued performance of the new process or
as indicators of when the new process is no longer relevant. Six sigma
projects close the transformation loop by mapping CTS driven design re-
quirements of the revised enterprise model.
    Six sigma produces data driven solutions with relevant new and/or im-
proved processes for the next “TO BE” enterprise model. It is therefore
imperative that the initial “As Is” Enterprise Model contains accurate and
relevant CTS information. It may be necessary to redefine the “AS IS”
enterprise model to ensure that the CTS indicators and measurables are
included and that the enterprise model does in fact represent the real life
situation. This is in essence the first step (Define) of the six sigma project.
The decision for any redesign efforts over traditional continuous improve-
ment depends on a number of variables including risk, available technol-
ogy & resources, cost, customer demand, time and complexity etc. This
is part of the six sigma methodology and covered in the “Define” stage
present in both DMAIC and DMADV based projects.
    Instead of having an abrupt change between two major enterprise mod-
els, the new transition methodology divides the gap into many manageable
steps (Figure 7). The intermediate “TO BE” enterprise models Mi (1<i<n)
in these steps are developed through six sigma projects. The changes are
simple enough to be redefined. However, our emphasis is to make the
change as smooth and manageable as possible to minimise impact. How-
ever, the future model Mn is defined to ensure a consistent approach or
direction that governs each intermediate state to be processed by six sigma
projects or a combinations of many grouped projects.
    The road map developed for Enterprise Model transformation can
be context related. The detail of each progressive enterprise model on
the roadmap of enterprise transformation to Mn can be derived from
six sigma projects with emphasis on the appropriate Mi design goals
towards the ultimate state. This six sigma driven transformation be-
comes an iterative and progressive process of making changes lead-
ing to the larger enterprise model transformation in a similar manner
to climbing Mount Everest. As the summit is ascended one step at a
196                         Obesity Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, and Treatmen



time, a new intermediate enterprise model may be developed until
the summit can be reached in a final project. This progressive method
of transformation is a logical approach for the enterprise model de-
velopment that could become culturally more ingrained within the
organisation already embracing six sigma for need based ongoing
Enterprise Model Transformation (EMT).
    In a more generic perspective, combining enterprise modelling with
six sigma provides many benefits. Six sigma projects benefit from a big
picture of the process lifecycle with the respective views or contexts.
Enterprise modelling gains a tool set with methodology for transform-
ing an “AS IS” enterprise model to the “TO BE” state. Within any stage
of the lifecycle, the proposed alignment of the six sigma methodolo-
gy to the generic enterprise architecture views remains the same. The
changes from Mi to Mi+1 is by methodological design to be incremental
and manageable. The same tools and methods remain applicable during
each of the steps used in transforming the different views of the enter-
prise model. The enterprise does not expect surprising disruption in this
process and hence can progress smoothly through the enterprise model
transformation.


10.6 CASE STUDY: ENGINEERING APPROVAL PROCESS CHANGE

We illustrate our proposed progressive enterprise model transformation
approach by a case study at Ford Australia Pty Ltd. A process re-engineer-
ing project is presented here illustrating the use of six sigma as the tool
to implement a needs based enterprise model transformation. The need
for enterprise change was initiated by the long time required to approve
engineering changes within the Product Development Organisation. From
operational point of view, this change was driven by internal customer
expectations. The case scenario is described below.
    A new vehicle product development engineering service provided by
Ford of Australia (FoA) to Ford India Private Limited (FIPL) required
that an engineering change management process be extended to include
approvals from FIPL. The initial implementation of the change manage-
                                                                         Six Sigma Driven Enterprise Model Transformation




FIGURE 7: Engineering approval process enterprise model transformation
                                                                         197
198                          Obesity Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, and Treatmen



ment process was slow, cumbersome and did not meeting the needs of the
business.
    The change management activity was mapped including processes and
organizational structure. A manifestation model of the present "AS IS"
(M1) state was produced for that section of the organization. The require-
ments critical to customer satisfaction were identified and stated as a prob-
lem definition—completing the first stage of the six sigma methodology
(Define). The “AS IS” enterprise model was found to be a linear process
with static work flow. It was not obvious what the process issues were
or what departments produced the delays. Issues seemed to be regular in
occurrence, but unique in nature. An "AS IS" model of the implementa-
tion phase was available, however, accuracy was uncertain and there were
no clear measures or controls to identify process deficiencies or where
changes may be required.
    The desirable future enterprise model (Mn) would have many of the
processes running in parallel and the ability to assure clear track and trace
of work items in the system. There was also expectations of reduction of
costs in the new model.
    Following six sigma methodology, key process and resource elements
identified in the updated manifestation Enterprise Model were used to
develop suitable measurable metrics that would reflect the process per-
formance. These metrics focused on critical to satisfaction outcomes that
included activities contributing to the delay of engineering change approv-
als. The metrics allowed key elements of the process to be measured and
areas of deficiency to be identified.
    During the Measure phase of the six sigma methodology, it was clear
that not all the metrics were readily available. Key performance measures
could not be effectively measured with the current manifestation of the
Enterprise. This was the driver for the first level of transformation, the
use of a change management and approvals database. The database would
automatically report the performance metrics against agreed departmental
targets. This paved the way for the development of a road map that would
define the next phase of Enterprise Model transformation with a new Op-
erational Enterprise Model.
    The initial minor transformation with the database provided metrics
data that was analysed after one month using six sigma statistical methods.
Six Sigma Driven Enterprise Model Transformation                        199



It became clear how the new present model of this engineering activity
was functioning and where the delays originated. The model identified a
serial process flow. Performance metrics for each stage of the model were
added presenting a clear view of what was happening in the enterprise.
Certain model activities were not necessary. Some activities were inde-
pendent and were realigned as parallel activities. A new "TO BE" model
(M2) was created with multiple parallel activities. Some new tools were
introduced and data from different activities were integrated within the
newly established change management database. In this case, poor change
management performance was the deficiency. The transformation did not
reduce variability. It changed the operational definition and introduced in-
tegrated tools to address values from the perspective of the customer. The
Enterprise Model Transformation that has gone through Ford Australia is
illustrated in Figure 8.
    The six sigma methodology provided the framework to define the prob-
lem and apply the standard tools to identify metrics that would measure
the existing "AS IS" performance. Interim progressive change was identi-
fied and actioned to help make the transition to the final model (M2). The
final Enterprise Model (M2) would address areas requiring transformation
to correct the operational deficiency. Appropriate metrics and data were
used to make decisions on where to transform the business when the extent
of the transformation was not clear. The metrics to measure and sustain the
improvements were built into the new "TO BE" model.


10.7 CONCLUSION

If we accept that an enterprise needs to adapt and transform its processes
to meet changing output deliverables and customer expectation within an
increasingly competitive global environment, we must then have a plan
or method by which we could transform the enterprise. Enterprise model-
ling alone is not sufficient in instigating this transformation. This paper
has illustrated the importance of a new progressive enterprise transforma-
tion process supported by established enterprise modelling and six sigma
methodologies.
200                                     Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    The new six sigma driven enterprise transformation process is devel-
oped first with a description of an alignment of six sigma with the refer-
ence views in generic enterprise architecture and an outline of the frame-
work that encourages the combined benefits of enterprise modelling and
six sigma. This generalised framework provides the roadmap for enter-
prise transformation with readily accepted six sigma tools.
    Six sigma focuses on the scope down to incremental improvement
projects. Enterprise transformation based on enterprise modelling ap-
proach provides a visionary target for the business process engineer to
work on. When combining the two methodologies, we can establish the
total enterprise picture with the “TO BE” future state, complete with road
map and six sigma tools to transform the enterprise can be established.
    This proposed approach has been illustrated by a case study. This is
an example of how six sigma methodology can be aligned with enterprise
modelling to make effective, significant and progressive enterprise trans-
formations. The “TO BE” enterprise model, together with a set of qual-
ity criteria as controls, becomes the new operational “AS IS” enterprise
model and in the Everest analogy, forms one of the many steps to reaching
the summit of enterprise model transformation. Further work is required
to detail and standardize the processes of creating effective links between
enterprise modelling and six sigma in a unified framework. The six sigma
driven enterprise model transformation is a progressive enterprise change
process and has proven to induce least disruption to business. It is a less
risky approach for enterprise model transformation and improvement.


REFERENCES

 1.   Beasley, M.S., Clune, R., Hermanson, D.R. (2005). Enterprise risk management: An
      empirical analysis of factors associated with the extent of implementation. Journal
      of Accounting and Public Policy, 24, 521-531
 2.   Buhman, C., Kekre, S., Singhal, J. (2005). Interdisciplinary and interorganizational
      research: establishing the science of enterprise networks. Production and Operations
      Management, 14(4), 493-514
 3.   Chen, D., Doumeingts, G., Vernadat, F. (2008). Architectures for enterprise integra-
      tion and interoperability- Past, present and future. Computers in Industry, Vol.59,
      Iss.7, Sept, pp.647-659
Six Sigma Driven Enterprise Model Transformation                                         201


 4.    Corbett L. M. (2008). Manufacturing strategy, the business environment, and op-
       erations performance in small low tech firms. International Journal of Production
       Research. pub. Taylor and Francis. Vol.46, Iss.20, pp.5491-5513
 5.    Dewhurst, F.W., Barber, K.D., Pritchard, M.C. (2002). In search of a general enter-
       prise model. Management Decision, 40(5), 418-427
 6.    Goel S., Chen, V. (2008). Integrating the global enterprise using six sigma: Business
       process reengineering at General Electric Wind Energy. International Journal of Pro-
       duction Economics, Volume 113, Issue 2, June, pp.914-927
 7.    Goh, T.N. (2002). A strategic assessment of six sigma. Quality and Reliability Engi-
       neering International, Vol. 18 No.5, pp.403-410.
 8.    Jiju, A. (2004). Six sigma in the UK Service Organizations: results from a pilot sur-
       vey. Managerial Auditing Journal, Vol.19, No.8, pp.1006-1013
 9.    Jochem, R. (2006). Enterprise Engineering Method supporting six sigma Approach.
       Proceedings of the 11th World Congress on Total Quality Management, 4-6 Decem-
       ber, Wellington, NZ
 10.   Kutsch E., Hall M., Intervening conditions on the management of project risk: Deal-
       ing with uncentainty in information technology projects, International Journal of
       Project Management, 23, 2005, 591-599
 11.   Kwon, D., Oh, W., Jeon, S. (2007). Broken ties: The impact of organizational re-
       structuring on the stability of information-processing networks, Journal of Manage-
       ment Information Systems, 24(1):201-231
 12.   Lin, C.Y.Y., Wei, Y.C. (2006). The role of business ethics in merger and acquisition
       success: An empirical study, Journal of Business Ethics, 69(1):95-109
 13.   Love, D., Barton, J. (1996). Evaluation of design decisions through CIM and simula-
       tion. Integrated Manufacturing Systems, 7(4), 3-11
 14.   Marino, A.M., Zabojnik, J. (2006). Merger, ease of entry and entry deterrence in a
       dynamic model, Journal of Industrial Economics, 54(3):397-423
 15.   McGinnis, L. F. (2007). Enterprise modeling and Enterprise Transformation. Infor-
       mation knowledge Systems Management 6(1/2), 123-143
 16.   Mo J.P.T., Zhou M., Anticev J., Nemes L., Jones M., Hall W. (2006). A study on the
       logistics and performance of a real ‘virtual enterprise. International Journal of Busi-
       ness Performance Management, 8(2-3):152-169
 17.   Molina, A., Medina, V. (2003). Application of enterprise models and simulation
       tools for the evaluation of the impact of best manufacturing practices implementa-
       tion. Annual Reviews in Control, 27:221–228
 18.   Oberg, C., Henneberg, S. C., Mouzas, S. (2007). Changing network pictures: Evi-
       dence from mergers and acquisitions. Industrial Marketing Management, 36(7):926-
       940
 19.   Ortiz, A., Lario, F., Ros, L. (1999). Enterprise Integration—Business Processes Inte-
       grated Management: a proposal for a methodology to develop Enterprise Integration
       Programs. Computers in Industry, Vol.40, pp.155, 171
 20.   Rho B. H., Park K., Yu Y. M. (2001). An international comparison of the effect of
       manufacturing strategyimplementation gap on business performance. International
       Journal of Production Economics, Vol.70, pp.89-97
 21.   Rouse, W. B. (2005a). A Theory of Enterprise Transformation. Systems Engineer-
       ing. Wiley InterScience, Vol.8, Iss.4, pp.279-295
202                                   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks


22. Rouse, W.B. (2005b). Enterprises as systems: Essential challenges and enterprise
    transformation, Systems Engineering, Vol.8, Iss.2, pp.138-150
23. Smith, H., Fingar, P. (2003). Digital six sigma – Integrating continuous improve-
    ment, with continuous change, with continuous learning. BPTrends, Pub. Boston
    University Corporate Education Centre, http://www.bptrends.com, December
24. Smith, L.R., (2001). Six sigma and the Evolution of Quality in Product Develop-
    ment. Six Sigma Forum Magazine, Vol.1, No.1, pp.28-35
25. Török, J. (2004). 1-2-3 Model for Successful Six Sigma Project Selection. Pub. iSix-
    Sigma.com. First pub. 20 April 2005. Retrieved December 27, 2008, from http://
    europe.isixsigma.com/library/content/c050420b.asp
26. Uppington, G., Bernus, P. (2003). Analysing the Present Situation and Refining
    Strategy. In “Handbook on Enterprise Architecture”, Ed. Bernus, P., Nemes, L.,
    Schmidt, G. pub. Springer-Verlag, ISBN 3-540-00343-6, pp.309-332
27. Williams T.J., Bernus P., Brosvic J., Chen D., Doumeingts G., Nemes L., Nevins
    J.L., Vallespir B., Vlietstra J., Zoetekouw D. (1994). Architectures for integration
    manufacturing activities and enterprises. Computers in Industry, 24:111-139
28. Yin, X.L., Shanley, M. (2008). Industry determinants of the "merger versus alliance"
    decision. Academy of Management Review, 33(2):473-491
    PART III

IMPLEMENTATIONS
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 11



EVALUATING AND REFINING
THE “ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE
AS STRATEGY” APPROACH AND
ARTIFACTS
M. DE VRIES and A. C. J. VAN RENSBURG




11.1 INTRODUCTION

Contrary to the information technology and cost reduction foci of previous
EA endeavours, this research is used to emphasise a new value-creation
focus that includes business architecture and enables business strategy. In
support of this new focus, Ross et al. [1] defined a new EA approach that
incorporates EA decision-making as part of the strategic decision-making
processes of an organisation. Action research is used to gain qualitative
feedback on the perceived practicality of two key artefacts that are used to
underpin this new approach.


11.2 ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE DEFINED

The first traces of EA were found in the publication of Zachman [2]. Zach-
man [3] defined EA as follows: “Descriptive representations (i.e. models)
that are relevant for describing an enterprise such that it can be produced


This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent. de Vries M
and van Rensburg ACJ. Evaluating and Refining the ‘Enterprise Architecture As Strategy’ Approach
and Artefacts. South African Journal of Industrial Engineering 20,1 (2009), pp. 31-43.
206                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



to management’s requirements (quality) and maintained over the period
of its useful life (change).” Zachman introduced the Zachman framework,
which consists of various models that are used to define and communi-
cate six characteristics/abstractions (What, How, Where, Who, When, and
Why) for five different viewpoints/perspectives (Planner, Owner, Design-
er, Builder, and Sub-contractor) (Zachman [3]). The Zachman framework
“is a tool for managing and communicating the vast amount of informa-
tion needed to make broad decisions, those that enable the organisation to
be competitive” (O’Rourke, Fishman & Selkow [4]).
    Numerous EA definitions were formulated following the inception of
the Zachman framework. These definitions addressed the following ele-
ments with different emphases:

   • Providing a systems view—i.e. describing systems, their components (e.g.
     people, processes, information, and technology), their interaction, and in-
     terrelationships. This includes the use of decomposition strategies to ensure
     holistic solutions in terms of solution components (TOGAF [5]; Theuer-
     korn [6]; Gartner in Lapkin [7]; Handler [8]).
   • Providing a blueprint for directing the company in terms of required high-
     level processes and IT capabilities (Ross et al. [1]; Gartner in Lapkin [7];
     Boar [9]).
   • Defining a process/master plan to explore and model the current realities
     and the envisioned future state, and enable its evolution (Gartner in Lapkin
     [7]; Bernard [10]; Schekkerman [11]).
   • Defining principles that govern the design and evolution of systems
     (TOGAF [5]; Theuerkorn [6]; Gartner in Lapkin [7]; Wagter, van den Berg,
     Luiijpers & van Steenberg [12]).
   • Using tools, processes and governance structures to implement enterprise-
     consistent IT architectures (Kaisler, Armour & Vallivullah [13]; Gartner in
     Lapkin [7]; Schekkerman [11]).


11.3 ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE: CREATING GOVERNANCE ON
A STRATEGIC LEVEL

EA initially aimed at modelling/describing the architecture components
associated with information technology. EA value was limited to direct
improvements in the performance of IT itself (lowering overall costs
from IT). This approach demonstrated some form of return on investment
Evaluating the “Enterprise Architecture as Strategy” Approach                        207




                                                                FIGURE 1: Different EA value creation approaches
208                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



(ROI)—i.e. accelerating project start-up and decreasing investment in
staff, consulting, training, and tools.
    Today, EA has broadened from enterprise-wide IT architecture (EWI-
TA) to include business architecture (BA); that is, EA = BA + EWITA
(Malan & Bredemeyer [14]; Bernard [10]; Ross et al. [1]). The focus is on
optimisation “across boundaries to achieve system goals” and the “trans-
lation of strategy into implementation” (Malan & Bredemeyer [14]). The
change in focus is closely related to the restricted contribution of previous
EA value propositions. EA practitioners realised that EA could show more
significant value when used to improve business performance, and with
IT used to support the execution of strategy (Rosser [15]; Lapkin [16]).
Ross et al. [1] took one step further. They believe that EA is not only about
supporting the execution of strategy, but should be used as a blueprint for
directing strategy.
    Figure 1 compares the previous value creation approaches with the
new value creation approach of Ross et al.[1]—‘EA as Strategy’.
    EA should provide a directional blueprint to ensure that companies
build a foundation for execution—i.e. they use their IT infrastructure
and digitised business processes to automate the company’s core capa-
bilities. The rationale is that routine processes are digitised to provide
reliability and predictability in business-critical processes. Once these
processes have been digitised, management can shift their attention from
fighting fires on lower-value activities to strategic issues. Ross et al. [1]
recommend eight steps in creating a ‘foundation for execution’. During
the first three steps, three key artefacts are defined, which should be used
in combination to establish EA objectives. The key artefacts are now
discussed briefly.


11.3.1 OPERATING MODELS

Ross et al. [1] suggest that organisations should decide on an operating
model for the entire organisation on which to build a foundation for ex-
ecution. The selected operating model provides a “stable and actionable
Evaluating the “Enterprise Architecture as Strategy” Approach             209




FIGURE 2: Characteristics of four operating models (Ross et al. [1:29])
                                                                                         210




FIGURE 3: Core diagram template for a unification operating model (Ross et al. [1:54])
                                                                                         Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
Evaluating the “Enterprise Architecture as Strategy” Approach                211



view of the company” (Ross et al. [1]) and is used to shape future strategic
choices.
    An operating model is “the necessary level of business process integra-
tion and standardisation for delivering goods and services to customers”
(Ross et al. [1]). The operating model is a “choice about what strategies
are going to be supported”, “a commitment to a way of doing business”
(Ross et al. [1]). Although each operating model encapsulates numerous
characteristics, two key dimensions are used to define four operating mod-
els (see Figure 2).

   • Business process standardisation, defining how the processes will be ex-
     ecuted regardless of the responsible entity or place of execution.
   • Business process integration, connecting the efforts of organisational units
     through linked processes and shared data.


11.3.2 CORE DIAGRAMS

While the operating model defines the process standardisation/integration
requirements of the company, the core diagram is used to translate these
requirements into the necessary organising logic for business processes
and IT infrastructure. The core diagram should be used to:

   • Facilitate discussions between business and IT managers to clarify require-
     ments for the company’s foundation for execution, and
   • Communicate the vision (high-level business process and IT requirements
     of a company’s operating model).

   A core diagram contains four main components: (1) core business
processes—the stable set of enterprise processes required to execute its
operating model and respond to market opportunities; (2) shared data driv-
ing the core processes—e.g. customer data shared across product lines or
business units of a company; (3) key linking and automation technolo-
gies – technologies that enable integration of applications (middleware) to
shared data, major software packages such as ERP systems, portals pro-
viding standardised access to systems and data, and electronic interfaces to
key stakeholder groups; and (4) key customers— major customer groups
212                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



served by the foundation for execution (Ross et al. [1]). The template for a
unification operating model is given in Figure 3.


11.3.3 OPERATING MATURITY ASSESSMENT

Ross et al. [1] also defined four operating maturity levels. In terms of IT
management, each level requires different business objectives, IT capabili-
ties, IT funding priorities, and management capabilities. Usually immature
organisations will start with a focus on IT efficiency/cost reduction. For
instance, research performed by Gartner (Kreizman, Knox & James [17])
indicated that research respondents still ranked IT cost reduction as the
most important driver for justifying EA investments. This merely reflected
their current operating maturity (stage 1 or 2 according to Figure 4 and its
associated cost reduction business objectives. The IT cost-focus of the re-
spondents also correlated with the comparatively low number of business
architects (compared with other full-time equivalent architects) employed
by the organisation (Kreizman et al. [17]). As organisations mature, busi-
ness operational efficiency and strategic agility become more important
(see Figure 4, stages 3 and 4).
    The operating model should be used in combination with the current
operating maturity of the organisation to identify realistic EA objectives. If
an organisation is, for example, at the first stage of operating maturity, the
organisation needs to standardise all technology infrastructure (elevating
to stage two) irrespective of the operating model of the organisation. How-
ever, elevating from stage two (standardised technology) to stage three
(optimised core) requires that the organisation define process standardisa-
tion and integration objectives according to the required operating model.


11.4 ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE AND STRATEGIC
MANAGEMENT

Ross et al. [1] believe that the key artefacts that were discussed in the
previous sections could be used to direct the strategic decision-making
processes and to shape future strategic choices. Strategic decision-making
                                                                                               Evaluating the “Enterprise Architecture as Strategy” Approach




FIGURE 4: Learning requirements of the architecture stages (adapted from Ross et al. [1:83])
                                                                                               213
214                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



is, according to Johnson, Scholes & Whittington [18]), one of three com-
ponents of strategic management. The three components consist of (1)
defining the strategic position (e.g. current strategic capability, the envi-
ronment, expectations and purposes); (2) defining strategic choices (e.g.
corporate-level/international decisions, business level decisions); and (3)
defining strategy execution (e.g. organising, enabling, and managing stra-
tegic change). One would require inputs from two of these components
(strategic position and previous strategic choices) to define the three key
artefacts. The modelled artefacts should then be used in combination to
influence the direction of future strategic choices and the subsequent stra-
tegic objectives. The set of strategic objectives may then be converted
to strategic initiatives/projects with various strategic conversion mecha-
nisms, such as those defined by Kaplan & Norton [19, 20, and 21] (bal-
anced scorecards, strategic themes, and strategy maps). The conceptual
process is delineated in Figure 5.


11.5 RESEARCH PURPOSE AND DESIGN




11.5.1 PURPOSE

The purpose of this research was to receive feedback on the perceived
practicality of defining the first two key artefacts—the operating mod-
el and the core diagram. Action research was used to receive qualitative
feedback on the difficulties experienced in defining the current operating
model and the core diagram for an organisation/subdivision.


11.5.2 RESEARCH DESIGN

Action research was selected for qualitative research for the following
reasons:
                                                                                     Evaluating the “Enterprise Architecture as Strategy” Approach




FIGURE 5: Key artefacts contextualised in terms of strategic management components
                                                                                     215
216                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



   • The ‘EA as strategy’ approach of Ross et al. is still new (published in 2006).
     Research respondents needed to have a good understanding of EA in gen-
     eral and of the new ‘EA as strategy’ approach. The ‘Business Architecture’
     post-graduate course was used as a vehicle to convey knowledge about EA
     and the ‘EA as strategy’ approach, techniques, and artefacts to students,
     who were then used as respondents.
   • The action research process provided the opportunity to assess the students’
     understanding of the course content, and guide them towards the correct use
     of the ‘EA as strategy’ approach, techniques, and artefacts.

   The action research process that was followed is based on the work of
specialists (referred to by Hodgkinson and Maree [22]):

   • Planning—A literature study was conducted in the field of EA to design the
     course content and assessment mechanisms. Special emphasis was placed
     on strategic management, the ‘EA as strategy’ approach, techniques and
     artefacts, the business architecture domain, and the development of an EA
     plan.
   • Implementation—Live presentations from the course presenter and indus-
     try speakers, course notes, and literature references were used to convey
     the course content to students. Students then had the opportunity to work
     individually or in pairs and to select an organisation in which to implement
     some of the techniques presented in the course. An interim project report
     was submitted for assessment. Students also wrote a semester test to assess
     their understanding of EA principles and of the ‘EA as strategy’ approach,
     techniques, and artefacts defined by Ross et al. [1].
   • Observation—The course presenter observed/assessed the students’ under-
     standing of the course content. Feedback was given to the students in the
     light of their semester test and interim project report. Students now had the
     opportunity to improve/update their project reports and submit a final proj-
     ect report. Based on the final report, they had to submit a completed survey.
   • Evaluation – The final reports were assessed and surveys were analysed.
     Analysis of qualitative survey feedback gave new insight into the practical-
     ity of two key artefacts (operating models and core diagrams). New insights
     were used to define suggested improvements, recommendations, and an
     agenda for further research.

    The survey consisted of twenty-eight questions. Some of the questions
were taken from the on-line survey used by the Institute for Enterprise Ar-
chitecture Developments (IFEAD) (Schekkerman [23]). Categorisation of
business activities was taken from the Oracle Magazine subscription form
(Oracle Magazine [24]). Questions were categorised according to param-
Evaluating the “Enterprise Architecture as Strategy” Approach                        217




FIGURE 6: Parameters that influence the practicality of defining two key artefacts



eters that could have a significant influence on the perceived practicality of
defining the two key artefacts – the operating model and the core diagram
(see Figure 6).


11.6 RESULTS

Thirty post-graduate students took part in the final assessment mechanism.
As students had the opportunity to work in pairs, a total of twenty-one
final project reports and completed surveys was submitted.


11.6.1 STUDENT PROFILE

Figure 7 indicates that fifty-two percent (52%) of the students had previ-
ously obtained an engineering degree, thirty-two percent (32%) a techni-
cal diploma, twelve percent (12%) a Bachelor of Science (BSc) degree,
and four percent (4%) a Bachelor of Commerce (BCom) degree. Tertiary
qualifications also correlated with the working positions of the students.
Most of the students held positions that were related to business process
                                                    218




FIGURE 7: Tertiary qualifications of the students
                                                    Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
Evaluating the “Enterprise Architecture as Strategy” Approach           219



planning and improvement. Questions regarding prior knowledge about
information systems indicated that sixty-seven percent (67%) of the stu-
dents had previously enrolled for information system-related courses,
while thirty-eight percent (38%) indicated work-exposure in the field of
information systems.
    Finally, students had to indicate the main reason(s) for course enrol-
ment. Students could provide additional reasons if the standard categories
were not sufficient. Most of the students (19 out of 21) selected the course
as part of their Honours studies. They also showed significant interest in
the management/improvement of business processes (18 out of 21) and
organisational management/governance (12 out of 21).



11.6.2 ORGANISATION PROFILE

Most of the companies that were used for analysis purposes by the stu-
dents employed fewer than 10,000 employees (see Table 1).
    The 21 analysed companies were involved in a wide spread of 19 differ-
ent business activities. Note that a company could be involved in multiple
business activities. These included automotive manufacturing (5 out of 21),
the consumer sector (4 out of 21), high- technology manufacturing OEM (3
out of 21), industrial manufacturing (3 out of 21), professional services (3
out of 21), research (3 out of 21),other business services (5 out of 21) and
12 remaining business activities (17 companies out of 21). None of the ana-
lysed companies was in the financial/insurance services industry. According
to Matthee, Tobin & Van der Merwe [25], the financial sectors usually invest
in EA endeavours owing to their high dependency on IT.


11.6.3 CURRENT ARCHITECTURE STATUS

Figure 8 indicates that a large number of companies (9 out of 21) managed
their divisions in silos. A significant number had progressed to the level
of standardised technology (7 out of 21) and optimised core (5 out of 21).
None of the companies operated according to a modular business design.
220   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




                                              FIGURE 8: Operating maturity of the companies
Evaluating the “Enterprise Architecture as Strategy” Approach                 221



According to Table 2, business architecture was well-established at 11 out
of 21 companies. The perceived level of business architecture activity may
also be explained by the process inclination of the students.


TABLE 1: Size of the entire company
 Number of people working in the organisation           Number of companies
 96,000                                                 1
 33,000                                                 1
 10,000–24,999                                          2
 100–9,999                                              12
 1–99                                                   5




    EA governance activities were performed at thirty-eight percent (38%)
of the analysed companies. Students believed that a company should in-
vest in EA governance owing to its decision-making support (7 out of 21),
system development support (6 out of 21), and delivery of insight and
overview of business & IT (5 out of 21). Only four students indicated the
use of architecture modelling technology that includes a repository. Tools
include ARIS, Casewise, and Systems Architect. According to Figure 9,
eight companies (38%) did not use a framework.


11.6.4 THE PERCEIVED PRACTICALITY OF OPERATING
MODELS AND CORE DIAGRAMS




11.6.4.1 THE ANALYSIS LEVEL FOR DEFINING AN OPERATING MODEL

Students preferred to apply the ‘EA as strategy’ approach on a business unit level
(17 out of 21) rather than a corporate level (4 out of 21). The different types of
operating models were well-represented: diversification (7 out of 21), unifica-
tion (6 out of 21), replication (5 out of 21), and coordination (3 out of 21).
                                                      222




FIGURE 9: Enterprise architecture frameworks in use
                                                      Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
Evaluating the “Enterprise Architecture as Strategy” Approach                        223



11.6.4.2 DIFFICULTIES IN DEFINING THE CURRENT OPERATING
MODEL

Students indicated their difficulty in deciding on one specific operating
model (14 out of 19). A few students (4 out of 19) indicated minimal diffi-
culty in identifying the operating model. Qualitative feedback was tagged
according to emerging themes:

    • Difficulty was experienced in deciding on a single operating model (8 out
      of 14 who experienced difficulty). Students had difficulty in establishing
      the degree of process standardisation/integration that would be required to
      classify an organisation according to a specific model. Companies (espe-
      cially on a corporate analysis level) exhibited behaviours of multiple oper-
      ating models.
    • Students (5 out of 14 who experienced difficulty) conveyed their difficulty
      in finding the correct information to perform a classification. This was also
      attributed to the limited knowledge and awareness of EA in the company.
    • Some difficulty (1 out of 14 who experienced difficulty) occurred in defin-
      ing an operating model on a business unit level due to fuzzy boundaries
      between the corporate level and business unit level.


TABLE 2: Established architectural levels

 Architecture Levels                                           Number of companies
 Business Architecture                                         11
 Information-System Architecture (Applications Architecture)   7
 Enterprise Architecture                                       6
 Security Architecture                                         6
 Information Architecture                                      5
 Technology Infrastructure Architecture                        5
 Governance Architecture                                       3
 Software Architecture                                         3




11.6.4.3 DIFFICULTIES IN COMPILING A CORE DIAGRAM

Qualitative feedback was tagged according to emerging themes:
224                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



   • Half the students (10 out of 20) experienced difficulty in selecting the main
     components of the core diagram. These students had trouble in identifying
     the shared technologies (4 out of 10 who experienced difficulty), shared
     data (3 out of 10), shared processes (3 out of 10), and the key customers (1
     out of 10). The problematic identification of shared technologies may be at-
     tributed to the student profile/limited exposure to technology infrastructure.
   • Some students (6 out of 20) had difficulty in understanding the generic
     core diagram templates provided by Ross et al. [1] or relating the diagram
     components to their company. They also questioned the validity of their
     own core diagram designs.
   • Another concern was the availability and/or the consolidation of available
     information (4 out of 20 students).


11.7 SUMMARY AND INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS

It was found that most of the students had an engineering background,
held positions related to business process planning and improvement, and
showed significant interest in the management/improvement of business
processes and organisational management/governance. Students also had
sufficient knowledge of information systems.
    Concerning the organisation profile, most of the companies that were
used for analysis purposes employed fewer than 10 000 employees, and
were involved in a large number of business activities excluding the finan-
cial sector. Results further indicated a relatively low level of operating ma-
turity – most of the analysed companies displayed business silo behaviour,
while none of the companies operated according to a modular business
design. The study indicated that business architecture was well established
at the analysed companies. Use of architecture modelling technology was
limited.
    The perceived practicality of the operating model and core diagram
artefacts could not be evaluated on a corporate level, as most of the stu-
dents defined operating models at a business unit level. According to Ross
et al. [1], this should not be a hurdle in validating the artefacts per se, as
operating models and core diagrams may be defined at various levels of
the organisation. The interpretation of the various difficulties experienced
follows:
Evaluating the “Enterprise Architecture as Strategy” Approach                  225



   • Difficulty in selecting a single operating model is linked to the identifica-
     tion of the degree of process standardisation/integration for the analysed or-
     ganisation/business unit. Extensive implicit/explicit knowledge is implied
     during the evaluation of the operating model characteristics that define the
     degree of process standardisation/integration.
   • Students had difficulty in finding the correct information to perform an
     operating model classification or select core diagram components. Identi-
     fication of operating model characteristics and core diagram components
     requires knowledge about the strategic choices (markets, products/ser-
     vices), operating/organising logic, business processes, and main databases
     and technologies of the organisation. Some baseline architectures are thus
     required, and this knowledge is not necessarily available or in an explicit
     format.
   • Students experienced difficulty in selecting the main components of the
     core diagram and understanding the core diagram templates. This may be
     related to the limited set of examples provided in the textbook. Case studies
     would be required to demonstrate inputs that would be required (e.g. base-
     line architectures) to define the core diagram components.


11.8 CRITICAL EVALUATIONS AND INFERENCES

Based on the qualitative feedback received from the action research effort,
the researcher revisited the main objectives of the operating model and
core diagram:

   • To aid the main stakeholders/users of these artefacts (business and IT man-
     agers) in guiding them during their strategic decision-making processes.
   • To communicate architecture vision to other stakeholders (in terms of pro-
     cess standardisation/integration requirements).

    If the main stakeholders are to use these artefacts to guide them during
the strategic decision-making processes, the artefacts should be based on a
more rigorous approach to attaining the artefact outputs. This will increase
their validity and reliability. The researcher also believes that process stan-
dardisation/integration requirements should be based on a more scientific
approach to define optimal standardisation/integration requirements for
an organisation. Porter [26], for instance, believes that decisions regard-
ing process standardisation/integration are complex and require detailed
226                              Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



analysis based on the strategic intent of the organisation (e.g. cost lead-
ership/differentiation/ focus-driven for target segments). Cost leadership
companies, for instance, would have to assess the impact that process stan-
dardisation/integration could have on overall cost, while differentiation-
focused companies need to assess if process standardisation/integration
could increase the uniqueness of an activity or lower its cost of differen-
tiation.


11.9 CONCLUSIONS

This study emphasised the limited value gained from EA when measured in
terms of ROI due to cost reductions alone. Today EA practitioners realise
that new value propositions emerge when EA is used to support the strate-
gic direction of the organisation. This new focus was used to introduce a
new approach towards EA value creation, called ‘EA as strategy’. The ap-
proach incorporates EA planning as part of the strategic decision-making
process using three key artefacts: operating models, core diagrams, and an
operating maturity assessment.
    Action research was used to assess the practicality of two key artefacts
(operating model and core diagram), which highlighted some difficulties
that were experienced and led to some critical evaluations and recommen-
dations regarding the artefacts. It is believed that the operating model and
core diagram could be useful in visualising the process standardisation/
integration requirements of an organisation/sub-division. The artefacts
should, however, be supported by a more scientific approach to their deri-
vation, to increase their validity/reliability.
    Further research has been initiated to perform a case study at an or-
ganisation. The case study incorporates processes to model baseline archi-
tectures, current strategic choices (markets, products/services), operating/
organising logic, business processes, main databases, and technologies of
the organisation. This will be followed by various analyses (e.g. value
chain analyses) to identify process standardisation/integration opportuni-
ties. Current artefact designs (e.g. operating model and core diagram) may
need to be adapted to convey the process standardisation/integration re-
quirements to strategic decisionmakers. The new artefact designs will be
Evaluating the “Enterprise Architecture as Strategy” Approach                         227



distributed to different strategic decision-makers to gain feedback about
their usefulness during strategic decision-making.
    .


REFERENCES

 1.    Ross, J.W., Weill, P. and Robertson, D.C. 2006. Enterprise Architecture as strategy.
       Creating a foundation for business execution. Boston, Massachusetts: Harvard Busi-
       ness School Press.
 2.    Zachman, J.A. 1987. ‘A framework for information systems architecture’, IBM Sys-
       tems Journal, 26(3), pp. 276-292.
 3.    Zachman, J.A. 1996. ‘Enterprise Architecture: The issue of the century’. [online]
       URL: http://mega.ist.utl.pt/~ic-atsi/TheIssueOfTheCentury.pdf. Accessed on 13 No-
       vember 2007.
 4.    O’Rourke, C., Fishman, N. and Selkow, W. 2003. Enterprise Architecture using the
       Zachman Framework. Boston, Massachusetts: Thomson Course Technology.
 5.    TOGAF Version 8.1, enterprise edition. [online] URL: www.opengroup.org/archi-
       tecture/togaf8/downloads.htm#Non-Member. Accessed 13 November 2007.
 6.    Theuerkorn, F. 2005. Lightweight enterprise architectures. New York: Auerbach
       Publications.
 7.    Lapkin, A. 2006. ‘Gartner defines the term “enterprise architecture”’, Gartner Re-
       search, ID Number: G00141795.
 8.    Handler, R. 2004. Enterprise Architecture is dead – long live Enterprise Architec-
       ture.     http://itmanagement.earthweb.com/columns/article.php/11079_3347711_1.
       Accessed 5 Jan 2007.
 9.    Boar, B. H. 1999. Constructing blueprints for enterprise IT architecture. New York:
       J. Wiley.
 10.   Bernard, S.A. 2005. An introduction to Enterprise Architecture EA3. 2nd edition.
       Bloomington: AuthorHouse.
 11.   Schekkerman, J. 2004. How to survive in the jungle of Enterprise Architecture
       frameworks. 2nd edition. Victoria: Trafford Publishing.
 12.   Wagter, R., Van den Berg, M., Luijpers, J. and Van Steenberg, M. 2005. Dynamic
       Enterprise Architecture – How to make it work. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley
       & Sons, Inc.
 13.   Kaisler, S.H., Armour, F. and Valivullah, M. 2005. Enterprise architecting: Critical
       problems, Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sci-
       ences, IEEE CS Press: 224b.
 14.   Malan, R. and Bredemeyer, D. 2005. ‘Enterprise Architecture as strategic differen-
       tiator’, Cutter Consortium Executive Report, 8(6), pp. 1-23.
 15.   Rosser, B. 2004. ‘Sell the value of architecture to the business’, Gartner Research,
       ID Number: G00123412.
 16.   Lapkin, A. 2005. ‘Business strategy defines Enterprise Architecture value’, Gartner
       Research, ID Number: G00129604.
228                                   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks


17. Kreizman, G., Knox, M. and James, G.A. 2005. ‘IT cost reduction and performance
    improvement provide the most value for Enterprise Architecture’, Gartner Research,
    ID Number: G00130524.
18. Johnson, G., Scholes, K. and Whittington, R. 2005. Exploring corporate strategy.
    London: Prentice Hall.
19. Kaplan, R.S. and Norton, D.P. 1996. The balanced scorecard. Boston, Massachu-
    setts: Harvard Business School Press.
20. Kaplan, R.S. and Norton, D.P. 2004. Strategy maps: converting intangible assets into
    tangible outcomes. Boston, Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Press.
21. Kaplan, R.S. and Norton, D.P. 2006. Alignment – using the balanced scorecard to
    create corporate strategies. Boston, Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Press.
22. Hodgkinson, C.A. and Maree, J.G. 1998. ‘Action research: some guidelines for first-
    time researchers in education’, Journal of Education and Training, 19(2), pp. 51-65.
23. Schekkerman, J. 2006. Enterprise Architecture survey 2006, Institute for Enterprise
    Architecture Developments (IFEAD).http://enterprise-architecture.info/EA_Sur-
    vey_2006.htm. Accessed 6 November 2007.
24. Haunert, T. 2008. ‘Want your own FREE subscription?’, Oracle Magazine, June/
    July, p. 64.
25. Matthee, M.C., Tobin, P.K.J. and Van der Merwe, P. 2007. ‘The status quo of Enter-
    prise Architecture implementation in South African financial services companies’,
    South African Journal of Business Management, 38(1), pp. 11-23.
26. Porter, M.E. 2004. Competitive advantage – creating and sustaining superior perfor-
    mance. New York: Free Press.
CHAPTER 12



AN ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE
METHODOLOGY FOR
BUSINESS-IT ALIGNMENT:
ADOPTER AND DEVELOPER
PERSPECTIVES
ZULKHAIRI M.D. DAHALIN, RAFIDAH ABD RAZAK,
HUDA IBRAHIM, NOR IADAH YUSOP,
and M. KHAIRUDIN KASIRA




12.1 INTRODUCTION

Enterprise Architecture (EA) can be viewed as a strategic approach in the
evolution of the IT system in response to the constantly changing needs
of the business environment (Schekkerman, 2006). There is no consensus
on the definitions and description of EA. A common theme in all of the
definitions is that EA describes principles and guidelines in governing the
implementation of information, technology and business mission in orga-
nizations; involving different stakeholders and processes.
    Enterprise Architecture is a blueprint for how an organization achieves
the current and future business objectives using IT. It examines the key
business, information, application, and technology strategies and their


This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent. Dahalin
ZMD, Razak RA, Ibrahim H, Yusop NI, and Kasira MK. An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for
Business-IT Alignment: Adopter and Developer Perspectives. Communications of the IBIMA 2011
(2011), DOI: 10.5171/2011.222028.
230                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



impact on business functions (Pereira and Sousa, 2005). It provides the
framework for planning and implementing a rich, standards-based, digi-
tal information infrastructure with well-integrated services and activities
(Watson, 2000).
    Organizations are always looking to find new and cost effective means
to leverage existing investments in IT infrastructure and incorporate new
capabilities to improve business productivity (Patrick, 2005). Hence, there
is an increasing need for organizations to align their IT and business strate-
gies. This paper examines the Systemic Enterprise Architecture Methodol-
ogy (SEAM) developed by Wegmann (2003) to determine its relevance
in explaining the business-IT alignment. Business-IT alignment can be
defined as the adoption of appropriate IT solutions that meets the business
requirements and gives satisfactory returns on the IT investment.


12.2 OBJECTIVES

This paper is set up to meet the following objectives: (1) to examine the
trend and status of EA adoption and implementation in Malaysia based on
international benchmark; and (2) to provide evidence of the significance
of the Systemic Enterprise Architecture Methdology (SEAM) as a viable
approach in validating business-IT alignment.


12.3 ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE IN MALAYSIA

In Malaysia, perhaps the first known publishable article on EA appeared in
a book written by Simon Seow (Seow, 2000). Ever since then and through
series of workshops and seminars, as well as the setting up of the Malay-
sia’s Chapter for the International Association of Software Architecture
(IASA) in 2002, EA is becoming more and more popular among organi-
zations based on the keen interest on the subject and the overwhelming
participation among key IS players (Zulkhairi et al., 2006). However, there
is still a strong need for academic involvement particularly in research and
development of EA in Malaysia to further enrich the knowledge of EA.
An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for Business-IT Alignment        231



    A study conducted in 2006 on the practices of EA in selected organiza-
tions in Malaysia reveals that knowledge and understanding of EA among
the organizations are poor though there had been efforts at implementing
EA (Zulkhairi et al., 2006). A study by Rafidah et al. (2007) found that
organizations in Malaysia, both public and private, do practice EA but the
EA activities were found to be incomplete or not adequately addressed.
The authors also found that knowledge on EA is very poor among the
enterprise management in Malaysia. In terms of EA practice, the findings
suggest variation of EA particularly at the planning stage. The study also
reveals that some aspects of the EA framework were not addressed at all;
whilst other aspects that were addressed vary in terms of perspectives.
Earlier, Seow (2000) observed that actual EA practice among Malaysian
organizations was very minimal.


12.4 THE STUDY

Theoretical framework is a deductive reasoning approach where existing
theories, ideas, constructs and methodologies are combined in search for
relevant explanation to the phenomenon being studied. SEAM is based
on business/IT alignment market, in which supplier business systems
compete to provide a value to an adopter business system. Two units of
analysis were identified in this study. First, those who are responsible for
business-IT alignment (the EA Adopter); and second were those who care
about EA (the EA Developer). These are people who plan, implement,
advice and do consulting and collaborate with others for the development
of EA in the organization. The role of the respondents in the EA Adopter is
to adopt EA. The supply role in the EA Development can be broken down
into two main actions: planning and implementation. The adoption action
is mainly the responsibility of managers and staff at the operational level
that drives the improvement of the business process. EA Development
started with planning, which is the responsibility of senior management,
and made practical through implementation, which is essentially the IT
professionals. These three actions: Planning, Implementation and Adop-
tion according to Wegmann (2003) are referred to as the EA lifecycle ac-
232                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



tivities. Three groups of respondents were identified in this study to com-
mensurate with these three actions that signify the EA activities.
     Elements of the research to be studied are based on the Trends in Enter-
prise Architecture 2005 report by the Institute for Enterprise Architecture
Development (Schekkerman, 2005). EA activities refer to the environment
in which EA is present and there is evidence to suggest business-IT align-
ment exists through interactions of elements between business issues and
the EA environmental elements. In this study, these interactions were iden-
tified based on correlation analysis that attempts to relate the EA environ-
mental elements with the EA business issues. Relationships that are found
to be significant are deemed to have supported the interactions, thereby
providing evidence of business-IT alignment. The IFEAD 2005 report pre-
sented three components that make up the EA environmental elements.
These are the EA Environment, the EA Governance, and the EA Methods,
Tools and Framework. These three elements along with the EA business
issues were incorporated into the questionnaire design as instrument used
to carry out the study. A preliminary study was conducted to test the instru-
ment and was found to be valid (Rafidah et al., 2009).
     The two units of analysis mentioned in SEAM, the Adopter and the
Developer, were identified as respondents in this study. EA Adopters
were those users at the managerial and operational level responsible for
the business-IT alignment. EA Implementers represent respondents who
plan and implement the EA in the organization. This can be further sub-
categorized into the Planner, who are essentially the CIO, Chief Architect
and IT Manager, and the Implementer, who are the Architect, Consultant
and Systems Analyst.
     Data collection was based on a questionnaire constructed to fulfill the
needs of the two units of analysis, whereas feedbacks obtained followed
the construct developed by the IFEAD 2005 report. The IFEAD report,
edited by Jaap Schekkerman, President of IFEAD, consists of four dimen-
sional constructs as represented in Table 1. The first construct, the EA
Business Issues describes the respondents’ perception on the business is-
sues that EA can help addressed. Two questions were posed to operational-
ize the construct: 1) Why EA is important?; and 2) What business issues
can EA help to address? Table 1 lists the complete operationalization of
the four constructs adopted from the IFEAD report.
An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for Business-IT Alignment                               233



TABLE 1: Dimensional Construct of EA Usage (adopter) and Implementation (Development)
 Dimension            Operationalized Research Elements
 EA Business Issues   Why is EA important for your organization?
                      For what kind of issues do you plan an EA program?
 EA Environment       Is your organization familiar with the importance of EA?
                      Is EA part of your organization’s strategic governance?
                      Are you aware of any guidelines or policies related to EA in Malaysia?
                      Is there any architecture established in your organization?
 EA Governance        At which level is EA part of your organization’s structure?
                      Do you have your own architect?
                      What type of architect do you have?
                      Does your organization use external architect?
                      From which external organizations do you get support in your EA projects?
                      To whom is the architect reporting?
                      How are your architects educated/trained?
                      Is certification of EA by an official authority an issue?
                      How often do you plan your people to coach by experienced architects?
                      How do you select a good architect coach/mentor?
                      How do you get more information about EA?
 EA Methods, Tools    What kind of EA framework does your organization used?
 and Framework        What kind of tools you use to develop EA?
                      What kind of business modeling techniques is your organization using?
                      What kind of system modeling techniques is your organization using?
                      What kind of system development methodology is in use in your organization?



    EA Environment refers to the situation within the organization that
makes EA present possible. EA Governance refers to the structure in
which EA is being managed, including the level in which EA is positioned
within the organization, the personnel involved, support structure, skills
and training involved, and EA knowledge acquisition. The last construct,
EA Methods, Tools and Frameworks, is concerned with the organization’s
adoption of a particular EA framework, the kinds of tools used to develop
EA, modeling techniques used, and systems development methodology
used to develop information systems that are part of the organization’s EA
implementation.
    This study involves a sample size of 100 organizations from both pub-
lic and private sectors. The sampling frame was based on the list of orga-
nizations registered in the Universiti Utara Malaysia (UUM’s) University
Industry Link database directory that lists more than 1260 organizations
participated in the student practicum attachment throughout Malaysia. In
addition, samples were also drawn from the Malaysia Computer Industry
234                                     Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




FIGURE 1: Categories of Organizations


Association (PIKOM) directory, Malaysia National Computer Confedera-
tion (MNCC), MSC status companies, Federal and State Government, and
IASA. Data collection involved three stages which are online, postal, and
hand-delivered due to the poor response encountered in the earlier stages.
A total of 500 questionnaires were distributed from the list based on ran-
dom selection with 100 returns representing 20% response rate.


12.5 ORGANIZATIONS BACKGROUND

Figure 1 shows the categories of organizations participated in the survey.
Organizations from multinational to small organizations participated in
the survey. Majority of the participating organizations (84%) were with
less than 1000 people working in the organizations.
    The participating organizations were from Kuala Lumpur (26%), Jo-
hore (18%), Selangor (11%), Kedah (11%) and smaller percentages (3-6%)
An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for Business-IT Alignment         235




FIGURE 2: Number of Workers in IT Dept.


from other states. Majority are from Government organizations (46%).
Other participating organizations were IT Services, Private companies,
Telecommunication companies (Telcos), Government-linked (GLCs), and
Consultancy firms.
    The number of people working in IT department is presented in Figure
2. Sixty-one percent of the participants in the categories of 1-10 people,
29% in the categories of 11-100 people, 3% in the categories of 101-500
and 2% made up the 501-1000.


12.6 THE RESPONDENTS

Table 2 listed the participating organizations category of respondents in the
EA lifecycle activities. Majority of the respondents (59%) are in the EA
Implementer category, 20% of them are in EA Adopter category and 17%
are in EA Planner category. Recall that EA Implementer are those IT pro-
236                                       Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



fessionals and technical people involved in implementing IT solutions that
support the business-IT alignment, whilst EA Adopter is essentially the
end-users who are managers and operational staff. EA Planner represents
the senior level management involved in formulating the business plans
and strategies. These categories of respondents were identified based on a
cover letter sent to the organizations specifically requesting respondents
who were familiar with the organization’s IS and business processes to
complete the questionnaire. The purpose is to ensure that those who are in
the position to represent the organization in terms of EA knowledge and
practices should complete the questionnaire.


TABLE 2: Category of Respondents
Category                                                     Freq         %
EA Adopter (End-users and business managers)                 20           20
EA Planner (CIO, IT managers, chief architects)              17           17
EA Implementer (IT professionals)                            59           59
Undefined                                                    4            4




12.7 ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE ACTIVITIES

This section presents evidence of EA activities found in the study. A com-
paritive analysis is also carried out against an international study that was
carried out and reported by the Institute for Enterprise Architecture Devel-
opment (IFEAD, 2005). Consistent with the report and construction of the
questionnaire instrument in this study, EA activities are categorised and
presented in the following manner: (1) EA business issues; (2) EA envi-
ronment; (3) EA governance; and (4) EA methods, tools and frameworks.
However, there is a need to include additional factors into the EA catego-
ries in view of the dynamic nature of IT and the global business transfor-
mations that exist today. Factors such as Business-IT alignment, Customer
Satisfaction, Better Work Environment, Improved Project Management,
and Service-Oriented Architecture not included in the IFEAD study were
found to be important as presented in the sections that follow.
An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for Business-IT Alignment                        237




                                                                   FIGURE 3: EA Important to Organization
238   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




                                           FIGURE 4: Business Issues that Require EA
An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for Business-IT Alignment   239




FIGURE 5: Familiar with EA
240                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



12.8 EA BUSINESS ISSUES

As mentioned previously, EA Business Issues describes the respondents’
perception on the business issues that EA can help addressed. The ques-
tion on why EA is important showed more than half of respondents (52%)
perceived business-IT alignment as the most important reason for EA to
organization. These were followed by improve client's satisfaction and
commitment (44%), managing complexity, support decision making and
support systems development at 43% of respondents, respectively. Figure
3 shows the rest of the reasons why EA is important and a comparison with
the IFEAD 2005 report.
    The IFEAD 2005 findings indicate support decision making, manages
IT portfolio, and delivers road maps for change as the top 3 reasons why EA
is important. These were also present in the top 10 list found in this study.
    On the kind of business issues that requires EA, again business-IT
alignment appeared top with more than half of the respondents (55%) per-
ceived it as most important. This is followed by business change (35%),
application renewal (34%), infrastructure renewal (29%), and transforma-
tion road map (23%). The rest are found in Figure 4 along with the IFEAD
2005 findings.Comparison with the IFEAD 2005 shows most of the busi-
ness issues that requires EA are similar across the two studies. Business-IT
alignment appears to be a universal issue that requires EA. Similarly busi-
ness change, application and infrastructure renewal, and transformation
roadmap all deals with the dynamic nature of business where respondents
believe EA should be able to address.


12.9 EA ENVIRONMENT

EA Environment as described previously refers to the situation within the
organization that makes EA present possible.It deals with familarity of
the organization with EA, policies and guidelines on EA implementation,
and the presence of EA. Finding suggests slightly more than half (52%)
of respondents acknowledged that their organizations are familiar with the
importance of EA. In contrast, the IFEAD 2005 report shows that almost
An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for Business-IT Alignment       241




FIGURE 6: Kinds of Architecture Established




all (95%) of the responding organizations are familiar with the importance
of EA. Figure 5 presents the comparison of the two studies.
    Part of the studying the EA environment is to examine the commit-
ment by organizations to establish some form of architecture. Hence re-
spondents were asked whether they have any architecture adopted by their
organizations. From the survey, 43% of the organizations have established
Information Systems architecture, which was the most popular kind of
architecture indicated by the respondents. Next is Software architecture
at 36%, followed by Governance Architecture (30%), and Technology In-
frastructure Architecture (28). The rest are presented as in Figure 6 along
with a comparison with the findings reported by IFEAD 2005. Surpris-
                                                                                        242




FIGURE 7: Cross-tabulation of Architectures Established in Public and Private Sectors
                                                                                        Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for Business-IT Alignment      243




FIGURE 8: EA as Organization’s Strategic Governance




ingly, this study found EA at the bottom of the list, as opposed to the
IFEAD 2005 report which ranked EA at the top along with Technology
Infrastructure and Security architectures.

    A cross-tabulation between the public and private sectors shows a
remarkable difference in terms of architecture preference. Private sector
identified Software architecture as the most dorminant architecture es-
tablished, however, the public sector indicated Software architecture to
be among the least. Equally surprising, EA was at the bottom of the list
indicated by the public sector organizations. The public sector identified
IS architecture and Governance as the two kinds of architectures mostly
adopted. Figure 7 presents the kinds of architectures established between
the public and private sectors.
244   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




                                              FIGURE 9: Level of EA Governance Structure
An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for Business-IT Alignment                                         245




                                                                   FIGURE 10: Adoption of EA Framework
246                              Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



12.10 EA GOVERNANCE

EA Governance describes the management structure which reflects the
conscious efforts place by the organizations in the development and adop-
tion of EA. This study found that 50% of the organizations indicate that
EA is part of their strategic governance. A cross tabulation between public
and private sectors show that the private sector organizations took greater
efforts in making EA part of their strategic governance. Figure 8 presents
the findings based on cross-tabulation of EA Governance by public and
private sectors.
    In terms of the level of EA governance structure, IT Management ap-
pears to be the preferred choice with 42% of respondents indicate EA gov-
ernance structure is at their IT Management level. This is also consistent
with the IFEAD 2005 report that shows similar order of EA governance
structure as presented in Figure 9.


12.11 EA METHODS, TOOLS AND FRAMEWORKS

As has been described previously, EA Methods, Tools and Frameworks, is
concerned with the organization’s adoption of a particular methods, tools
and framework for the development and adoption of EA. Findings from
this study suggest majority of the respondents indicated using their orga-
nization’s own EA framework with 61% responses. The Service Oriented
Architecture (SOA) came a far second with 18% responses. This was fol-
lowed by the ISO/IEC 14252 standard architecture (IEEE 1003.0) with
9%, and Zachman Framework with 4% responses.
    Figure 10 presents the EA Framework adopted by the responding orga-
nizations along with the IFEAD 2005 findings. It is interesting to note that
the presence of a well-known EA framework like the Zachman Framework
is declining dramatically compared to the 2005 report on the trends in EA
(IFEAD, 2005). What we have seen at least in Malaysia is that EA frame-
work is still dominantly “home grown” as organizations are still grappling
with the idea of an industry standard architecture that can explain how
their information systems can support the organization’s business objec-
An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for Business-IT Alignment                                   247




                                                                   FIGURE 11: System Development Methodology
248                              Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



tives. One industry standard architecture that appears promising and has
recently shown significant presence is the Service Oriented Architecture
(SOA). In the IFEAD report 2005, SOA was not even mentioned. Today,
five years down the road, SOA has become a prominent industry standard
architecture and its popularity and adoption is expected to improve signifi-
cantly in the future as more and more major IT players like IBM, Micro-
soft, SAP, Oracle etc. incorporate SOA in their service delivery.
    Respondents were also asked on the methodology used for systems
development. Top of the list is Rapid Application Development (RAD)
with 26% of respondents indicated using the RAD approach to develop
systems. The Rational Unified Process (RUP) came in second with 16%
responses. A close third is the traditional system development life cycle
represented by the Linear Application Development (LAD) with 15% re-
sponses. This is followed by the Dynamic System Development Method
(DSDM) with 10% responses, the Iterative Application Development
(IAD) with 9% responses, Extreme Programming (8%), and others (3%).
A significant proportion of respondents (13%) did not used any system
development methodology.
    Figure 11 summarized the System Development Methodology in the
participating organizations with comparison from the IFEAD 2005 results.
Both RUP and RAD appears to be popular occupying the top 3 devel-
opment methodology for EA. However, the IFEAD 2005 study is more
surprising as a significant proportion of their respondents did not use any
known methodology.
    As for the tools to develop EA in the organizations, majority reported
Microsoft Office Tools (60%) were used to develop EA in their organiza-
tions. Almost 30% indicated using Microsoft Visio.


12.12 SEAM VALIDATION

With evidence of EA activities presented in the foregoing section, recall
that SEAM is an EA methodology proposed by Wegmann (2003) describ-
ing the business-IT alignment market in terms of the supplier business sys-
tem collaborate with the adopter business system in the form of EA life-
cycle activities. This section attempts to present evidence that the SEAM
An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for Business-IT Alignment                            249




                                                                   FIGURE 12: SEAM Validation Correlation Analysis
250                                   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



is a valid approach to EA development and adoption. Applying SEAM
to this research, the supplier business system is represented by the EA
Developer, which as mentioned in Section 4 of this paper, consists
of 2 units of analysis: EA Planner and EA Implementer. The adopter
business system is represented by the third unit of analysis, ie., EA
Adopter. The collaboration between the EA Developer and EA Adopter
in the business-IT alignment market can be illustrated by the extend
relationships exist between these two elements. Using the dimensional
construct of EA usage (adopter) and EA implementation (developer) as
presented previously in Table 1 to signify the EA lifecycle activities,
correlation analysis can be performed to determine the madnitude of
relationships exist between the constructs. These relationships are pre-
sented as shown in Figure 12.
    In order to test the significance of the relationships between the con-
structs, Intensity indices were formulated for each construct to determine
the strength of the construct based on selections made by the respondents
on the questionnaire instrument. Average scores of the intensity indices
along with minimum and maximum scores were calculated and presented
as in Table 3.


TABLE 3: Intensity Indices of EA Constructs
 Intensity Construct                     Average (%)   Minimum (%)   Maximum (%)
 Business Issues                         28.8          4.17          83.3
 EA Environment                          33.0          0.00          100.0
 EA Governance                           22.0          0.00          61.9
 EA Methods, Tools & Framework           17.0          5.26          36.84




    Table 3 suggests that the strengths of EA activities are determined
largely by the EA environment, that is familiarity of the organization to
EA, the presence of EA policies and guidelines, and actual implemen-
tation of EA. EA activities are also determined by intensity of business
issues, that is the need to address business changes and transformation
An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for Business-IT Alignment       251



processes. To a lesser extend, EA Governance also affect EA activities
but not as much as EA Environment and Business Issues. The least aver-
age intensity score for EA Methods, Tools and Framework suggests that
implementation issues, particularly the technical development of EA is
less prominent than the business issues. This is despite the sample of
this study constitutes nearly 60% of respondents were categorised as EA
Implementers.
    Figure 12 shows the results of the correlation analysis between the
EA Implementation (developer category constituting the EA Planner and
EA Implementer) and the EA Usage (adopter category). The results sug-
gest there exist relationships between EA Environment, EA Governance
and EA Methods, Tools and Frameworks with EA Business Issues at the
0.01 significant level. Correlation coefficients reveal the magnitude and
direction of relationships. The magnitude or degree of correlation be-
tween 0.36 to 0.37 as shown in the figure is considered modest. The posi-
tive relationships between the variables indicate a large (or small) values
on the Developer category are associated with a large (or small) values
on the Adopter category. In other words, the higher the intensity of EA
Environment as signified by familiarity with EA, EA as part of organiza-
tion’s strategy, number and variety of architectures, and EA policy and
guidelines, the higher the intensity of business issues addressed by EA.
Similarly, the higher the intensity of EA Governance signified by EA for-
mal structure, presence and levels of architects, and architects’ reporting
structures, the higher the intensity of business issues addressed by EA.
Likewise, the higher the intensity of EA methods, tools and framework
used by the organization, the higher the intensity of business issues that
can be addressed by EA. In summary, the correlation analysis suggests
that a more conducive environment for EA tends to address better busi-
ness issues, whereas a stronger EA governance is likely to manage a
wide-ranging business issues, and a more comprehensive methods, tools
and framework to facilitate EA imlementation has a positive effect in
addressing a wide coverage of business issues. Hence, the SEAM ap-
proach applied in this research is considered valid based on the empirical
evidence presented in this section.
252                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



12.13 DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

In response to the first objective of the study, the main reasons for adopt-
ing EA found in this study are to support business and IT alignment, im-
prove client’s satisfaction and commitment, managing complexity, support
systems development, support decision making, better work environment,
and improve project management. Support business and IT alignment has
been seen to be an important reason for EA activities in other prior studies.
This suggests that organizations that want to ensure their business strate-
gies are aligned to IT strategies should embark on EA. The significance
of this alignment would ensure the organization’s IT investment is justifi-
able. This is even strengthened by the second objective of this study, that
provide evidence of the significance of the Systemic Enterprise Architec-
ture Methodology (SEAM) as a viable approach in validating business-IT
alignment.
    EA is also considered important to manage road maps for change.
Changes in enterprises are becoming fundamentally important because of
the growing uncertainty in the global business environment today, there-
fore EA is important to manage these changes.
    In terms of EA environment, the findings suggest that majority of the
participating respondents acknowledged that their organizations are famil-
iar with the importance of EA, though findings at the international level
show a more overwhealming trend. This reveals that there is a growing
interest in EA in the country, but actual EA adoption appears to be very
minimal, particularly among the public sector organizations.
     In terms of EA governance, the findings suggest that private sector
organizations took greater efforts in making EA part of their strategic gov-
ernance as compared to the public sector organizations. The findings also
reveal that despite EA being considered important, it is largely the respon-
sibility of IT managers instead of top management. This indicates a lower
maturity index profile of EA governance. This is not surprising, since EA
is considered a relatively new phenomenon in Malaysia. Studies done
elsewhere (Schekkerman, 2005 and Matthee, 2007) show higher level of
An Enterprise Architecture Methodology for Business-IT Alignment                    253



maturity with respect to EA implementations. These studies show a shift
of responsibility for EA from IT managers to CEO and business managers.
    On the extent of EA method, tools and framework used, dominant EA
development methodologies are the Rational Unified Process and Rapid
Application Development. Microsoft suites of tools almost sweep through
the entire EA development activities. Majority also reported using house
standards for EA framework, with growing interest in Service Oriented Ar-
chitecture; whilst the more popular framework like the Zachman Frame-
work was becoming less popular. This may suggest that organizations’
preference depends much upon the industry and technology dominion, but
at the same time organizations are caution in adopting new and emerging
technologies. As a result, EA in Malaysia is slow to take off, but there is
a growing interest among organizations in Malaysia towards EA as evi-
denced from this study.
    With the SEAM approach proven viable, there is no excuse for orga-
nizations not to embark on Enterprise Architecture, as this study provides
evidence that EA would be able to address an organization’s business-IT
alignment. Given the right environment with strategic governance in place
and relevant methods, tools and framework for EA development, organi-
zations would be able to achieve the returns on their IT investment and
more importantly meeting their strategic business needs.


REFERENCES

 1.   Matthee, M. C., Tobin, P. K. J. & Van Den Merwe, P. (2007). "The Status Quo of
      Enterprise Architecture Implementation in South African Financial Services Com-
      panies," South Africa Journal of Business Management, vol. 38, pp. 11-23.
 2.   Patrick, P. (2005). "Impact of SOA on Enterprise Information Architectures," pre-
      sented at SIGMOD, Baltimore Maryland USA.
 3.   Pereira, C. M. & Sousa, P. (2005). "Enterprise Architecture: Business and IT Align-
      ment," presented at SAC "05, Santa Fe, NM, USA.
 4.   Rafidah, A. R., Zulkhairi, M. D., Huda, I., M-Khairudin, K. & Nor-Iadah, Y. (2009).
      "The Scenarios of Enterprise Architecture in Malaysian Organizations," presented
      at The 13th International Business and Information Management (IBIMA). Confer-
      ence, Marrakech, Morocco.
254                                    Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



5.  Rafidah, A. R., Zulkhairi, M. D., Rohaya, D., Siti-Sakira, K., & Sahadah, A. (2007).
    "Enterprise Information Architecture (EIA).: Assessment of Current Practices in
    Malaysian Organizations," presented at Hawaii International Conference on System
    Sciences (HICSS-40)., Hawaii.
6. Schekkerman, J. (2005). 'Trends in Enterprise Architecture 2005,' Institute for Enter-
    prise Architecture Developments (IFEAD).
7. Schekkerman, J. (2006). How to survive in the jungle of Enterprise Architecture
    Frameworks,Third Edition ed. Victoria, Canada: Trafford Publishing.
8. Seow, S. P. S. (2000). 'The Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture - Find-
    ing Out More,' USA: The Analyst LLC, 2000.
9. Watson, R. W. (2000). "An Enterprise Information Architecture: A Case Study for
    Decentralized Organizations," presented at The 33rd Hawaii International Confer-
    ence on System Sciences, Hawaii.
10. Wegmann, A. (2003). "On the Systemic Enterprise Architecture Methodology
    (SEAM)," presented at the International Conference on Enterprise Information Sys-
    tems, Angers, France.
11. Zulkhairi, M. D., Rafidah, A. R., Rohaya, D., Siti-Sakira, K. & Sahadah, A. (2006).
    'Enterprise Information Architecture: An Assessment of Current Practices and Con-
    ditions,' Universiti Utara Malaysia, Sintok, Kedah, Research Report.
CHAPTER 13



ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE
ONTOLOGY FOR SUPPLY CHAIN
MAINTENANCE AND RESTORATION
OF THE SIKORSKY’S UH-60
HELICOPTER
JAMES A. RODGER and PANKAJ PANKAJ




13.1 INTRODUCTION

This template, Enterprise Architecture is a comprehensive blueprint for the
automated enterprise that is developed from different views and perspec-
tives [1]. The thought was that a single company or organization can be an
enterprise, when the reality is that no organizational entity can operate as
a complete enterprise without considering 1) relationships with custom-
ers, 2) relationships with suppliers and contractors, and 3) relationships
with regulators. Therefore, the enterprise model expressed in enterprise
architecture must address how the operation interacts in its functional uni-
verse. Special consideration is given to 1) information, 2) processes, 3) en-
abling technology, and 4) enabling human resources and their associated
organization.




This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent. Rodger
J and Pankaj P, Enterprise Architecture Ontology for Supply Chain Maintenance and Restoration of
the Sikorsky’s UH-60 Helicopter. Intelligent Information Management, 4,4 (2012), pp. 161-170. DOI:
10.4236/iim.2012.44024.
256                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



     Enterprise model or how an enterprise works as a collection of people,
process, and technologies is often descriptive, ad hoc, or pre-scientific [2].
It is often a collection of heuristics which are not applicable in all circum-
stances. Enterprise architecture as a discipline has emerged to provide the
theoretical foundations for designing and representing the enterprise in a
scientific fashion. Using standard based ontologies to model enterprise is
one of the core aspects of enterprise architecture.
     Ontologies are of particular importance in the computer science and
information systems area on account of their ability to model/represent
knowledge as a set of concepts and the relationship between these con-
cepts in a given domain. If an ontology is formulated in a crowdsourced/
collaborative manner using a formal language then one can arrive at a
formal unambiguous model/representation of the knowledge (referred to
as ontology) about the given domain. Ontologies have developed for a
variety of things like enterprise modeling [2], in-vivo biological cell types
[3], marketing in relation to brand management [4], and socialism [5].
     An enterprise is defined by a host of characteristics—processes, inputs,
outputs, controls, enabling mechanisms including people (organizations)
and technology. There are meaningful and dynamic relationships among
these elements that affect cost and time as well as value and assets [1]. In
the enterprise architecture domain an ontology (model) can account for all
elements in the organization: its people, process, and technologies. The
ontology can form the basis of common or shared understanding of the
given domain can be used by internal constituents and partners of the en-
terprise for a variety of purposes like process integration etc. This shared
conceptualization can also form the basis for design of information sys-
tems that can help run the enterprise more efficiently, and multi-enterprise
collaboration using automated tools like intelligent agents. With regards to
the latter Gubric and Fan provide an analysis of six supply chain ontolo-
gies [6]. Boeing’s Boeing Technical Libraries developed a technical the-
saurus in the form of a semantic network incorporating 37,000 concepts
with an additional 19,000 synonym concept names, and 100,000 links [7-
9] to promote common understanding between various partners involved
in the manufacturing and design process.
     It is well understood that that a modern enterprise must be data driven
and all decisions should be based on information [1]. The process of
Enterprise Architecture Ontology for Supply Chain Maintenance              257



preparing data for transformation into information and presenting it for ac-
tion depends upon ontology. The process of associating information with
experience, methods, and algorithms also depends on ontology. Given a
problem domain within the context of an enterprise the first step would
to represent the domain using an ontology. The ontology representation
(syntax and semantics used to state the concepts and their relationships)
should be based on standards especially if the domain spans across sev-
eral enterprises. There are many standards available for representing an
ontology [1] and one of the popular standard is the OWL 2 Web Ontology
Language [10] by W3C.
    In this paper we present a problem domain related to aircraft mainte-
nance and provide description of the preliminary work done towards rep-
resenting the problem domain by arriving at an ontology using the OWL
ontology language.


13.2 MILITARY MAINTENANCE, REPAIR, AND OVERHAUL (MRO)

The military maintenance, repair, and overhaul (MRO) activities refer to
the maintenance functions required to sustain an active aircraft fleet such
as the Sikorsky UH- 60 [11]. The amount of maintenance required is di-
rectly related to the total number and usage of active aircraft. In other
words, the greater the air time, the greater the maintenance demand, and
the greater the MRO market. The MRO involves various constituents and
complex relationships. Regulatory environment plays a key role in how
the activities are carried out.
    This is also an illustration of the complexity of the issues, and hence the
requirement for an ontology that can promote shared understanding. MRO
industry requires licenses from their suppliers. A key business segment for
MRO firms involves obtaining PMA licenses. PMA licenses were enacted
for two purposes. First, they monitor the quality of MRO replacement or
modification parts for type-certified aircraft such as the Sikorsky UH-60.
Second, they ensure a supply of MRO parts for all aircraft, both military
and civilian. In a recent survey conducted by A.T. Kearney’s Aerospace and
Defense Practice [12], it was found that 96% of MRO respondents believed
PMA parts to be among the top 10 issues facing the aerospace industry [13].
258                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    Sikorsky is the contractor and producer of the UH-60 helicopters series
[12]. After each successful manufacturing, then the end product will be de-
livered to the military departments, who are its primary customers. How-
ever, each military department uses the helicopters for different types of
missions and in different operating environments. Nevertheless, the DoD
itself is able to exploit the Army facility to function as the central repair
facility for all the UH-60 helicopter models. As mentioned before MRO
is a complex operation involving many parties interacting in a complex
fashion and therefore leads to several issues.
    One of the key issues is that Sikorsky has little visibility on keeping
track of each individual UH-60 record, because each military service
records information differently in various flight data and maintenance
log books [14]. The data is then captured as represented on forms. Each
service has different form designs and records different data in terms of
differences in methods and locations. Thus the Army and Sikorsky have
difficulty in tracking the use and maintenance of the Navy and Army heli-
copters. When those helicopters arrive at the Army depot for repair, histo-
ry and configuration management are investigated for security clearance.
If Army does not have reliable data about those arriving helicopters at its
depot, it will definitely create unnecessary and redundant replacements
and exchange of parts, which will increase the operating costs and time.
    In addition the Sikorsky’s UH-60 is actually subject to the minimal
time required constraint. In other words, adding more human resources
and additional capital to the entire project will not lead to shorter MRO
time. If more resources are added to the project, it will only increase the
complexity and uncertainty of the whole project because more and more
factors will be accumulated, and it is very hard to identify the underlying
problems because groupthink phenomena will occur if there are redundant
employees are hired for a project.
    There are several ways to improve Sikorsky’s UH-60 project and
MRO. From a standards perspective, the government customer may adopt
a top-down strategy and attempt to direct all of the services to adopt a
single Information System. However, first, it has to recognize that for the
Army, Navy, and Sikorsky to replace all of the disparate legacy systems
is not possible, and it has to be noninvasive as possible. Alternatively, the
Enterprise Architecture Ontology for Supply Chain Maintenance             259



solution would be a system of data exchange among all parties that as-
sures accessibility to actionable data. By creating a data exchange mecha-
nism like Enterprise Application Integration (EAI), an Enterprise Bus, or
Service Oriented Architecture (SoA), a host or system neutral exchange
mechanism can be provided. Such exchange mechanism would of course
need unambiguous data definitions at the interface amongst other things.
Sikorsky, Army, and Navy would be able to map the data required for
exchange to any other qualified user in the aircraft community. Moreover,
the standardization is a critical factor for the success of the whole integra-
tion process. In this case, one may use the ISO 13030, which is the Prod-
uct Life Cycle Support Standard (PLCS) in defining and standardizing all
the complications into one unifying and collaboration processing system.
PLCS would alleviate the some discrepancies between the public sectors
and the private sectors in transmitting the information.
    Due to the different organizations involved in the MRO process and it
complexity, it is important to arrive at the same shared conceptualization
of the MRO domain between different participants. This conceptualization
will be made conformant to the PLCS standard. As discussed before the
domain can be represented with an ontology. This ontology can be con-
structed using a standards compliant language like OWL. The ontology
can then be used to design information systems (for of data exchange and
process standardization) across various partners involved in the Sikorsky
UH-60 MRO to resolve the issues faced.
    The following assumptions are made:

   1. We have to assume that all the involved entities would be willing
      to use common models as a medium for data exchange that is ap-
      plicable to most defense enterprise integration problems centered on
      exchanging information based on rigid standards and interfaces. For
      example, the Aircraft Maintenance Records entity from the ontol-
      ogy will have the data come from the Air Force Logistics Command
      (WR-ALC), Navy Air (NAVIR), Army Command (AMCOM), Sup-
      pliers, Depots, and Program Management Office (PMO).
   2. The Army, the subcontractors, and the external suppliers are able
      to accommodate to the operating characteristics of the Navy
260                              Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



       environment in providing the manufacturing, maintenance, and
       restorative services. Furthermore, we have to assume that Sikor-
       sky will still maintain a different system for its internal operat-
       ing environment, because it will provide some level of flexibil-
       ity for Sikorsky in servicing those non-governmental contracts.
       Additionally, the military services are autonomous for its culture
       and it may have difficulty to embrace common processes and
       common needs.
  3.   The defense industrial business information objects can be
       completely converted into PLCS data exchange objects (DEX)
       without any errors. Besides that, there are some critical im-
       provements in the data exchange between the dependent orga-
       nizations. For instance, the data exchange capabilities will be
       elevated between Army and Sikorsky, Navy and Army, as well
       as Navy with Sikorsky. Moreover, we have to assume that we
       have 100% knowledge about the exact scope, product informa-
       tion, usage characteristics, and minimum requirements of the
       entire aircraft industries, which appropriately comply with the
       standards defined by the H60 Helicopter Program and Aviation
       Maintenance, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and
       the Joint Aviation Authorities (JAA).
  4.   The Army, Navy and Sikorsky will adopt a standard and flexible
       data exchange utility, which enables seamless exchange without
       disrupting the respective application environments.
  5.   The data exchange processes are human-less processes, which
       mostly performed by autonomous computer system. There are no
       duplicated data or redundancy in database reporting, the responses
       to the request are almost spontaneous, and the involved data ex-
       change utilities are flexible and reworkable at minimal efforts and
       costs.
  6.   This proposed aircraft MRO ontology is general and broad enough
       to cover the entire aircraft industry for Army, as well as Navy. This
       is needed for ensuring that the ontology is still useful and can be
       adapted to at least other similar aircrafts.
Enterprise Architecture Ontology for Supply Chain Maintenance             261



13.3 AIRCRAFT CLASS HIERARCHY

The ontology presented here is preliminary and a work in progress. In
addition this work is primarily for research purposes and not oriented
towards implementation. The complexity and scope of the problem pre-
cludes a complete presentation. It however provides a good illustration of
the process of constructing an ontology using OWL Language and Protégé
tool [15]. Protégé is a free, open source ontology editor and a knowledge
acquisition system. Like Eclipse, Protégé is a framework for which vari-
ous other projects suggest plugins. It is written in Java and heavily uses
Swing to create the rather complex user interface. Protégé recently has
over 160,000 registered users. Protégé is being developed at Stanford Uni-
versity in collaboration with the University of Manchester and is made
available under the Mozilla Public License 1.1. The development of the
aircraft ontology starts with the identification of the aircraft we identified
for the case. Actually more aircraft types and classes can be added to this
existing ontology we have developed as long as they shared common at-
tributes, which can be linked to other entities. In our case, we only choose
Boeing 777 (refer to Figure 1) and Sikorsky’s UH-60 helicopter as our
primary subjects for the development of the aircraft ontology. From the
diagram below, we manipulated a variable, which is called Part_Type to
connect the two different types of plane we investigated. It is because
Sikorsky_UH-60 and Boeing_777 entities have recorded the information
about the parts required for the maintenance purposes, which we will use
in the later stage.
    After we developed the major entities for the aircraft types, we will
then further develop the sub-entities of Boeing 777 (refer to Figure 2)
so that we will clearly observe the flow of the parts that are required to
manufacture and to repair a Boeing 777 airplane. As we mentioned be-
fore, all the attributes (required parts and specifications) are linked to the
Part_Type entity for the expansion of the entire ontology. The other air-
craft type we have included for this aircraft ontology is the Sikorsky’s
UH-60 helicopter (refer to Figure 3). Similar to the Boeing 777 aircraft,
we derive all the relative part levelby-level from Sikorsky_ UH-60 to
262                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



the Tail_Section and the Front_Section, and then those two are further
divided into sub-sub-parts or components. Similarly, all the attributes (re-
quired parts and specifications) are linked to the Part_Type entity for the
expansion of the entire ontology.


13.4 OBJECT AND DATA PROPERTIES

We begin the process of capturing the domain knowledge pertinent to the
repairable parts by focusing on the primary information flow. The primary
objects in this partial ontology (refer to Figure 4) include air bases, air
planes, types of parts, facilities and remote supply requests and depots. As
we are required to understand the exact quantities of items such as parts
and aircraft, but it is necessary to create a Quantity_Of class that permits
the association of a numeric count with a specific plane or part type. In this
way we can say that a particular facility has a Quantity_Of instance relat-
ing a particular item with a specific number. It was also necessary to be
able to associate each air base with an ordered list of remote supply facili-
ties available to provide additional parts, which can be achieved using an
Remote_Supply_Requests structure (will be connected to other variables
later in the complete ontology).
    Simulated data was constructed for this scenario consisting of the in-
ventory of aircraft and parts at from different air bases and different re-
mote supply bases taken at various times. Each event contained facility-
specific information such as the quantity of good aircraft of each type,
the quantity of aircraft parts in stock, and the quantity of fixable parts in
stock along with the current need for parts that needed to be replaced on
aircraft undergoing repair. In addition to this event data, a file of annota-
tions was created containing descriptions of the various aircraft types and
the parts that make them up, while another annotation file was constructed
to provide descriptions of the specific air bases, their aircrafts and their
remote supply facilities. In other words, the constructed entity relationship
diagrams above will illustrate the six interrogatives of what, when, who,
where, why and how, described by the Zachman Framework [16].
Enterprise Architecture Ontology for Supply Chain Maintenance       263




                                                                FIGURE 1: Aircraft class entity relationship diagram
                                                   264




FIGURE 2: Boeing 777 entity relationship diagram
                                                   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
                                                                    Enterprise Architecture Ontology for Supply Chain Maintenance




FIGURE 3: Sikorsky’s UH-60 helicopter entity relationship diagram
                                                                    265
                                                                            266




FIGURE 4: Partial aircraft entity relationship diagram and its attributes
                                                                            Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
Enterprise Architecture Ontology for Supply Chain Maintenance            267



    After understanding how the information flow between the internal
aspects of the Army’s, Navy’s, and Sikorsky’s information systems, the
next step we have to configure the external working environments for the
maintenance requests to be delivered to the suppliers and the appointed
subcontractors. First, we will implement a SCM system, which acts as a
middleware for information exchange between the buyer side and the sell-
er side. It pretty much links all the variables such as Facility, Air_ Base,
Remote_Supply_Requests, Aircraft_Maintenance_ Records, SCM_Data_
Repository, Distributors, and PLCS (will discuss in later section).
    The topology of this SCM is defined by entities and connectors (refer to
Figure 5). The entities interact with each other through the connectors as an
order is fulfilled in a supply chain. Each entity performs five main actions
with regard to the order life cycle, which are the creation, placement, pro-
cessing, shipping, and finally receiving. Those orders are initiated based on
the Remote_Supply_ Requests, placed by the Army, or the private sectors.
The order transport is to be assumed with some level of processing delays.
Once the requests are initiated, the order will be shipped from the supplier
side to the initiation entity. Whenever the orders are received, they will be
consummated immediately (no inventory for stock items).
    We basically have identified the primary supply chain agents in the
SCM system, and they are distributors, assemblers, Manufacturers, and
suppliers (refer to Figure 6). Each connector between those entities serves
as the tracking and coordination utility for the flow of material, informa-
tion, and finance in the supplier-customer network.
    We will further develop the supplier network by identifying all the
participating suppliers, which will contribute to the manufacturing and
maintenance of the aircrafts (refer to Figure 7). In our case, we develop an
interactive supplier database system for all the participating suppliers for
the bidding activities to take place. Suppliers who comply with the PLCS
specifications will be chosen to be the prime contractors for the Army,
Navy, and Sikorsky.
    Next, we have to impose the Product Life Cycle Support Standard
(PLCS), ISO 10303, to map the order specifications against the aircraft
maintenance records by the military users (refer to Figure 8). Thus, PLCS
serves as the catching mechanism to filter the data redundancy and faulty
parts, which are not appropriately, comply with the PLCS specifications.
                                                    268




FIGURE 5: SCM system entity relationship diagram.
                                                    Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
Enterprise Architecture Ontology for Supply Chain Maintenance              269




FIGURE 6: Simplified SCM entity relationship diagram



PLCS entity contains the PLCS_Data_Repository, which consists on all
kinds of forms for internal processing purposes. It is needed for data ex-
change, visibility, and flexibility.
    In addition to that, we have to consider that sometimes Army from
the air bases and facilities may employ outside contractors to perform the
maintenance activities, when the Army side lacks of latest knowledge and
expertise. Once again, those subcontractors will be interacted with the
SCM systems, to comply with the PLCS standards (refer to Figure 9), and
to follow the Aircraft_ Maintenance_Records specifications from various
air bases, different facilities, and at different time. Thus, we have to estab-
lish interrelated connectors between those entities.
    As we connect all the partial ontologies for the maintenance of the
aircraft by the Army for the Navy people, we will be able to understand
the overall picture of the complete aircraft ontology (refer to Figure 10).
First, we will realize that all the significant entities are actually interre-
lated, interoperated, and dependent in nature. Second, as we discover more
factors, we have to actually increase the entities in the ontology, which in
turn, increase the complexity of the ontology. Moreover, we will be able
to observe the critical path factors in the aircraft ontology that we have
created, from the number of connectors that an entity has.


13.5 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

An ontology can present the knowledge about a domain in a scientific
and unambiguous fashion. This representation can be used for a common
shared understanding by different constituents of the domain including
various stakeholders and can also be used as the basis for designing in-
formation systems. Here we have presented an ontology that modifies the
current domain to be standard compliant and therefore provides a solution
that may alleviate some issues through design of appropriate information
270                                   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




FIGURE 7: Supplier database system entity relationship diagram.
Enterprise Architecture Ontology for Supply Chain Maintenance                             271




                                                                FIGURE 8: PLCS entity relationship diagram.
                                                        272




FIGURE 9: Subcontractors entity relationship diagram.
                                                        Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
Enterprise Architecture Ontology for Supply Chain Maintenance              273




FIGURE 10: Complete Boeing 777 and Sikorsky’s UH-60 helicopter ontology.
274                                    Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



systems. With reference to the example issue that was discussed model-
driven data exchange may be implemented as a replacement for point-
to-point and hub-spoken connectivity. Additionally international standard
framework for data exchange may be used so that open interoperability
may be achieved and entire ontology can be expanded.
    The ontology presentation in this paper is somewhat limited fashion due
to issues of scope and functionality. The ontology is preliminary based on
available information and may be improved. To improve the proposed ontol-
ogy, more recent data would be gathered so that some unsolved exceptions
can be handled effectively. Additional development spirals for the ontology
and associated information systems, could be undertaken from time to time
through gathering of more performance data and learned-from-experienced
data from the customer satisfaction reports. Next one may focus on the ef-
ficiency and improvement of planning, problem solving, sense making, and
the decision making of the maintenance activities and through timely and re-
liable forecasts on the arrival of those aircrafts to the maintenance facilities.


REFERENCES

 1.   J. J. George and J. A. Rodger, “Smart Data: Enterprise Performance Optimization
      Strategy,” John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, 2010.
 2.   M. Gruninger and K. Atefi, “Ontologies to Support Process Integration in Enterprise
      Engineering,” Computational & Mathematical Organization Theory, Vol. 6, No. 4,
      2000, pp. 381-394. doi:10.1023/A:1009610430261
 3.   T. F. Meehan and A. M. Masci, “Logical Development of the Cell Ontology,” BMC
      Bioinformatics, Vol. 12, No. 1, 2011, p. 6. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-6
 4.   W. Grassl, “The Reality of Brands: Towards an Ontology of Marketing,” The Ameri-
      can Journal of Economics and Sociology, Vol. 58, No. 2, 1999, pp. 313-359.
 5.   R. Westra, “Marxian Economic Theory and an Ontology of Socialism: A
      Japanese Intervention,” Capital & Class, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2002, pp. 61-85.
      doi:10.1177/030981680207800104
 6.   T. Grubic and I. S. Fan, “Supply Chain Ontology: Review, Analysis and Synthe-
      sis,” Computers in Industry, Vol. 61, No. 8, 2010, pp. 776-786. doi:10.1016/j.comp-
      ind.2010.05.006
 7.   P. J. Clark and R. Thompson, “Exploiting a Thesaurus- Based Semantic Net for
      Knowledge-Based Search,” 12th Conference on Innovative Applications of AI
      (AAAI/ IAAI’00), 2000. http://www.aaai.org/Papers/IAAI/2000/IAAI00-008.pdf
 8.   A. Hunter, “Engineering Ontologies,” 2001. http://www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/a.hunter/
      tradepress/eng.html
Enterprise Architecture Ontology for Supply Chain Maintenance                      275


 9.    M. Uschold, “Creating, Integrating and Maintaining Local and Global Ontologies,”
       First Workshop on Ontology Learning (OL-2000) in Conjunction with the 14th Eu-
       ropean Conference on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI 2000), Berlin, 2001.
 10.   P. Hitzler and M. Krötzsch, “OWL 2 Web Ontology Language Primer,” 2012. http://
       www.w3.org/TR/owl2-primer/
 11.   L. Miller and M. Bertus, “License Valuation in the Aerospace Industry: A Real Op-
       tions Approach,” Review of Financial Economics, Vol. 14, No. 3-4, 2005, pp. 225-
       239. doi:10.1016/j.rfe.2005.04.001
 12.   Wikipedia, “Sikorsky UH-6,” 2012. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sikorsky_UH-60
 13.   W. Anderson, “Logistics and Support Chain Management: An Aerospace Industry
       Perspective,” 5th Annual Executives Logistics Forum, University of North Texas,
       Denton, 2001
 14.   C. Koblish, “MRO—Crisis or Cycle,” Maintenance, Repair, and Overhaul Confer-
       ence Fort Lauderdale, McGraw Hill, New York, 2003.
 15.   Standford, “Protégé,” 2012. Protege.standford.edu
 16.   J. A. Zachman, “John Zachman’s Concise Definition of the Zachman’s Framework,”
       2008. http://www.zachman.com/about-the-zachman-framework
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER 14



AN ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE
FRAMEWORK FOR MOBILE
COMMERCE
KHAWAR HAMEED, HANIFA SHAH, KAMRAN AHSAN,
and WEIJUN YANG




14.1 INTRODUCTION

The phenomenon of mobility has driven an evolution and revolution of
technologies and new ways of working, exploiting the practice of anytime,
anyplace, anyhow computing whilst gaining critical mass as a research
discipline and paradigm - the study of which has provided a grounding
for conceptual and theoretical perspectives that allow framing and dis-
cussion of mobility [2] [3]. Mobile commerce has created a wide range
of business opportunities—the spectrum of which includes the transfor-
mation of mobile network operators to go beyond the provision of core
voice services to the delivery of value added services and service aggrega-
tion that provide comprehensive consumer packages [4], the emergence
of business models to develop and deploy mobile applications (such as
the Apple ‘App’ Store, the O2 Litmus programme, and the Sony Ericsson
Developer World – most of which are based on shared revenue distribution
through sales through the respective hosting channels. Furthermore,


This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent. Hameed K,
Shah H, Ahsan K, and Yang W. An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Mobile Commerce. Interna-
tional Journal of Computer Science Issues, 7,3 (2010), ISSN (Online): 1694-0784.
278                              Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



open programmes and platforms such as Android (Google) are likely to
contribute to the enlargement of the developer community that seeds the
growth of mobile applications. With the supply chain of mobile computing
and commerce, a range of opportunities exist for contributing parties to
collaboration to provide value-added solutions based on new relationship
types, rules and ecosystems [5] further enhancing the composite capability
and reach of service providers into new market areas. Beyond service pro-
viders, the ease of access, penetration, and diffusion of mobile technolo-
gies has enabled individual sectors and organisations therein to apply the
concepts and practice of mobility to create innovative domain-specific m-
commerce applications that leverage the specific nuances associated with
those domains resulting in value-added solutions for end-users and new
revenue-generating opportunities for business. Examples of these include
mobile location-based tourism, travel and navigation systems, m-ticketing
and booking applications. Beyond the core commercial imperative of in-
creased revenue generation, the application of mobile computing and prin-
ciples of m-commerce also underpin the development of private and pub-
lic sector mobile applications that aim to reduce operating costs, enhance
efficiency and provide better platforms for engaging the end-user popula-
tion. Basole [2] presents an Enterprise Mobility Continuum that frames
mobile solutions from point-specific solutions to those that diffuse across
entire organisations to create stakeholder value. Across and throughout the
complex m-commerce ecosystem the question arises regarding the con-
struction of m-commerce solutions and how these are best approached.
    The increasing attention to business underpinned by mobility, mobile
services, mobile applications, and technologies has become a major driver
for the development of m-commerce systems. This growing trend has be-
come a focus for a significant number of organisations. This paper propos-
es that in developing mcommerce systems organisations need to establish
an enterprise architecture for m-commerce. The rationale for this is rooted
in the need to develop a holistic and integrated view of strategic direction
relating to mcommerce which will enable a coordinated and controlled
approach that reduces complexity and yields effective systems based on
the structured integration of services, practices and technology resources.
In doing so, the potentially complex universe of discourse associated with
An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Mobile Commerce                279



mobility is harnessed to produce and organisational asset to drive the de-
velopment of m-commerce.
    The next section proposes a framework to establish such an enter-
prise architecture for mobile commerce. Firstly, an enterprise architecture
framework for mobile commerce is presented followed by a brief view of
associated issues concerned with method.


14.2 AN ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE (EA) FRAMEWORK FOR
MOBILE COMMERCE

An EA framework provides the basis or template for the creation and es-
tablishment of enterprise architecture. Zachman [6] is credited with de-
veloping the discipline of enterprise architectures as a concern for both
researchers and practitioners. An enterprise architecture framework is es-
sentially a meta-construct used to define the scope of the associated archi-
tecture and how the areas of the architecture relate to each other [7]. An
architecture can be considered analogous to a blueprint or plan of a build-
ing structure, where different perspectives may exist and each perspective
contains structures that demonstrate inter-relationships based upon some
predefined constraint and yield a solid foundation and approach upon
which the building is constructed.
    Generally speaking, the EA framework defines the scope of the re-
sulting architecture, which typically includes a business view, information
integration, application-level views, and technology infrastructures. Defi-
nitions of each view may include more refined constructs and relationships
at a lower level of granularity.
    The application of an EA approach is considered relevant and ap-
propriate since the ecosystem within which the development of m-
commerce solutions occurs comprises a set of interrelated perspectives
based upon the integration of mobile devices, technologies, and busi-
ness processes [8]. Therefore, an EA framework for mobile commerce
can be considered to address, at least, the scope of architecture cover-
ing the business level/view, the application level and the technology
infrastructure level.
280                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    In each level of our proposal, core components have been identified.
These are: a business model of m-commerce (business level), supply chain
of m-commerce (supply chain level), m-commerce applications (applica-
tion level) and technology infrastructure for m-commerce (technology
level). Our research has shown that integration of core EA approaches
with m-commerce is relatively sparse, whereas literature in both contrib-
uting areas is substantial. Furthermore, Leist & Zellner [9] state that “as
information systems grown in complexity and scope the need for a com-
prehensive and consistent approach in modelling these systems becomes
of paramount importance.” Basole [2] recognises that businesses are “just
beginning to recognise the importance and potentially transformative
impact of enterprise mobility.” Given this our approach to applying EA
principles to m-commerce appears well-grounded. A proposed Enterprise
Architecture Framework for mobile commerce is shown in Figure 1.


14.2.1 FIRST LEVEL: M-COMMERCE BUSINESS MODELS

Figure 1 shows the first (topmost) level in our Enterprise Architecture
framework for m-commerce relating to business models. This level is
identified as the first level in the EA framework and provides a descrip-
tion of the roles and relationships of an organisation, its customer, partners
and suppliers and stakeholders, as well as the flows of goods, information
and money between these parties and the main benefits for those involved
[10]. The stakeholder transactional models are based upon those present-
ed by Coursaris & Hassanein [11] and are divided into four models (i)
wireless Business-to-Consumer (WB2C) model; (ii) a wireless Consumer-
to-Business (WC2B) model; (iii) a wireless Consumer-to-Consumer (WC2C)
model; and (iv) a wireless Consumer-to-Self (WC2) model. These models
mainly describe business activities between the contributing parties, and
the specific nature of these. The abstraction of these models provides a
basis for higherlevel understanding of the spectrum of stakeholders and
relationships at the topmost level of the architecture.
    Other business models of mobile commerce attempt to address the
complexities associated with the m-commerce ecosystem comprising dif-
ferent participants (such as mobile consumers, network operators, service
An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Mobile Commerce                281




FIGURE 1: An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Mobile Commerce


providers, application developers, content providers and technology pro-
viders) and encompass the types of services and sources of profits. In addi-
tion, models describe operations and processes relating to mobile growth,
value-added benefits, revenue models and return on investment, and the
transfer of benefits across stakeholders for mutual gain [12].
    During the development of our framework we reviewed models broad-
ly associated with the business models for mobile information, mobile
advertising and for mobile office work. Typical characteristics of these
were associated with relationships between content providers, network op-
erators and service providers for direct gain through revenue opportunities
from mobile consumers and shared distribution amongst stakeholders and
participants. Interestingly, one specific finding was that, “mobile consum-
ers represent the only sustainable revenue source for participants” [13].
282                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



    From the characteristics identified, it is seen that business models for
mobile commerce are helpful in enabling organisations to increase the
possibilities for increasing revenue and profit, and enhancing competitive-
ness. Taking Vodafone Group Plc [14] as a typical example rather com-
plex business activities can be observed where the business acts as wire-
less network operator providing information transmission services for its
customers whilst also acting as a content or service providers of specific
service content for its customers such as music downloading, online gam-
ing, e-mail and location-based information. In this and other similar cases
the business models appear not to be mutually exclusive (e.g. single and
independent WB2C, WC2B, WC2C, WC2 business models) [11]. Thus, encap-
sulating the diverse stakeholder groups and associated mobile information
needs can be seen as providing competitive advantage and market diver-
sification.


14.2.2 SECOND LEVEL: THE SUPPLY CHAIN OF MOBILE
COMMERCE

Figure 1 shows the second level in the Enterprise Architecture framework
for mobile commerce and is concerned with the supply chain. The materi-
alisation of business models for m-commerce depends on a complex chain
of business relationships between participants of the supply chain [12].
The supply chain for m-commerce is therefore identified as the second and
supporting level in the enterprise architecture framework.
    This supply chain for m-commerce can be seen as rooted in mobile
telecom markets, within which a variety of participants possess resources,
perform activities, and are in relationships that are established or evolv-
ing in delivering an end-to-end service [15]. However, given the increas-
ing diversity of applications, services and associated information delivery,
this supply chain is being extended to include a spectrum of market areas
which, when aggregated provide value-added services to the mobile user.
    The core elements of the m-commerce supply chain include mobile
commerce participants, mobile commerce resources and mobile commerce
An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Mobile Commerce                 283



activities. Mobile commerce participants are a major driving force behind
the m-commerce supply chain [13]. Mobile commerce participants funda-
mentally include mobile consumers, wireless network providers, content
provide, service providers, application developers and technology provid-
ers—all of whom engage in a business-oriented relationship and, in the
specific case of m-commerce, one that is focussed on commercial gain for
service delivery participants. For example, the shared/distributed revenue
approach entails the wireless network providers delivering part of that rev-
enue to other participants in the supply chain—such as content providers
and other service providers.


14.2.3 THIRD LEVEL: MOBILE COMMERCE APPLICATIONS

The third level of the framework is concerned with mobile commerce ap-
plications. Because an organisation uses mobile applications to support
and deliver its business models through the supply chain, mobile ap-
plications are seen as the tangible end-user vehicles that mechanise and
enable the m-commerce transaction. Mobile applications are therefore
identified at the third level in the Enterprise Architecture framework for
m-commerce.
    M-commerce applications can be broadly categorised as communica-
tion applications, information applications, entertainment applications and
commerce applications [11]. Five main application types were identified:
mobile ticketing, mobile advertising, mobile information, mobile bank-
ing and mobile office applications. These were found to support the key
business models and imperatives (revenue generation or cost reduction)
and were constructed using the supply chain to deliver an aggregated ser-
vice. The constantly developing landscape of mobile technologies, and
more specifically application capability, raises a proposition of re-aligning
business models and supply chains to fully leverage the potential of that
change—thus suggesting a commercially synergistic relationship (in this
case, the applications and technology forcing a re-evaluation of the busi-
ness models and supply chain) .
284                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




14.2.4 FOURTH LEVEL: THE TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE
FOR MOBILE COMMERCE

The fourth level of the framework is concerned with technology infrastruc-
ture for m-commerce. This includes wireless communication technology,
wireless middleware technology, information exchange technology, wire-
less network & application protocols and mobile security technology. Es-
sentially, these are the core technological components and infrastructures
that enable mobile users in their environments. These technologies sup-
port upper levels of the framework (m-commerce business models, m-
commerce supply chain, and m-commerce applications).


14.3 METHOD

In order to materialise a specific architecture from the enterprise architec-
ture framework an associated method is required. The method provides a
step-by-step description of how to establish the architecture [7]. In context
of the proposed framework, a five-step approach is proposed based upon
five generic steps [16] adapted to suit the framework-specific needs. Our
current research focuses on the development of the m-commerce enter-
prise architecture framework and the method associated with this is in
embryonic form. Nevertheless, views and expectations are that this will
focus on internal knowledge audits to determine organisational readiness
and mobile strategies, a series of data collection methods that aim to elicit
the type of existing of new applications that can be mobilised in context
of m-commerce, the skills base, and the technology/resource levels within
the organisation, and levels of innovation. Other aspects are expected to
address appropriate business planning tools, modelling techniques and no-
tations that apply across the four levels of the framework and incorporate
the modelling of mobility in context of mobile commerce opportunities.
Technical limitations of mobile devices and wireless communications,
business concerns and legal constraints complicate the practical use of
mobile commerce [17]. Therefore, these also provide the impetus of de-
veloping appropriate methods that address these concerns. In all these cas-
An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Mobile Commerce                   285



es organisations may have existing approaches and techniques that might
be used a part of the method.


14.4 VALIDATION

To validate the proposed framework a questionnaire was developed to test
the overall construct of the framework, its direct relevance to businesses,
and to seek the views that might be incorporated in its refinement. The
survey aimed to elicit initial and relatively informal feedback and as such
was constructed to provide qualitative feedback that would enable scope
for interpretation and discussion. Three organisations (anonymity main-
tained) participated in the survey. Questions were asked in two parts (EA
Framework for M-Commerce & EA Method for MCommerce) and sought
views on the following areas and propositions:


14.4.1 THE BUSINESS MODEL FOR M-COMMERCE

   • A1: The positioning of the business model for mcommerce at the first (top-
     most) level in the EA Framework
   • A2: The role of a business model for m-commerce to describe how organ-
     isations create and realise genuine benefit from mobile commerce activi-
     ties.
   • A3: The division of an m-commerce business model into a Wireless Busi-
     ness-to-Consumer model, Wireless Consumer-to-Business model, Wire-
     less Consumer-to-Consumer model, and Wireless Consumer-to-Self model
     [11].
   • A4: The composition of a business model for mcommerce to include the
     source of profits, mobile services and supply chain participants.
   • A5: The choice of novel or more recent business model approaches over
     traditional business models for m-commerce.



14.4.2 THE SUPPLY CHAIN FOR M-COMMERCE

   • A6: The positioning of the supply chain model for mcommerce at the sec-
     ond level in the EA Framework.
286                                Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



  • A7: That a good supply chain for m-commerce can streamline business
    processes for m-commerce.
  • A8: That the supply chain for m-commerce includes m-commerce partici-
    pants, m-commerce resources and m-commerce activities.
  • A9: That the m-commerce participants are a major driving force behind the
    supply chain of mcommerce.


14.4.3 M-COMMERCE APPLICATIONS

  • A10: The positioning of m-commerce applications at the third level in the
    EA Framework.
  • A11: M-commerce applications are influenced by the business model and
    supply chain for m-commerce.
  • A12: M-commerce applications need be supported by reliable m-commerce
    technology


14.4.4 TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR M-COMMERCE

  • A13: The positioning of technology infrastructure for m-commerce at the
    final level (bottom) in the EA Framework.
  • A14: The role of mobile communication technologies in offering message
    or wireless data capability.
  • A15: That wireless middleware technology supports the development and
    operation of m-commerce applications.
  • A16: Information exchange technologies are necessary for m-commerce
    applications and mobile devices.
  • A17: That wireless network and application protocols can support the de-
    livery of web-based information.


14.4.5 EA METHOD FOR M-COMMERCE

  • B1: The positioning of data collection (knowledge audit) as a first step in an
    EA method for m-commerce.
  • B2: Data collection should comprise identification of m-commerce compo-
    nents and also possible obstacles or restrictions in m-commerce.
  • B3: That defining the purposes of an EA for mcommerce is defined as the
    second step.
  • B4: That establishing an EA (schema) for mobile commerce is defined as
    the third step.
An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Mobile Commerce                                       287



    • B5: That an EA framework of m-commerce needs be modelled by software tools.
    • B6: That tool selection is defined as the finall step.


14.4 RESULTS

A 3 scale scoring system was used and responses constrained to Accept (3),
Neither/Neutral (2), and Not Accepted (1). All three participants responded
and the summarised results for each participant are tabulated as shown.


TABLE 1: The total feedback score: Organisation 1
         Establishing Enterprise Architecture (EA) for Mobile Commerce (M-Commerce)
                          Section A: An EA Framework of M-Commerce
 The Business Model of             Total scale: (1–15)
 M-Commerce:                       A1: (3) + A2: (3) + A3: (2) + A4: (3) + A5: (3) = 14
 The Supply Chain of               Total scale: (1–12)
 M-Commerce:                       A6: (3) +A7: (3) + A8: (3) + A9: (2) = 11
 M-Commerce Applications:          Total scale: (1–9)
                                   A10: (3) + A11: (2) + A12: (3) = 8
 Technology Infrastructure of      Total scale: (1–15)
 M-Commerce:                       A13: (3) + A14: (3) + A15: (3) + A16: (3) + A17: (1) = 13
                           Section B: An EA Method for M-Commerce
 The Steps in an EA Method for     Total scale: (1–18)
 M-Commerce                        B1: (3) + B2: (3) + B3: (2) +B4: (3) + B5: (3) + B6: (2) = 16


TABLE 2: The total feedback score: Organisation 2
         Establishing Enterprise Architecture (EA) for Mobile Commerce (M-Commerce)
                          Section A: An EA Framework of M-Commerce
 The Business Model of             Total scale: (1–15)
 M-Commerce:                       A1: (3) + A2: (3) + A3: (2) + A4: (3) + A5: (3) = 13
 The Supply Chain of               Total scale: (1–12)
 M-Commerce:                       A6: (3) +A7: (3) + A8: (3) + A9: (2) = 11
 M-Commerce Applications:          Total scale: (1–9)
                                   A10: (3) + A11: (2) + A12: (3) = 8
 Technology Infrastructure of      Total scale: (1–15)
 M-Commerce:                       A13: (3) + A14: (3) + A15: (3) + A16: (3) + A17: (2) = 14
                           Section B: An EA Method for M-Commerce
 The Steps in an EA Method for     Total scale: (1–18)
 M-Commerce                        B1: (3) + B2: (3) + B3: (2) +B4: (3) + B5: (3) + B6: (3) = 17
288                                      Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



TABLE 3: The total feedback score: Organisation 3
         Establishing Enterprise Architecture (EA) for Mobile Commerce (M-Commerce)
                          Section A: An EA Framework of M-Commerce
 The Business Model of             Total scale: (1–15)
 M-Commerce:                       A1: (3) + A2: (2) + A3: (2) + A4: (3) + A5: (3) = 13
 The Supply Chain of               Total scale: (1–12)
 M-Commerce:                       A6: (3) +A7: (2) + A8: (3) + A9: (2) = 10
 M-Commerce Applications:          Total scale: (1–9)
                                   A10: (3) + A11: (3) + A12: (2) = 8
 Technology Infrastructure of      Total scale: (1–15)
 M-Commerce:                       A13: (3) + A14: (3) + A15: (3) + A16: (3) + A17: (2) = 14
                           Section B: An EA Method for M-Commerce
 The Steps in an EA Method for     Total scale: (1–18)
 M-Commerce                        B1: (3) + B2: (3) + B3: (2) +B4: (2) + B5: (3) + B6: (2) = 15




    All 3 respondents scored highly regarding the business model compo-
nent of the proposed framework, indicating its appropriate and relevant
positioning. Similarly, responses regarding the supply chain model com-
ponent of the framework scored highly. This again was interpreted as a
positive response regarding its overall context and positioning. The scor-
ing for m-commerce applications as part of the framework was slightly
lower, although this was still deemed a positive response. Finally, the
technology infrastructure level scored highly, again indicating an over-
all positive response. The overall interpretation was that the framework
proposition was an appropriate and useful vehicle for the development of
mcommerce within organisations.
    With respect to the method, all responded again scored this aspect
highly thus indicating its potential relevance, value and use.


14.5 CONCLUSIONS

Mobile technology is continuing to play a significant role in providing
efficient and effective means for organisations to broaden their revenue
streams, and enhancing competitive positioning. There is no doubt that
the mobile ecosystem creates many possibilities for the development of
innovative solutions that create real value for end users whilst meeting
An Enterprise Architecture Framework for Mobile Commerce                                 289



real financial imperatives of service providers and stakeholders in the m-
commerce supply chain. However, the mobile ecosystem is potentially
complex and the universe of discourse created contains many interrelated
components that span across financial, organisational, technological, and
social boundaries. It is this that provides the impetus and rationale to focus
on adopting an enterprise architecture framework approach to govern the
development of mcommerce systems and with a view to reducing com-
plexity. It is also this that aims to enable organisations to adapt rapidly
to mobile technologies, reap the affordances created through technology
adoption, remain competitive—yet through a structured and framework-
oriented approach that provides a baseline for pro-active transformation
rather than a re-active and potentially chaotic and fragmented approach.
    This paper has proposed an initial enterprise architecture framework
for mobile commerce that aims to provide practitioners and researchers a
platform for considering the development of m-commerce systems, and
one which aims to influence both philosophical and practical approaches
to building m-commerce systems. Initial response, albeit being based on
limited demographics, has been positive and this provides motivation for
future work. The framework proposition comprises four levels, each of
which draws upon specific nuances associated with the mobile environ-
ment and each of which is constructed in context of other layers—thus
demonstrating a frameworkoriented approach.


REFERENCES

 1.   Mahatanankoon, P., Wen H.J., & Lim,B. (2005) Consumer-Based m-commerce: Ex-
      ploring Consumer Perception of Mobile Applications. Computer Standards & Inter-
      faces, 27(4), 347-357.
 2.   Basole, Rahul C., Enterprise Mobility: Researching a New Paradigm. Information
      Knowledge Systems Management 7 (2008) 1-7.
 3.   Kakihara, M., Sorensen, C. (2001) Expanding the ‘Mobility’ Concept. ACM SIG-
      GROUP Bulletin. 22 (3) 33-37.
 4.   Seybold, Andrew M., The Convergence of Wireless, Mobility, and the Internet and its Rel-
      evance to Enterprises. Information Knowledge Systems Management 7 (2008) 11-23.
 5.   McDowell, M., Business Mobility: A Changing Ecosystem. Information Knowledge
      Systems Management 7 (2008) 25-37.
 6.   Zachman, J.A., A Framework for Information Systems Architecture. IBM Systems
      Journal, Vol 26 (3) 1987.
290                                    Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks


7.    Scott A. Bernard, An Introduction to Enterprise Architecture, Second Edition, 2006.
8.    N.Bandyopadhyay, E-Commerce: Context, Concepts and Consequences, Published
      by McGraw-Hill Education, Second Edition, 2002.
9.    Zellner, S. L. A. G. (2006). Evaluation of current architecture frameworks. ACM,
      SAC'06, April, 23-27, 2006, Dijon, France.
10.   Giovanni Camponovo and Yves Pigneur, Business Model Analysis Applied To Mo-
      bile Business, The University of Lausanne, 2004.
11.   Coursaris & Hassanein, Understanding m-commerce: A Consumer-centric Model,
      Degroote School of Business, McMaster University, 2006.
12.   WANG Yan & GAO Yufei, Research on the Value Chain and Business Models for
      Mobile Commerce, Fudan University, 2004.
13.   Brian E.Mennecke and Troy J.Strader, Mobile Commerce: Technology, Theory, and
      Applications, Lowa State University, Published by Idea GroupInc, 2003.
14.   Vodafone, About Vodafone Power to You, from http://www.vodafone.com/start/
      about_vodafone, accessed November 13, 2009.
15.   Nan Si Shi, Wireless Communications and Mobile Commerce, Published in the
      United Kingdom by Idea Group Inc, 2004.
16.   Rob.C.Thomas, A Practical Guide for Developing an Enterprise Architecture, Fed-
      eral Chief Information Officer Council, 2004.
17.   Keng Siau, Ee-Peng Lim, Zixing Shen, Mobile Commerce: Current States and Fu-
      ture Trends, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, USA, 2006.
CHAPTER 15



EA-MDA MODEL TO RESOLVE IS
CHARACTERISTIC PROBLEMS IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
MARDIANA and KEIJIRO ARAKI



15.1 INTRODUCTION

Educational institutions play a pivotal role in society, primarily in devel-
oping countries. Educational institutions which in this case refer to higher
education institutions (HEI) have business domains unlike that of busi-
ness entities or other organizations. HEI or university places more empha-
sis on the role of information technology (IT) in supporting its business
processes. Given its scale and complexity, IT management in HEI can
be categorized as enterprise-scale data management. As such, particular
planning and design is necessary to ensure that IT is applied in accor-
dance with the institution’s strategic objective and plan, and that it can be
optimally utilized by users. The purpose of HEI in Indonesia adheres to
the Triple Principles of Higher Education Institutions (Tridharma Pergu-
ruan Tinggi) that comprise education, research and community service.
To ensure adherence to these principles, every university has developed
their own strategic plan according to their vision and mission statements.
University must also synchronize their business and technology strategies.
All of these can be attained by applying the enterprise architecture (EA)



This chapter was originally published under the Creative Commons License or equivalent. Mardiana
and Araki K. EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Characteristic Problems in Educational Institutions. Inter-
national Journal of Software Engineering & Applications 4,3 (2013), DOI : 10.5121/ijsea.2013.4301.
292                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



approach within the institution. Through the optimal performance of busi-
ness processes, EA can facilitate strategic planning, align business and IT
resources, and regulate the lifecycle of an information system (IS) devel-
opment process [1].
    IS development is an aspect that should be part of an institution in
order to support business activities and provide services to stakeholders,
mainly in relation to data, information, technology and application. IS de-
velopment should be well planned, centralized or distributed in related
working units, and integrated into other existing systems. IS has helped
automate many phases in the business process previously done manually
in an educational institution. In line with shifts in user needs, changes to
the business process are unavoidable. If an information system fails to
accommodate these changing trends, its utilization will therefore be less
than optimal. Hence, such changes need to be taken into account when
developing an IS.
    Service-oriented Architecture (SOA) helps accommodate changing
business needs by providing flexibility for more efficient and effective
use of IT resources. Through SOA, substantial and complex business
processes are broken down into smaller and simpler services that allow
for easier and faster changes to business processes [2]. SOA is equal-
ly useful for dealing with issues related to the integration of various
existing systems, maintenance and improving application and systems
performance. SOA however requires platform-independent services, in-
cluding services that can translate all business service needs into dif-
ferent implementations of information technology. Model-Driven Archi-
tecture (MDA) is capable of addressing SOA weaknesses. MDA helps
create an model that IS developers can make use of, which ranges from
goals and requirements specification to implementation through several
abstraction levels [3].
    Applying the EA, MDA and SOA models together is the key element
for optimizing the business processes of an enterprise. EA provides a com-
prehensive understanding of the core business process of an educational
institution and defines the IS that contributes to the optimizing of the busi-
ness process. EA essentially focuses on strategy and integration. MDA
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions       293



makes use of models as its main element while focusing on efficiency
and quality. SOA on the other hand, depends on service as its key element
while concentrating on flexibility and reuse.
    The purpose of this study is to formulate an information technol-
ogy architecture model that provides clearly defined directions with
regard to inputs and outputs for EA development activities. EA cap-
tures a HEI as-is and to-be capabilities using a number of models and
required to develop the models further. The MDA drives the models
that provided from the previous activities. This proposed model spe-
cifically emphasizes on IS development by applying MDASOA to en-
sure that IS help align the direction of the planning, implementation
and control process to remain consistent with the enterprise business
strategy. The critical task of this development process are selecting
the appropriate model for each phase of EA at the right level of MDA
in detail. The information system will therefore meets the quality as-
surance (QA) standard in order to improve the educational quality of
HEI in Indonesia [4]. This model will then be tested through a case
study by applying the model for University of Lampung (Unila), a
public university in Indonesia.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 presents the
related work. Section 3 gives key technologies and concepts. Section 4
presents analysis of WIS development in educational institution. Architec-
tures used for creating the foundation for WIS development are described
in section 5. Section 6 presents WIS development as a case study in Unila
including WIS implementation and evaluation, while concluding remarks
and future work are provided in section 7.


15.2 RELATED WORK

Integration between business and IT is a major challenge that industries,
including higher education institution must deal with. The adoption of the
EA concept in this case becomes an absolute need [5]. Various models
in different abstraction levels required by EA can be supported by MDA
294                             Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



[6]. The author in [7] has described that the MDA approach can support
modeling at hierarchical systems employed for aligning business and IT
within an organization. The research also featured techniques applied to
design hierarchical systems and developed an integrated enterprise model.
A number of studies have adopted the MDA and EA frameworks to tackle
modeling issues, such as [8] that described the conceptual mapping be-
tween the MDA and Zachman framework.
    For web information system (WIS) development, several studies
have adopted MDA such in [9] that presented the MIDAS framework.
These studies focused on the structural dimension of WIS. Still adopting
this framework, authors [10] have complemented the issue on navigation
model construction from a user service-oriented perspective. In addi-
tion to the functional and navigational requirements of WIS, research
that discussed on architectural features resulting in web specifications
includes [11]. The authors have described WebSA (Web Software Ar-
chitecture) based on the standard MDA. WebSA provides a set of archi-
tectural models and transformation models to specify a web application.
A combination of the MDA and SOA approaches for IS is adopted in
[12]. The authors have described Service-Oriented Development Meth-
od (SOD-M) that consists of models and the rules for mapping from the
business view to the information view. SOD-M distinguishes between
business modeling and IS in which the IS will be developed. Business
view focuses on the requirement of the business, while IS focuses on the
functionalities and processes.
    Nevertheless, the simultaneous adoption of the EA, MDA and
SOA concepts for producing an information technology architecture
model for HEI is remain few. This study shall use the approach to
generate an information technology architecture model and also spe-
cifically emphasize on WIS development especially for HEI to en-
sure that WIS has a coherent planning, implementation and control
mechanism in place consistent with the business strategy of the edu-
cational institution.
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions            295



15.3 KEY TECHNOLOGIES AND CONCEPTS




15.3.1 WEB INFORMATION SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT

The rapid pace of IT development has led to an increasing number of in-
formation systems being transformed into web information systems (WIS)
[13]. WIS is an effective platform for collecting, storing, managing and
disseminating information similar to the function of traditional informa-
tion systems. The difference however is that WIS can handle vast amounts
of information from diverse sources undergoing fast-paced technological
advancements, in different formats with high levels of complexity. This
web-based system can be integrated into other WIS or non- WIS for en-
terprise purposes such as integration with database. Recently WIS has be-
come a complex enterprise application. WIS normally integrates existing
systems by using interactive interfaces, handles a large number of users
with different access rights, and accessible through various of devices.
From its development aspect, web-based systems are now more than sim-
ply about visual and user interface design. A systems developer must be
familiar with the environment and current needs, and armed with the latest
approaches that allow users to adapt quickly to the system. As such, WIS
development is a complex task that requires approaches and effective tools
to assist the developer.



15.3.2 IS : THE CASE OF HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION
INDONESIA

Each HEI has its own set of strategies built on the stated vision and mis-
sion. IS must therefore be well planned to complement this strategic direction.
296                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



IS that is intended in this paper refers to webbased information system or
non web-based. Pursuant to government regulations in Indonesia the IS
established by university must be prepared to support academic program
management and quality improvement. The IS must help HEI meet its QA
standard, that should at least consists of data collection, analysis, storage
and retrieval, data and information presentation, and communication with
relevant parties [4]. The IS evaluation standard in HEI is regulated by the
government and covers several key elements, including the availability of
the following components [14]:

   1. Blue print on IS development, management and utilization, includ-
      ing systems that regulate data flow, data access authorization and
      disaster recovery systems.
   2. Decision support systems to support top management for better
      planning and self-assessment analysis and more objective deci-
      sion-making.
   3. Database that at least should consists of information on financ-
      es, assets, facilities and infrastructure, academic administration,
      student and alumni profile, and teaching staff and supporting
      personnel.
   4. IS intended for campus internal and external communication, and
      access to sources of academic information for students and teach-
      ing staff.
   5. Internet capacity with adequate bandwidth ratio per student.

    From the aforementioned elements, information systems that sup-
ports HEI activities at a minimum should encompass academic, human
resource, financial and asset information systems that ideally web-based
platform. An integrated WIS is crucial for the academic community to
ensure easy access to data and information for learning, administrative
and reporting purposes. Management also requires an integrated WIS to
support the decision-making process and for monitoring and evaluating
HEI performance. Given the purpose of a HEI, and its WIS requirements
along with the business process involved, it can be concluded that the data
and information characteristics of a HEI are as follows: (1) distributed in
every working unit and typically have different structures and standards
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions          297



(2) accessed by all members of the academic community with different
needs, roles and level of knowledge (3) data is obtained from historical
and operational data of the higher education institution (4) continued rapid
data growth (5) immense data volume as academic data must be stored
for a lengthy period (6) data must be periodically transferred to a different
system as it has become input for another system (7) data transactions with
varying time periods depending on academic calendar, peak time for cer-
tain periods such as the new academic year (8) for data reporting purposes
to the central government, academic data must be based on data structure
and relations set forth in the National Higher Education Database (PDPT)
Data Glossary (determined by the Directorate General for Higher Educa-
tion, DGHE) [15].


15.3.3 CONCEPTUALIZATION OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY ARCHITECTURE MODEL

Compatibility between IS application and institutional needs can be as-
sured by taking into account the integration factor when developing the
system. The essential purpose of integration is to narrow gaps found in the
systems development process. Enterprise architecture helps reduce these
gaps by providing model-based IS planning, designing and managing with-
in the enterprise. With regard to HEI, the EA concept is highly relevant to
be applied for maximizing the benefits of having an IS in the educational
institution. The IS can therefore strategically increase HEI comparative
advantage. EA in general has the following domains: Business Architec-
ture, Information System Architecture, Technology Architecture. Business
Architecture defines the business strategy, management, organization and
business process. Information System Architecture comprises Data Archi-
tecture that describes data structure, data management and resources; and
Application Architecture that defines applications required for managing
data and supporting business functions. Technology Architecture repre-
sents software application infrastructure to support application develop-
ment. EA has various frameworks and those that are often applied include
Zachman Enterprise Architecture Framework [16] and The Open Group
Architecture Framework (TOGAF) [17]. These frameworks essentially
298                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



serve the same purpose of facilitating the design of the IT architecture of
an enterprise. Nevertheless, preference over a particular framework also
needs to be consistent with enterprise needs [18].
    A key factor of EA is the compatibility between business and technology
available for all stakeholders. This can be attained when all involved parties
share a common perception. In this regard, modeling becomes a crucial as-
pect that needs to be taken into account [19]. Several models being applied
however are still difficult to understand and have backgrounds that are not
commonly used. Under such circumstances, the advantages of the preferred
framework may not be optimally realized. A model refers to systems speci-
fication and normally presented through illustrations and texts. The ability
to develop and transform models at different levels is a critical feature of
MDA. The MDA is developed by The Object Management Group (OMG)
[3]. The main phases of MDA process are analysis, design and model-driven
implementation. This corresponds to the Computation Independent Models
(CIM), the Platform Independent Models (PIM) and the Platform Specific
Models (PSM). The TOGAF Architecture Development Method [ADM]
[20] and MDA are mutually complementary and present immense business
potential if effectively applied in combination. Hence, synergies between
TOGAF and MDA will lead to improvements for the organization particu-
larly for developing better architecture quality. From 9 phases of TOGAF
ADM and requirement managements phase, the 6 specific phases have ap-
plicable and useful criteria to map to MDA. The applicable criteria are phase
A (Architecture Vision) to CIM and PIM levels of MDA, phase B (Business
Architecture) to CIM and PIM levels, phase C (Information System Archi-
tectures) to PIM level, phase D (Technology Architecture) to PSM level.
The useful criteria are phase E (Opportunities and Solutions) and phase G
(Implementation Governance) to PSM level. The proposed model in this
study based on this approaches [21].
    The solution to apply MDA in sync with other frameworks in order to
establish the required model is expected to address any existing modeling
issues. The model-driven method is a systems development approach in
which the model is described in a way that clearly defines system compre-
hension, design, development, application, maintenance and modification.
MDA in this case is intended to develop an information system that can be
applied to describe enterprise business and resources. Through this form,
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions          299



the enterprise will gain the ability to generate specific applications and if
required, make the necessary modifications according to changing needs
which will later be represented in code form. Similarly, using SOA will
complement the WIS being developed. Web services, as the applied tech-
nology, on the other hand shall regulate on how the system will interact
and be utilized by WIS or other applications. To effectively implement
SOA, it is therefore crucial to ensure an accurate analysis of the required
data, ongoing business process, as well as applications and interfaces
employed in running the business process in every unit within HEI. The
simultaneous use of all of these approaches shall lead to a welldefined
information technology architecture understandable to all stakeholders,
while MDA-SOA helps ensure a more effective and manageable systems
development process.


15.4 ANALYSIS OF WIS DEVELOPMENT IN EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTION

In the academic world, information serves as one of the most valuable re-
sources that need to be well managed in order to accomplish goals set by the
educational institution. Education-related information as vital resource for
the educational institution includes content and curriculum, learning pro-
cess, facilities and infrastructure, and human resource. This indispensable
resource should ideally complement and support the existing business pro-
cess. In reality however, HEI in Indonesia needs to anticipate and deal with
several of the following persistent issues in information systems such as re-
dundancy, lack of standardization, lack of consolidation and inconsistency.
Therefore the development strategies, requirements, issues and challenges
needs to be analysed to determine the needs of educational institution.


15.4.1 WIS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY

Given the importance of WIS development, HEI as an implementing en-
terprise must draw up clearly defined guidelines and plans for developing
a comprehensive WIS within its organization. Based on an analysis of
300                               Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



the overall situation of the institution along with its general information
system characteristics, the approach required to establish WIS within HEI
must have the following qualities (1) able to integrate various existing
standards and platforms (2) can be easily adapted to changes (3) facilitates
the developer in the WIS development process (4) can be easily imple-
mented (5) must have clear guidelines for evaluating WIS implementation.
    Many existing information systems have been established in the HEI
but are not integrated with the exist of the systems. The strategy to retain
existing IS still in operation, re-engineer or replace with new systems can
be seen from the system modularity parameter, on whether the existing IS
can or cannot be integrated into other IS. If the existing IS is difficult to
integrate, this means that it may no longer be viable to maintain the sys-
tem due to its obsolete technology. Meanwhile, for existing IS that is to be
maintained, the appropriate interface needs to be established to facilitate
integration with other IS, or interface for the data warehouse. A new WIS
is being developed in stages according to the integration standard after
which the previous IS can then be terminated.


15.4.2 REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS OF WIS

Requirements analysis is intended to collect information necessary for
WIS development that shall help meet HEI business goals. Requirements
are identified based on the internal and external needs of the higher educa-
tion institution.


15.4.2.1 INTERNAL REQUIREMENTS

Internal requirements are formulated according to the needs of the higher
education institution as well as its departments and relevant divisions. The
requirement of each department and division may differ but in general will
be adjusted by conforming to the existing procedure. Given the internal
requirements, the following aspects should be taken into account during
IS development:
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions            301



   • Web-based platform
   • Supports changes including with regard to changes in the curriculum,
     courses, codification or transcript
   • Allows automation of academic transactions
   • Allows the customization of functions specific to the needs of departments
     and working units


15.4.2.2 EXTERNAL REQUIREMENTS

External requirements are formulated based on government regulations
applicable in Indonesia which in this case refers to the Ministry of Educa-
tion, higher education policies and strategies, reporting requirements and
other general requirements. Given these external requirements, the WIS to
be developed must:

   • Be compatible with the National Higher Education Database (PDPT)
   • Support standards and formats for academic program reporting purposes to
     the government (DGHE) such as the EPSPED report (study program evalu-
     ation based on self-assessment) [22]
   • Comply with QA standards for the accreditation of HEI issued by the Na-
     tional Accreditation Board for Higher Education (BAN-PT).


15.4.3. ISSUES AND CHALLENGES




15.4.3.1 INTEGRATION

Higher education institution needs to be encouraged to develop an WIS
integrated into a model that is built according the needs of working units
within the respective institution or among university. Certain data required
by departments and working units as inputs is essentially the same except
for differences in its usage and reporting mechanism according to their
respective business process. An integrated system shall significantly sup-
port interrelated business processes and optimize its use. For example, an
effective academic system that takes into account the number of students
302                                 Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



will be capable of predicting the number of required human resource (in
relation to human resource system), incoming and outgoing costs (in re-
lation to finance system), as well as the number of required classes and
rooms (in relation to assets system).
    To ensure integration with existing systems, new technologies should
be combined with existing technologies with the least possible effort with-
out having to redevelop ongoing systems. Based on the current situation of
the existing IS in university, integration may come in the following forms:

   • Data integration of different business processes, different IS functions and
     processes yet related to the overall work cycle, and database integration.
   • Availability of an interface that can form linkages among existing IS.
   • Users need not login for every WIS in order to access the required data and
     information. They only need to login once to enable access to all relevant
     WIS.
   • Data that serves as output for a certain process in an IS can be the input for
     another IS.


15.4.3.2 INTEROPERABILITY

WIS development must consider the interoperability of systems. Interop-
erability refers to the ability of a system to work in sync with another
system that allows information exchange and the ability to use the shared
information. With regard to WIS implementation, the technical and regu-
latory aspect of data exchange needs to taken into account. A key factor
related to the technical aspect is high-level interoperability to ensure that
data transfers from source to target can be done regardless of the diver-
sity in hardware and software platforms. An open architecture solution is
therefore necessary to allow the smooth exchange of data and information
from a different system that works in sync with systems inside and outside
of university. Apart from technical issues, interoperability also needs to
be regulated through the appropriate policies. This is essential in order to
ensure uniformity in format and data exchange mechanisms among HEI
for the purpose of guaranteeing high-level interoperability.
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions          303



15.5 ARCHITECTURE USED: CREATING THE FOUNDATION FOR
WIS DEVELOPMENT

Based on the previous analysis, this section shall explain on the informa-
tion technology architecture model which serves as a reference model for
WIS planning, design and organizing within HEI. The proposed EA-MDA
model exhibits all activities required to develop the architecture for HEI,
beginning from vision construction to implementation and evaluation.
The WIS development process will specifically be described in detail by
adopting the MDA-SOA approach. Figure 1 presents the proposed model.
    Formulating the information technology architecture model for HEI is
inextricably linked to the analysis of the university internal and external
business functions as regulated by the government and set out in regula-
tions on higher education in Indonesia. Business function is divided into
two groups: primary business function and supporting business func-
tion. The primary business function of universities in Indonesia generally
comprise primary business activities grounded in the Triple Principles of
Higher Education Institutions, namely education, research and commu-
nity service. The supporting business function on the other hand contains
supporting business activities that include academic administrative man-
agement, human resource management, finance management and asset
management. All of these activities must meet the QA and Executive In-
formation standards.


15.5.1 ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE




15.5.1.1 BUSINESS ARCHITECTURE

Business architecture in general describes the series of business activities,
data and information found in the internal and external environments of
                                                      304




FIGURE 1: Information Technology Architecture Model
                                                      Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions           305



the HEI. This phase is specifically meant to gain insight on the current
situation of the business process before improvements are recommended
by initiating the business architecture modeling process. HEI business
architecture modeling may refer to HEI business functions already ana-
lyzed previously specifically by considering the primary and supporting
business functions of the higher education institution. Business functions
can be identified by using Porter’s value chain approach. At this stage,
modeling tools and basic methods such as Business Process Modelling
Notation (BPMN) [23] and Unified Modeling Language (UML) [24] can
be employed to develop the desired model.


15.5.1.2 INFORMATION SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE



15.5.1.2.1 DATA ARCHITECTURE

Data architecture refers to the identification of data that supports business
functions as defined in the business model explained earlier. Management
requires centralized and integrated data sources in order to heighten co-
ordination and synchronization of data management operations. Within
the context of data architecture, university needs to avoid the repeated
inputting of the same data. Data should be inputted only once and can
subsequently be used simultaneously by relevant business processes. The
data architecture currently developed by university still has weaknesses
that need to be addressed before it can be integrated with data originating
from other universities due to lack of integration in their data structures.
    In this stage, data architecture is developed through the identification
of the business function and organizational entity. Results of the identifica-
tion process are then presented through an UML class diagram or a data
functional matrix to illustrate the connection between business process
and data entity through created, use, read and delete (CURD) functions.
The relation between each data entity with another entity is analyzed then
compared with the list of data currently being managed by the system.
This comparison is necessary to ascertain on whether data covered in the
data architecture entity is based on data description.
306                             Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



15.5.1.2.2 APPLICATION ARCHITECTURE

Application architecture focuses more on the planning of application
needs and creating of application models. Application architecture re-
quired by the HEI is an integrated, online application that runs on a
standard platform. In addition, management also requires a dynamic ap-
plication and real-time system to ensure the presentation of timely and
accurate information. Application architecture can be described through
the application interaction matrix of business functions within the orga-
nization or the technical reference model (TRM). Application is linked
to business and organizational functions in order to keep track of the
collective use of an application. The impact of application architecture
towards existing applications is analyzed. The appropriate solutions are
required in order to determine on whether available applications are to
be maintained or modified, integrated into other applications or new ap-
plications developed.


15.5.1.3 TECHNOLOGY ARCHITECTURE

Technology architecture seeks to identify technology platforms, ana-
lyze the use of current technology platform toward applications, and
propose technology platforms related to university needs. The appro-
priate technology platform is selected by assessing current IT trends
and developments such as trends in hardware, software, network, data-
base, security and social network. Results of technology classification
include the selection of viable technologies for technology platforms
that shall support applications and the recommended technology devel-
opment. The technology architecture model essentially describes how
technology supports applications and user interaction when using the
applications.
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions             307




15.5.2 SUPPORT ACTIVITIES




15.5.2.1 VISION ARCHITECTURE

This stage involves the identification of management requirements, proj-
ect scope and constraints, and the definition of advanced architecture and
expected targets. These identified aspects are represented through the stat-
ed vision and mission, business goals, and business objectives. The output
at this stage is the creation of the vision architecture to be used. To have
an idea of the general universities vision in Indonesia, several samples of
Indonesia’s leading universities have been examined. From this sampling
it can be conferred that the stated vision of university in general is to estab-
lish themselves as leading seats of learning of national and international
repute by building on their respective core competencies. Their mission
statement on the other hand aspires to deliver first-rate educational pro-
cesses based on the Triple Principles of Higher Education Institutions.


15.5.2.2 DEFINITION FOR ACTIVITIES

Prior to starting work on the subsequent architecture model, it is neces-
sary to document and define all data needs, data organizing applications
and data sharing requirements in running the business process, and ex-
isting technology platforms employed within the enterprise. Documenta-
tion shall become the basis for architecture modeling and the following
implementation plan. Based on the primary and supporting activities of
the higher education institution, this stage shall define activities necessary
for documentation purposes that cover literatures, surveys and interviews
with relevant parties.
308                                Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



15.5.2.3 ADJUSTMENT BUSINESS VISION

Architectural models obtained in the previous stages will be reviewed at
the next activity. The modeled business and application architecture in the
previous stages is then re-assessed with regard to its compatibility with
university business vision. This stage maps out the relation between ap-
plication architecture and the achievement of the vision formulated earlier.
The output of this activity will be the basis for the development of the
system, especially at the CIM level in the MDA approach.


15.5.2.4 ACTIVITIES FOR DEVELOPMENT

WIS development is also conducted based on the guidelines from the list of
WIS development activities. This list is necessary to provide a more focused
WIS development process, beginning from preparations for needs assess-
ment to the eventual development of a systems design for use by the higher
education institution. The output of this activity will be the basis for the de-
velopment of the system, especially at the PIM level in the MDA approach.


15.5.2.5 SOLUTION AND STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT

This activity is intended to identify main issues and seek viable solutions.
From the results of the analysis on the current situation of the higher edu-
cation institution and the architecture model produced, a gap analysis is
conducted. Results of this gap analysis can become the solution and strat-
egy for resolving issues. This stage is also performed to determine the
priority of application development. These solutions and strategies in turn
can serve as input for the subsequent process of developing a more com-
prehensive WIS and technology infrastructure need.

15.5.2.6 MIGRATION AND PLANNING

The migration strategy for a new WIS is required prior to the implementa-
tion. In this stage, a gap analysis is essential on the resource base, including
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions          309



changes that may arise upon the implementation of the system. In addi-
tion, it is also equally important to conduct an impact analysis of the new
application architecture and the decision-making process towards new IT
investments in order to ensure a complete planning process with regard to
systems migration and implementation.


15.5.2.7 IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY

This stage involves estimations on human resource, implementation sched-
ule, costs and benefits of the plan and time required. This includes the for-
mulation of recommendations for each development implementation, deter-
mining the implementing organization and guaranteeing the compatibility
of systems development with the desired architecture. Risk management is
another essential component that needs to be incorporated into the imple-
mentation plan in order to minimize potential risks, such as risks related to
human resource, unmet implementation schedule and others.


15.5.3 TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE

The gap that might occur between the current architecture and propose
architecture can be eliminated by means of fulfilling the needs of technol-
ogy and information system. This stage is conducted through procurement
for technology support needed to encounter the needs of the technology of
addition or optimization technology.


15.5.4 MDA-SOA BASED WIS DEVELOPMENT

The web information system development process is based on the MDA-
SOA concept. Metamodeling defines the structure of models, and in an
abstract way specifies the construct of a modeling language and their rela-
tions. Through this approach, it is necessary to determine a metamodel that
suitably represents the web application. During the design phase, modeling
is used to define requirements and provide model details at various levels.
310                              Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



Next, model transformation is carried out in accordance with transforma-
tion rules. The models provide support for testing prior to implementation
and also contribute to automatic code generation.


15.5.4.1 COMPUTATION INDEPENDENT MODEL LEVEL

This stage is associated with an enterprise architecture particularly busi-
ness architecture that already proposed in the previous stage. Business
models need to describe the environment in which the system will be used,
with no direct orientation on how it will be implemented. It also specify
the requirements, use cases and the system’s main flow from the custom-
er’s perspective.


15.5.4.2 PLATFORM INDEPENDENT MODEL LEVEL

Modeling the systems process and structure can be done through these
models in an independent way of the technological details for their imple-
mentation. The processes are captured by UML activity diagram and struc-
tures are capture by UML class diagram. These models can be modified or
transformed into PSM that express the specific implementation process.
For this particular study, the Model View Controller (MVC) pattern is ap-
plied as a target technology for the generated web application. Templates
need to be defined in order to automatically generate the web application
and conduct model transformations. They state transformation rules for
changing a given model-to-model or model-to-text transformation. These
templates are designed to implement the classes for Data Definition Lan-
guage (DDL) scripts, Web Service Description Language (WSDL) and
for the MVC_Controller of the MVC pattern that functions to receive re-
quests, invoke the MVC_Model to perform the requested operations and
send data to the MVC_View. MVC_View formats are to be presented in a
web application as PHP files output. The defined templates also facilitate
the generation of highly specific PSM from PIM.
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions      311




                                                                  FIGURE 2: Detail of WIS development process
312                                Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



15.5.4.3 PLATFORM SPESIFIC MODEL LEVEL

Based on the models and templates identified earlier, the code generation
process can proceed to automatically produce the source code. In this case,
Acceleo [25] will be applied for creating the templates and producing a
PHP-based web application [26]. Web application is implemented through
the PHP scripting language and additional technologies, such as the Apache
web server and MySQL database server, as the target environment for de-
ployment, while the adoption of the CodeIgniter [27] PHP framework is
based on the MVC pattern. All files generated are placed into the frame-
work. The remaining part are created manually to finalize the entire process.
The detail of WIS development steps as shown in Figure 2.


15.5.5 IMPLEMENTATION

The implementation stage is where the WIS already developed in the previ-
ous phase is implemented. Through systems implementation, the outcomes
can be operated and utilized optimally according to needs. At this stage, it can
be determined on whether the system that has been developed can operate
according to plans, and whether it can be utilized by the end user and meet
the expected objectives. An evaluation is also conducted during this stage on
shortcomings during the system development process, including a deficient
requirements analysis, not modeled and unpredictable factors. As such, the
necessary improvements can then be made to rectify these inadequacies.



15.5.6 EVALUATION

Evaluation is an important aspect necessary for gleaning information
on the extent to which the objectives of an WIS has been successfully
achieved. Through evaluation, feedback will also be generated, crucial for
improving WIS quality in the future. The main constraint in conducting
evaluation is in determining the evaluation criteria, evaluation parameter
and methodology for establishing the evaluation framework. Recent
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions         313



developments in information technology, particularly with regard to the
internet, have made it even more difficult to gauge the level of success and
effectiveness of an WIS compared to earlier conditions. WIS has brought
forth a different set of conditions and factors that need to be considered,
such as direct user interaction unrestricted by time, distance and place.
    From previous studies, several recommended models for IS evalua-
tion include Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) and IS-Impact. TAM
introduces two key variables - Perceived Ease of Use (PEU) and Perceived
Usefulness (PU)—that have central relevance to predict user acceptance
[28]. Through the IS-Impact model, IS impact can be measured in terms of
Information Quality (IQ), System Quality (SQ), Individual Impact (II) and
Organizational Impact (OI) [29]. This however does not provide a com-
prehensive evaluation of Web-based information system. In view of this,
the evaluation model for IS implementation is modified from the afore-
mentioned models by incorporating specific measurements. The selection
of the two existing models and the necessary modifications are essential
with regard to WIS for the higher education institution in which the char-
acteristics are different from other enterprises.
    The defined dimensions for measuring WIS by adding 4 dimensions:
User Capabilities (UC), Organisation Capabilities (OC), Information Ef-
fectiveness (IE) and System Effectiveness (SE). Based on the charac-
teristics of the HEI, the dimensions used still needs to be adapted for
specific user. For example, the OI dimension is not provided to the user
student due to not directly related to the organization impact. The ele-
ments for measuring the dimensions consist of 19 elements for students,
teachers and related working units user, 10 elements for System Devel-
oper, 10 elements for Managements as shown in Table 1.


15.6 WIS DEVELOPMENT: A CASE STUDY

This section shall discuss on the application of the information technology
architecture model recommended above to support WIS development at
Unila as the case study. Unila is a stateowned university in Indonesia that
runs 8 faculties, 54 undergraduate study programs (diploma and bache-
lor’s degree), 12 post-graduate study programs (master’s and PhD degree)
314                                          Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



and currently serves 28.116 students, 1120 lecturers and 707 administra-
tive staff (data from academic year 2011).

TABLE 1: Elements for measuring the dimensions
 User                     Element
 Students, Teachers,      Enjoyment, Number of site visits, Number of transactions executed,
 Staff, related working   Availability, Reliability, Accessibility, Response time, Ease of use, Ease
 units                    of learning, Navigation patterns, Functions, Training, Services, Empathy,
                          Responsiveness, Assurance, Security, Integration, System features
 System Developer         Conciseness, Timelines, Consistency, Maintainability, Applicability,
                          Server and Network Speed, Traceability, Security, Currency, Interactivity
 Management               Cost reduction, Time savings, Improving work efficiency, Enhancement
                          of communication, Enhancement of coordination, Improved decision
                          making, Completeness, Relevance, Number of academic standards pro-
                          cedure supported, Number of operational university supported




    Data and analysis on university activities related to its Business Func-
tion, Vision Architecture, and Definition for Activities required as input
for modeling Unila’s enterprise architecture are entirely based on current
data and conditions necessary for Unila. Due to limited space, not all will
be presented in this paper.


15.6.1 BUSINESS ARCHITECTURE

For the modeling of the business process, Unila’s business functions are
identified and its organizational structure documented. These identified
business functions are then linked to the working units in order to deter-
mine the responsibilities of working units in relation to a business func-
tion. Business functions are identified by using the value chain model that
classifies business areas into primary activities and supporting activities
of the enterprise. From this model, it can be concluded that Unila has five
supporting activities and three primary activities.
    Three primary activities related to education, research and community
service while five supporting activities related to human resource, finance,
asset, services and public relation management.
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions         315




15.6.2 INFORMATION SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE




15.6.2.1 DATA ARCHITECTURE

Data architecture consists of both existing and planned data architecture.
Data architecture draws from the business architecture explained earlier
which refers to data required for facilitating three primary activities and
five supporting activities.



15.6.2.2 APPLICATION ARCHITECTURE

Application architecture refers to current applications (as-is) and planned
applications (to-be). An analysis is therefore necessary on ongoing appli-
cations to look at the business process and needs of working units. Analy-
sis results on existing applications based on faculties, departments and
working units responsible for managing the applications. In the develop-
ment of current applications, Unila have three developments options, e.g.,
open-source based development, ownsource based development, and for
some special purpose the application already be developed by the gov-
ernment and ready to be implemented. Available application technologies
mostly use PHP and database and Oracle. A few other technologies still
operate through Novel Netware by using DBF database. Websites use PHP
and MySQL.
    Analysis results on existing applications inform decisions on strategies
to be implemented for WIS integration with the institution. Subsequently,
to identify future application needs, a Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportuni-
ties, and Threats (SWOT) and Critical Success Factors (CSF) analyses are
conducted to determine the future WIS solution model appropriate for the
business process carried out by Unila. Figure 3 shows the analysis results
of planned application (to-be) required by Unila. There are classified in
316                             Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



the Academic management, Knowledge management, Resource manage-
ment, IT Services, and Community Relationship Management (CRM) to
support Quality Assurance and Executive information.


15.6.3 TECHNOLOGY ARCHITECTURE

This particular phase is intended to identify the current technology
platforms and how they are applied with regard to applications, and
determine the recommended technology platforms that Unila requires.
Unila’s existing technology platforms identified include its data cen-
ter equipped with 32 servers, 2000 desktop computers connected to
the Local Area Network (LAN), and data storage in the form of SAN
(Storage Area Network). Its intranet infrastructure that links internodal
working units relies on a switching system applicable up to the faculty
level whereby all switching functions are done through the manageable
switch mode. Fiber optic as the main media backbone has 1 Gbps in
channel bandwidth. Wireless media is also used as the network infra-
structure, although several study programs (30% from all study pro-
grams in Unila) are still using cables and have yet to employ wireless
technology. The existing technology platforms are largely support of
the proposed application but still need optimization to improve the per-
formance. From Unila’s needs assessment, the technology required by
the institution is a network technology that connects applications and
allows easy access for end users. Technology platforms recommended
for development must be those that adopt recent technological trends
such as the latest in hardware, in memory computing (IMC), network,
cloud computing, web 2.0., e-Learning 2.0, mobile computing, Internet
of Things (IOT) and social network.


15.6.4 SOLUTION STRATEGY FOR BRIDGING THE GAP

Subsequent activities as follow up to architecture modeling include Ad-
justment Business Vision, Activities for Development, and Solution and
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions   317




FIGURE 3: Application Architecture (to-be)
318   Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks




                                             FIGURE 4: Integration Model Architecture
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutionsv                            319



Strategy Development. Based on the current situation of existing IS in
Unila and HEI in general, solutions and strategies are formulated for inte-
gration purposes with regard to the presentation (user interface), applica-
tions, services and data. The integration is also perform with the data on
DGHE (government application). Figure 4 presents the integration model
architecture.
    This particular phase also determines the list of priority for application
development. The solution model produced can connect existing applica-
tions with other ongoing applications as well as with new applications
without affecting the performance of the respective application. Concern-
ing WIS development, based on Unila’s needs assessment, the Academic
management domain shall be given the highest development priority. The
following example focuses on the development of a web information sys-
tem (called SIMPEL) [30] to integrate the existing systems provided in the
analysis results mentioned in section 6.2.2.

TABLE 2: The templates
 Template Name    Description                                                  Total Template
 MVC pattern       A template for generating Model, View (user interface) 10
                  and Controller
 DDL              A template for generating DDL scripts to create the tables   1
 WSDL             A template for generating WSDL files                         1




15.6.5 APPLYING MDA-SOA BASED WIS DEVELOPMENT

In this work, a set of models is designed related to the WIS. A specific
metamodel acquaintance of UML metamodel is created for this model-
ing process. Based on the result obtained from the modeling process, this
process expects to generate artifacts that may help create the necessary
web pages. Nevertheless, the modeling process only constitutes half of the
entire MDA system. Templates to produce the target system are equally
important. The usefulness of the templates is to transform a given model
to text as shown in Table 2.
    By using the defined templates and models, the generator code creates
all application source code based on MVC pattern, DDL and WSDL files.
320                              Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



The SIMPEL development in this work realized 107 FPs (Function Point).
Handwritten (manual) codes need to be added after generation for complex
business logic and graphical user interface (GUI) parts. Then the result of
generated and handwritten code are tailored to the framework for system
implementation. The development of WIS is combined with a framework
CodeIgniter, leading to faster PHP web application development.


15.6.6 WIS IMPLEMENTATION

From the results obtained in the previous stages, the proposed WIS has not
been entirely developed and implemented. Similarly, the proposed tech-
nology platform. This case study is taken to integrate two existing WIS by
using a WIS that serves as an interface. The development process involved
in implementing the approach allows developers to progress smoothly
from requirements specification to the generation of the web application.
The implementation of a WIS has successfully integrated Course Manage-
ment System (CMS) MOODLE [31] into Unila’s academic information
system and work properly. The implemented SIMPEL is analyzed in the
teaching/learning activities at Department of Electrical Engineering Unila
on trial period in odd and even semester of the 2011/2012 academic year.
During this period a total of 887 students were enrolled in 25 courses
through the SIMPEL and follow the learning activities in MOODLE.


15.6.7 WIS EVALUATION

The model adopted for WIS evaluation is a modification of the IS-Impact
and TAM models with 12 dimensions of measurements. This model is ap-
plied to assess the quality and impact of SIMPEL implementation in Uni-
la. The designed questionnaire is consists of 19 elements for user students
and teachers. Given the time constraint in evaluating the implementation
of SIMPEL, the evaluation process only involves participants representing
user students and teachers and has yet to involve all stakeholders in Unila.
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions                   321



Some 142 users have expressed their views through the questionnaire on
SIMPEL implementation for the recommended dimensions. Results as
shown in Table 3 reveal that 69.2% of users are satisfied with the SIMPEL
(highly agree and agree), neutral 24.6% and 6.2% unsatisfied (disagree
and highly disagree).


TABLE 3: Evaluation result
 Element                  Highly agree   Agree   Neutral   Disagree   Highly disagree
 Enjoyment                64.9%          26.6%   7.1%      1.4%       0.0%
 Number of site visits    62.1%          30.5%   5.7%      1.8%       0.0%
 Number of transactions   32.1%          45.6%   19.2%     3.2%       0.0%
 executed
 Availability             20.3%          50.4%   25.6%     3.4%       0.4%
 Reliability              7.8%           48.4%   27.4%     3.5%       12.9%
 Accessibility            5.7%           43.8%   32.7%     5.3%       12.5%
 Response time            6.4%           33.4%   54.5%     5.7%       0.0%
 Ease of use              7.4%           62.7%   26.0%     3.9%       0.0%
 Ease of learning         20.7%          52.0%   25.3%     2.1%       0.0%
 Navigation patterns      7.1%           64.8%   25.3%     2.8%       0.0%
 Functions                20.0%          53.8%   19.1%     6.9%       0.1%
 Training                 18.2%          49.8%   15.1%     4.4%       12.5%
 Services                 17.5%          30.4%   36.1%     3.5%       12.5%
 Empathy                  7.1%           60.2%   29.5%     3.2%       0.0%
 Responsiveness           18.5%          31.3%   45.2%     4.6%       0.4%
 Assurance                30.1%          40.6%   21.9%     7.3%       0.2%
 Security                 22.1%          57.8%   19.0%     1.1%       0.0%
 Integration              26.2%          59.8%   13.1%     0.9%       0.0%
 System features          7.9%           71.8%   19.8%     0.5%       0.0%




   Questionnaire results also show that the significant elements in SIMPEL
are Number of site visits, Enjoyment and Integration. It show that SIM-
PEL effectively assist the teaching learning process. While the elements that
must be improved are Accessibility, Training and Reliability. It shows that
SIMPEL still need to be complemented and enhanced the quality.
322                                    Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks



15.7 CONCLUSIONS

Based on an analysis of IT/IS of HEI in Indonesia, an EA-MDA-based in-
formation technology architecture model has been developed according to
the situation and needs of national universities. This model is then applied
to University of Lampung as a case study. The outcome is an architec-
ture information technology that can be implemented to support integrated
WIS development in Unila. One of the WIS developed in Unila has been
implemented and subsequently evaluated which resulted in an impressive
level of user satisfaction. This study is expected to specifically contribute
to the advancement of HEI in Indonesia, particularly as reference for de-
signing and building a comprehensive WIS. The definition of a complex
architecture model shall help meet all university needs. Nevertheless, HEI
need not force themselves to create unnecessary business processes, but
it would be best for them to focus on areas most suited with their respec-
tive needs. The adoption of the MDA therefore substantially supports this
concept. The future work we will find other strategies in addressing issues
of the integrated WIS and focus on improve the models in each activities
prior to developed.


REFERENCES

 1.   Osvalds, Gundars, (2001) Definition of Enterprise Architecture – Centric Models for
      The Systems Engineers, TASC Inc.
 2.   T. Erl, (2005) Service-Oriented Architecture - Concepts, Technology, and Design,
      Prentice Hall.
 3.   OMG, “OMG Model Driven Architecture,” Available: http://www.omg.org/mda.
 4.   Republic of Indonesia, (2005) ”Government regulations (PP) No.19 of 2005 of na-
      tional standard of education,” Jakarta, Indonesia.
 5.   Shah, H. & Kourdi, M.E (2007) "Frameworks for Enterprise Architecture," IT Pro-
      fessional , vol.9, no.5, pp. 36-41
 6.   Ostadzadeh, S. S, Aliee, Fereidoon S., Ostadzadeh, S. A., (2008), “An MDA-
      Based Generic Framework to Address Various Aspects of Enterprise Architec-
      ture”, Advances in Computer and Information Sciences and Engineering, pp.
      455–460.
 7.   Wegmann, A. and Preiss, O., (2003) "MDA in Enterprise Architecture? The Living
      System Theory to the Rescue”, Proceedings of the 7th IEEE international Enterprise
      Distributed Object Computing Conference (EDOC'03), pp. 2-13
EA-MDA Model to Resolve IS Problems in Educational Institutions                      323


 8.    Fatolahi, Ali, S. S, Stéphane, C. L, Timothy (2007) “ Enterprise Architecture Using
       the Zachman Framework: A Model Driven Approach”, Proceedings of the IRMA
       2007 International Conference, pp 65-69.
 9.    Cáceres, P., Marcos,E.,Vela ,B., (2003), “A MDA-Based Approach for Web Informa-
       tion System Development”, Workshop in Software Model Engineering (WISME’03)
 10.   Castro,V., Marcos, E., Cáceres, P., (2004) “A User Service Oriented Method to Mod-
       el Web Information Systems”, WISE 2004, LNCS 3306, pp. 41–52
 11.   Meliá, S., & Gómez,J.,(2005)” Applying Transformations to Model Driven Devel-
       opment of Web Applications “,ER Workshops 2005, LNCS 3770, pp. 63-73
 12.   Castro, V. De., Marcos, E., and Vara, J.M., (2010), “Applying CIM-to-PIM model
       transformation for the service-oriented development of information systems,” Jour-
       nal Information and Software Technology, pp. 87-105
 13.   Carstensen, P. H., Vogelsang, L, (2001), “Design of Web-based information sys-
       tems—new challenges for systems development?” Ninth European conference on
       information systems (ECIS), pp 536–547
 14.   National Accreditation Board for Higher Education (Badan Akreditasi Nasional
       Perguruan Tinggi, BAN-PT) Ministry of Education Indonesia, (2008) Book IIIA:
       Undergraduate program study accreditation, Jakarta, Indonesia, BAN PT.
 15.   Directorate General of Higher Education (DGHE), “Dissemination of national high-
       er education database system”, Ministry of Education Indonesia, (2010), Jakarta,
       Indonesia.
 16.   Sowa, J. F., Zachman, J.A. (1992) “Extending and formalizing the framework for
       information systems architecture”. IBM Systems Journal 31, No. 3, 590-616.
 17.   The Open Group, TOGAF Version 9.1, http://www.opengroup.org/togaf/
 18.   Leist,S., & Zellner,G.,(2006), “Evaluation of current architecture frameworks”. In
       Proceedings of the 2006 ACM symposium on Applied computing
 19.   Frankel, David S.,(2003) The Model Driven Architecture: Applying MDA to Enter-
       prise Computing, OMG Press.
 20.   Open Group, (2009) The Open Group Architecture Framework: Architecture Devel-
       opment Method.
 21.   Rivett,P., Spencer,J., Waskiewicz,F., (2005) TOGAF/MDA Mapping, White Paper,
       The Open Group
 22.   Directorate General of Higher Education (DGHE), (2009), EPSBED, http://evaluasi.
       or.id/
 23.   The OMG Group, (2008) Business Process Modelling Notation, Version 1.1.
 24.   Booch, G., Rumbaugh, J., Jacobson, I., (1999) “The Unified Modeling Language: A
       User Guide”, Addison Wesley.
 25.   Main Acceleo Site, “Acceleo MDA Generator,” http://www.acceleo.org/.
 26.   Main PHP Site “PHP,” http://www.php.net/.
 27.   Main CodeIgniter Site , “CodeIgniter,” http://codeigniter.com/.
 28.   Chuttur, M.Y., (2009), “Overview of the Technology Acceptance Model: Origins,
       Developments and Future Directions”, Indiana University, USA, Sprouts: Working
       Papers on Information Systems
 29.   Gable, G.,Sedera, D.,Chan, T. (2008), “Re-conceptualizing Information System
       Success: The ISImpact Measurement Model”, Journal of the Association for Infor-
       mation Systems, 9 (7), pp. 377-408.
324                                Designing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks


30. Mardiana & Araki,K., (2012) “SIMPEL: An innovative web application interface
    supporting online course management system,” in Information Technology Based
    Higher Education and Training (ITHET), pp.212-219.
31. Main Moodle Site, “Moodle,” http://moodle.org/
AUTHOR NOTES



CHAPTER 4

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work financially supported by the National
Research Foundation. The researcher would also like to thank Mr Johan
van Tonder at Anglo Platinum for his valuable inputs.


CHAPTER 9

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the anonymous referees for constructive
comments on earlier version of this paper.


CHAPTER 11

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work financially supported by the National
Research Foundation.


CHAPTER 12

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the Ministry of Higher Education, Malay-
sia and Universiti Utara Malaysia for providing the research grant for this
study. Likewise, we are also indebted to Jaap Schekkerman, President of
the Institute for Enterprise Architecture Developments (IFEAD) for giv-
ing us the permission to use the IFEAD EA Trend Survey Questionnaire
in this study.
326                                                            Author Notes



CHAPTER 14

Acknowledgments
We would like to thanks the three organizations (anonymity maintained)
for their participation in the survey.


CHAPTER 15

Acknowledgments
The first author would like to thank the Directorate General of Higher Ed-
ucation (DGHE) of the Ministry of National Education of Indonesia that
has provided the funding of this study. Thanks are also to the colleagues of
the Department of Electrical engineering and Computer Centre University
of Lampung for their help and support.
This page intentionally left blank
