Certified	Cloud	Security	Professional
              (CCSP)

                    Technology	Workbook




                            www.ipspecialist.ne	t

                             Document	Control

Proposal	Name           :   Certified	       Cloud	   Security
                            Professional
Document	Version        :   Version	1
Document	Release	Date   :   15th	May,	2019
Reference               :   Technology	Workbook
Copyright	©	2018	IPSpecialist	LTD.
Registered	in	England	and	Wales
Company	Registration	No:	10883539
Registration	 Office	 at:	 Office	 32,	 19-21	 Crawford	 Street,	 London	 W1H	 1PJ,
United	Kingdom
www.ipspecialist.net
All	rights	reserved.	No	part	of	this	book	may	be	reproduced	or	transmitted	in	any
form	 or	 by	 any	 means,	 electronic	 or	 mechanical,	 including	 photocopying,
recording,	 or	 by	 any	 information	 storage	 and	 retrieval	 system,	 without	 the
written	 permission	 from	 IPSpecialist	 LTD,	 except	 for	 the	 inclusion	 of	 brief
quotations	in	a	review.
Feedback:
If	you	have	any	comments	regarding	the	quality	of	this	book,	or	otherwise	alter
it	 to	 better	 suit	 your	 needs,	 you	 can	 contact	 us	 through	 email	 at
info@ipspecialist.net
Please	make	sure	to	include	the	book’s	title	and	ISBN	in	your	message
About	IPSpecialist
IPSPECIALIST	 LTD.	 IS	 COMMITTED	 TO	 EXCELLENCE	 AND
DEDICATED	TO	YOUR	SUCCESS.
Our	 philosophy	 is	 to	 treat	 our	 customers	 like	 family.	 We	 want	 you	 to	 succeed,
and	 we	 are	 willing	 to	 do	 everything	 possible	 to	 help	 you	 make	 it	 happen.	 We
have	the	proof	to	back	up	our	claims.	We	strive	to	accelerate	billions	of	careers
with	 great	 courses,	 accessibility,	 and	 affordability.	 We	 believe	 that	 continuous
learning	 and	 knowledge	 evolution	 are	 the	 most	 important	 things	 to	 keep	 re-
skilling	and	up-skilling	the	world.
Planning	and	creating	a	specific	goal	is	where	IPSpecialist	helps.	We	can	create
a	 career	 track	 that	 suits	 your	 visions	 as	 well	 as	 develop	 the	 competencies	 you
need	 to	 become	 a	 professional	 Network	 Engineer.	 We	 can	 also	 assist	 you	 with
the	execution	and	evaluation	of	your	proficiency	level,	based	on	the	career	track
you	choose,	as	they	are	customized	to	fit	your	specific	goals.
We	 help	 you	 STAND	 OUT	 from	 the	 crowd	 through	 our	 detailed	 IP	 training
content	packages.

Course	Features:
❖									Self-Paced	learning

                Learn	at	your	own	pace	and	in	your	own	time

❖									Covers	Complete	Exam	Blueprint

                Prep-up	for	the	exam	with	confidence

❖									Case	Study	Based	Learning

                Relate	the	content	with	real	life	scenarios 		

❖									Subscriptions	that	suits	you

                Get	more	and	pay	less	with	IPS	subscriptions

❖									Career	Advisory	Services

                Let	the	industry	experts	plan	your	career	journey
❖									Virtual	Labs	to	test	your	skills

                With	IPS	vRacks,	you	can	evaluate	your	exam	preparations

❖									Practice	Questions

                Practice	questions	to	measure	your	preparation	standards

❖									On	Request	Digital	Certification

                On	request	digital	certification	from	IPSpecialist	LTD


About	the	Authors:
This	 book	 has	 been	 compiled	 with	 the	 help	 of	 multiple	 professional	 engineers.
These	 engineers	 specialize	 in	 different	 fields	 e.g.	 Networking,	 Security,	 Cloud,
Big	 Data,	 IoT	 etc.	 Each	 engineer	 develops	 content	 in	 his/her	 own	 specialized
field	that	is	compiled	to	form	a	comprehensive	certification	guide.

About	the	Technical	Reviewers:
Nouman	Ahmed	Khan
AWS-Architect,	 CCDE,	 CCIEX5	 (R&S,	 SP,	 Security,	 DC,	 Wireless),	 CISSP,
CISA,	 CISM,	 Nouman	 Ahmed	 Khan	 is	 a	 Solution	 Architect	 working	 with	 a
major	 telecommunication	 provider	 in	 Qatar.	 He	 works	 with	 enterprises,	 mega-
projects,	 and	 service	 providers	 to	 help	 them	 select	 the	 best-fit	 technology
solutions.	 He	 also	 works	 as	 a	 consultant	 to	 understand	 customer	 business
processes	and	helps	select	an	appropriate	technology	strategy	to	support	business
goals.	He	has	more	than	14	years	of	experience	working	in	Pakistan/Middle-East
&	 UK.	 He	 holds	 a	 Bachelor	 of	 Engineering	 Degree	 from	 NED	 University,
Pakistan,	and	M.Sc.	in	Computer	Networks	from	the	UK.
Abubakar	Saeed
Abubakar	 Saeed	 has	 more	 than	 twenty-five	 years	 of	 experience,	 managing,
consulting,	 designing,	 and	 implementing	 large-scale	 technology	 projects,
extensive	 experience	 heading	 ISP	 operations,	 solutions	 integration,	 heading
Product	Development,	Pre-sales,	and	Solution	Design.	Emphasizing	on	adhering
to	Project	timelines	and	delivering	as	per	customer	expectations,	he	always	leads
the	 project	 in	 the	 right	 direction	 with	 his	 innovative	 ideas	 and	 excellent
management	skills.
Muhammad	Yousuf
Muhammad	 Yousuf	 is	 a	 professional	 technical	 content	 writer.	 He	 is	 Certified
Ethical	 Hacker	 (CEHv10)	 and	 Cisco	 Certified	 Network	 Associate	 (CCNA)	 in
Routing	 and	 Switching.	 He	 holds	 a	 bachelor’s	 degree	 in	 Telecommunication,
Engineering	 from	 Sir	 Syed	 University	 of	 Engineering	 and	 Technology.	 He	 has
both	 technical	 knowledge	 and	 industry	 sounding	 information,	 which	 he	 uses
perfectly	in	his	career.
Farah	Qadir
Farah	Qadir	is	a	professional	technical	content	writer,	holding	bachelor’s	degree
in	Telecommunication	Engineering	from	Sir	Syed	University	of	Engineering	and
Technology.	 With	 strong	 educational	 background,	 she	 possesses	 exceptional
researching	and	writing	skills	that	has	led	her	to	impart	knowledge	through	her
professional	career.

Muhammad	Khawar
Muhammad	 Khawar	 is	 a	 professional	 technical	 content	 writer.	 He	 holds	 a
bachelor’s	degree	in	Computer	Science	from	Virtual	University	of	Pakistan.	He
was	working	as	an	IT	Executive	in	a	reputable	organization.	He	has	completed
training	of	CCNA	Routing	and	Switching,	.NET	and	Web	designing.	He	as	both
technical	knowledge	and	industry	sounding	information.

Free	Resources:
 With	each	workbook	bought	from	Amazon,	IPSpecialist	offers	free	resources
 to	our	valuable	customers.
 Once	you	buy	this	book	you	will	have	to	contact	us	at	support@ipspecialist.net
 or	 tweet	 @ipspecialistnet	 to	 get	 this	 limited	 time	 offer	 without	 any	 extra
 charges.

Free	Resources	Include:
Exam	 Practice	 Questions	 in	 Quiz	 Simulation:	 IP	 Specialists'	 Practice
Questions	 have	 been	 developed	 keeping	 in	 mind	 the	 certification	 exam
perspective.	The	collection	of	these	questions	from	our	technology	workbooks	is
prepared	 keeping	 the	 exam	 blueprint	 in	 mind,	 covering	 not	 only	 important	 but
necessary	 topics	 as	 well.	 It	 is	 an	 ideal	 document	 to	 practice	 and	 revise	 your
certification.
Career	 Report:	This	 report	 is	 a	 step	 by	 step	 guide	 for	 a	 novice	 who	 wants	 to
develop	 his/her	 career	 in	 the	 field	 of	 computer	 networks.	 It	 answers	 the
following	queries:

            Current	scenarios	and	future	prospects.
            Is	 this	 industry	 moving	 towards	 saturation	 or	 are	 new	 opportunities
            knocking	at	the	door?
            What	will	the	monetary	benefits	be?
            Why	to	get	certified?
             How	to	plan	and	when	will	I	complete	the	certifications	if	I	start
             today?
             Is	there	any	career	track	that	I	can	follow	to	accomplish	specialization
             level?
Furthermore,	 this	 guide	 provides	 a	 comprehensive	 career	 path	 towards	 being	 a
specialist	 in	 the	 field	 of	 networking	 and	 also	 highlights	 the	 tracks	 needed	 to
obtain	certification.
	
IPS	 Personalized	 Technical	 Support	 for	 Customers:	 Good	 customer	 service
means	 helping	 customers	 efficiently,	 in	 a	 friendly	 manner.	 It	 is	 essential	 to	 be
able	to	handle	issues	for	customers	and	do	your	best	to	ensure	they	are	satisfied.
Providing	 good	 service	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 things	 that	 can	 set	 our
business	apart	from	the	others	of	its	kind.
Great	 customer	 service	 will	 result	 in	 attracting	 more	 customers	 and	 attain
maximum	customer	retention.
IPS	 is	 offering	 personalized	 TECH	 support	 to	 its	 customers	 to	 provide	 better
value	for	money.	If	you	have	any	queries	related	to	technology	and	labs	you	can
simply	ask	our	technical	team	for	assistance	via	Live	Chat	or	Email.

Become	an	Author	&	Earn	with	Us
If	 you	 are	 interested	 in	 becoming	 an	 author	 and	 start	 earning	 passive	 income,
IPSpecialist	offers	"Earn	with	us"	program.	We	all	consume,	develop	and	create
content	during	our	learning	process,	certification	exam	preparations,	and	during
searching,	developing	and	refining	our	professional	careers.	That	content,	notes,
guides,	worksheets	and	flip	cards	among	other	material	is	normally	for	our	own
reference	 without	 any	 defined	 structure	 or	 special	 considerations	 required	 for
formal	publishing.
IPSpecialist	 can	 help	 you	 craft	 this	 ‘draft’	 content	 into	 a	 fine	 product	 with	 the
help	 of	our	 global	team	 of	experts.	We	sell	your	content	via	different	 channels
as:

        1.	   Amazon	–	Kindle
        2.	   eBay
        3.	   LuLu
        4.	   Kobo
        5.	   Google	Books
        6.	   Udemy	and	many	3rd	party	publishers	and	resellers
Our	Products
Technology	Workbooks
IPSpecialist	 Technology	 workbooks	 are	 the	 ideal	 guides	 to	 developing	 the
hands-on	skills	necessary	to	pass	the	exam.	Our	workbook	covers	official	exam
blueprint	 and	 explains	 the	 technology	 with	 real	 life	 case	 study	 based	 labs.	 The
content	 covered	 in	 each	 workbook	 consists	 of	 individually	 focused	 technology
topics	 presented	 in	 an	 easy-to-follow,	 goal-oriented,	 step-by-step	 approach.
Every	scenario	features	detailed	breakdowns	and	thorough	verifications	to	help
you	completely	understand	the	task	and	associated	technology.
We	 extensively	 used	 mind	 maps	 in	 our	 workbooks	 to	 visually	 explain	 the
technology.	 Our	 workbooks	 have	 become	 a	 widely	 used	 tool	 to	 learn	 and
remember	the	information	effectively.
vRacks
Our	highly	scalable	and	innovative	virtualized	lab	platforms	let	you	practice	the
IP	Specialist	Technology	Workbook	at	your	own	time	and	your	own	place	as	per
your	convenience.

Quick	Reference	Sheets
Our	 quick	 reference	 sheets	 are	 a	 concise	 bundling	 of	 condensed	 notes	 of	 the
complete	 exam	 blueprint.	 It	 is	 an	 ideal	 and	 handy	 document	 to	 help	 you
remember	 the	 most	 important	 technology	 concepts	 related	 to	 the	 certification
exam.
Practice	Questions
IP	 Specialists’	 Practice	 Questions	 are	 dedicatedly	 designed	 from	 a	 certification
exam	 perspective.	 The	 collection	 of	 these	 questions	 from	 our	 technology
workbooks	are	prepared	keeping	the	exam	blueprint	in	mind	covering	not	only
important	 but	 necessary	 topics	 as	 well.	 It’s	 an	 ideal	 document	 to	 practice	 and
revise	your	certification.
                     Content	at	a	glance

Chapter	01:	Architectural	Concepts	&	Design	Requirements
Chapter	02:	Cloud	Data	Security
Chapter	03:	Cloud	Platform	&	Infrastructure	Security
Chapter	04:	Cloud	Application	Security
Chapter	05:	Operations
Chapter	06:	Legal	&	Compliance
Answers:
Acronyms:
References:
About	Our	Products
                           Table	of	Contents
Chapter	01:	Architectural	Concepts	&	Design	Requirements
 Technology	Brief
 Cloud	Computing	Concepts
   Cloud	Computing	Terminologies
   Cloud	Computing	Roles
   Key	Cloud	Computing	Characteristics
   Building	Block	Technologies
 Cloud	Reference	Architecture
   Cloud	Service	Categories
   Cloud	Deployment	Models
   Cloud	Cross-Cutting	Aspects
   Security	Concepts	Relevant	to	Cloud	Computing
   Access	Control
   Data	and	Media	Sanitization
   Virtualization	Security
   Common	Threats
   Security	Considerations	for	Different	Cloud	Categories
 Understand	Design	Principles	of	Secure	Cloud	Computing
   Cloud	Secure	Data	Life	Cycle
   Cloud	Based	Business	Continuity/Disaster	Recovery	Planning
   Cost	Benefit	Analysis
   Functional	Security	Requirements
 Practice	Questions
Chapter	02:	Cloud	Data	Security
 Cloud	Data	Life	Cycle	(CSA	Guidance)
  Phases
  Relevant	Data	Security	Technologies
 Cloud	Data	Storage	Architectures
  Storage	Types	(e.g.,	long-term,	ephemeral,	raw-disk)
  Threats	to	Storage	Types	(e.g.,	ISO/IEC	27040)
  Technologies	Available	to	Address	Threat	s
 Data	Security	Strategies
   Encryption
   Key	Management
   Masking
   Tokenization
   Emerging	Technologies
   Homomorphic	Encryption
 Data	Discovery	and	Classification	Technologies
   Data	Discovery
   Classification
 Jurisdictional	Data	Protections	for	Personally	Identifiable	Information	(PII)
   Data	Privacy	Acts
   Implementation	of	Data	Discovery
   Classification	of	Discovered	Sensitive	Data
   Mapping	and	Definition	of	Controls
   Application	of	Defined	Controls	for	PII	(in	consideration	of	customer’s	Data
   Privacy	Acts)
 Data	Rights	Management
   Data	 Rights	 Objectives	 (e.g.,	 provisioning,	 users	 and	 roles,	 role-based
   access)
   Appropriate	Tools	(e.g.,	Issuing	and	replication	of	certificates)	Domain
 Data	Retention,	Deletion,	and	Archiving	Policies
   Data	Retention	Policies
   Data	Deletion	Procedures	and	Mechanisms
   Data	Archiving	Procedures	and	Mechanisms
 Auditability,	Traceability,	and	Accountability	of	Data	Events
   Definition	of	Event	Sources
   Identity	Attribution	Requirement
   Storage	and	Analysis	of	Data	Events
   Continuous	Optimizations
   Chain	of	Custody
   Non-repudiation
 Summary:
 Practice	Question	s
Chapter	03:	Cloud	Platform	&	Infrastructure	Security
 Cloud	Infrastructure	Components
   Physical	Environment
   Network	and	Communications
   Compute
   Virtualization
   Storage
   Management	Plane
 Analyze	Risks	Associated	to	Cloud	Infrastructure
   Risk	Assessment/Analysis
   Cloud	Attack	Vectors
   Virtualization	Rısks
   Counter-Measure	Strategies
 Security	Controls
   Physical	and	Environmental	Protection
   System	and	Communication	Protection
   Virtualization	Systems	Protection
   Management	 of	 Identification,	 Authentication	 and	 Authorization	 in	 Cloud
   Infrastructure
   Audit	Mechanisms
 Plan	Disaster	Recovery	and	Business	Continuity	Management
   Understanding	of	the	Cloud	Environment
   Understanding	of	the	Business	Requirements
   Understanding	of	the	Risks
   Disaster	Recovery/Business	Continuity	strategy
   Creation/Implementation	of	the	Plan
 Practice	Questions:
Chapter	04:	Cloud	Application	Security
 Application	Security
  Cloud	Development	Basics
  Common	Pitfalls
  Common	Vulnerabilities
 Cloud	Software	Assurance	and	Validatio	n
  Cloud-based	Functional	Testing
  Cloud	Secure	Software	Development	Life	Cycle
  Security	Testing
 Use	Verified	Secure	Software
   Approved	API
   Community	Knowledge
   Supply-Chain	Management
 Software	Development	Life-Cycle	(SDLC)	Process
   Phases	&	Methodologies
   Business	Requirements
   Software	Configuration	Management	&	Versioning
 Apply	the	Secure	Software	Development	Life-Cycle
   Common	Vulnerabilities
   Cloud-Specific	Risks
   Quality	of	Service	(QoS)
   Threat	Modelling
 Specifics	of	Cloud	Application	Architecture
   Supplemental	Security	Devices
   Cryptography
   Sandboxing
   Application	Virtualization
 Identity	and	Access	Management	(IAM)	Solutions
   Federated	Identity
   Identity	Providers	(IP)
   Single	Sign-On	(SSO)
   Multi-factor	Authentication	(MFA)
 Practice	Questions
Chapter	05:	Operations
 Data	Center	Design
  Logical	Design
  Physical	Design
  Environmental	Design
 Physical	Infrastructure	for	Cloud	Environmen	t
  Secure	Configuration	of	Hardware	Specific	Requirements
  Virtualization	Management	Tools	for	the	Host
 Run	Physical	Infrastructure	for	Cloud	Environment
  Configuration	of	Access	Control	for	Local	Access
  Securing	Network	Configuration
  OS	Hardening	via	Application	of	Baseline	(e.g.,	Windows,	Linux,	VMware)
  Availability	of	Stand-Alone	Hosts
  Availability	 of	 Clustered	 Hosts	 (e.g.,	 Distributed	 Resource	 Acheduling
  (DRS),	 Dynamic	 Optimization	 (DO),	 storage	 clusters,	 maintenance	 mode,
  high	availability)
Manage	Physical	Infrastructure	for	Cloud	Environment
  Configuring	 Access	 Controls	 for	 Remote	 Access	 (e.g.,	 RDP,	 Secure
  Terminal	Access)
  OS	Baseline	Compliance	Monitoring	and	Remediation
  Patch	Management
  Performance	Monitoring
  Hardware	Monitoring
  Backup	and	Restore	of	Host	Configuration
  Implementation	 of	 Network	 Security	 Controls	 (e.g.,	 firewalls,	 IDS,	 IPS,
  honeypots,	vulnerability	assessments)
  Log	Capture	and	Analysis	(e.g.,	SIEM,	Log	Management)
  Management	Plane
Build	Logical	Infrastructure	for	Cloud	Environment
  Secure	Configuration	of	Virtual	Hardware	Specific	Requirements
  Installation	of	Guest	O/S	Virtualization	Toolsets
Run	Logical	Infrastructure	for	Cloud	Environment
  Secure	Network	Configuration
  OS	 Hardening	 via	 Application	 of	 a	 Baseline	 (e.g.,	 Windows,	 Linux,
  VMware)
  Availability	of	the	Guest	OS
Manage	Logical	Infrastructure	for	Cloud	Environment
  Access	Control	for	Remote	Access
  OS	Baseline	Compliance	Monitoring	and	Remediation
  Patch	Management
  Performance	Monitoring	(e.g.,	Network,	Disk,	Memory,	CPU)
  Backup	and	Restore	of	Guest	OS	Configuration
  Implementation	of	Network	Security	Control	s
  Log	Capture	and	Analysis
  Management	Plane
Ensure	 Compliance	 with	 Regulations	 and	 Controls	 (e.g.,	 ITIL,	 ISO/IEC
20000-1)
   Change	Management
   Continuity	Management
   Information	Security	Management
   Continual	Service	Improvement	Management
   Incident	Management
   Problem	Management
   Release	and	Deployment	Management
   Configuration	Management
   Service	Level	Management
   Availability	Management
   Capacity	Management
 Conduct	Risk	Assessment	to	Logical	and	Physical	Infrastructure
 The	Collection,	Acquisition,	and	Preservation	of	Digital	Evidence
   Proper	Methodologies	for	Forensic	Collection	of	Data
   Evidence	Management
 Manage	Communication	with	Relevant	Parties
   Vendors
   Customers
   Partners
   Regulators
   Other	Stakeholders
 Summary
 Practice	Questions
Chapter	06:	Legal	&	Compliance
 Legal	Requirements	and	Unique	Risks	within	the	Cloud	Environment
   International	Legislation	Conflicts
   Appraisal	of	Legal	Risks	Specific	to	Cloud	Computing
   Legal	Controls
   eDiscovery	(e.g.,	ISO/IEC	27050,	CSA	Guidance)
   Forensics	Requirement	s
 Privacy	Issues,	Including	Jurisdictional	Variation
   Difference	between	Contractual	and	Regulated	PII
   Country-Specific	Legislation	Related	to	PII	/	Data	Privacy
   Difference	between	Confidentiality,	Integrity,	Availability,	and	Privacy
 Audit	 Process,	 Methodologies,	 and	 Required	 Adaptations	 for	 a	 Cloud
 Environment
   Internal	and	External	Audit	Controls
   Impact	of	Requirements	Programs	by	the	Use	of	Cloud
   Assurance	Challenges	of	Virtualization	and	Cloud
   Types	of	Audit	Reports
   Restrictions	of	Audit	Scope	Statements	(e.g.,	SAS	70)
   Gap	Analysis
   Audit	Plan
   Standards	Requirements
   Internal	Information	Security	Management	System	(ISMS)
   Internal	Information	Security	Controls	System
   Policies
   Identification	and	Involvement	of	Relevant	Stakeholders
   Specialized	Compliance	Requirements	for	Highly	Regulated	Industries
   Impact	of	Distributed	IT	Model
 Implications	of	Cloud	to	Enterprise	Risk	Management
   Access	Providers	Risk	Management
   Difference	between	Data	Owner/Controller	vs.	Data	Custodian/Processor
   Risk	Mitigation
   Different	Risk	Frameworks
   Metrics	for	Risk	Management
   Assessment	of	Risk	Environment
 Outsourcing	and	Cloud	Contract	Design
   Business	Requirements
   Vendor	Management
   Contract	Management	(e.g.,	right	to	audit,	metrics,	definitions,	termination,
   litigation,	assurance,	compliance,	access	to	Cloud/data)
 Execute	Vendor	Management
   Supply-chain	Management	(e.g.,	ISO/IEC	27036)
 Summar	y
 Practice	Questions
Answers:
Acronyms:
References:
About	Our	Products
About	this	Workbook
This	workbook	covers	all	the	information	you	need	to	pass	the	(ICS)2	-	Certified
Cloud	Security	Professional	(CCSP)	exam.	The	workbook	is	designed	to	take	a
practical	approach	of	learning	with	real	life	examples	and	case	studies.
  ➢								Covers	complete	CCSP	blueprint
  ➢								Summarized	content
  ➢								Practice	Questions
  ➢								100%	pass	guarantee
  ➢								Mind	maps

CCSP	Certifications
The	 (ICS)2	 -	 Certified	 Cloud	 Security	 Professional	 (CCSP)	 certification
evaluates	the	applicant’s	knowledge	of	cloud	security.	It	is	administered	by	the
International	Information	System	Security	Certification	Consortium.	(ISC)2	,	and
was	developed	in	partnership	with	the	Cloud	Security	Alliance	(CSA).
The	 CCSP	 is	 designed	 as	 the	 certification	 for	 mid-level	 security	 professionals
who	want	to	demonstrate	their	proficiency	in	the	field	of	cloud	security.
How	does	CCSP	certifications	help?
CCSP	certification	helps	you	boost	your	career	in	the	following	ways:

        1.	 The	CCSP	positions	you	as	an	authority	figure	on	cloud	security.		It’s
            a	quick	way	to	communicate	your	knowledge	and	earn	trust	from	your
            clients	or	senior	leadership.
        2.	 The	 CCSP	 can	 enhance	 your	 working	 knowledge	 of	 cloud	 security
            and	keep	you	current	on	evolving	technologies.
        3.	 You	 can	 use	 your	 knowledge	 across	 a	 variety	 of	 different	 cloud
            platforms.	This	not	only	makes	you	more	marketable,	it	ensures	you
            are	better	equipped	to	protect	sensitive	data	in	a	global	environment.
        4.	 The	 CCSP	 created	 new	 opportunities	 from	 being	 able	 to	 move	 into
            more	strategic	roles,	to	being	able	to	add	new	consulting	services	to
            your	business.
About	the	CCSP	Exam
  ➢								Exam	Number:	(	ICS)2	Certified	Cloud	Security	Professional(CCSP)
   ➢								Associated	Certifications:	CCSP
   ➢								Duration:	240	minutes	(125	questions)
  ➢								Exam	Registration:	Pearson	VU	E
The	 Certified	 Cloud	 Security	 Professional	 is	 a	 240-minutes,	 125	 questions
assessment	 that	 is	 associated	 with	 the	 CCSP	 certification.	 This	 exam	 tests	 a
candidate's	 knowledge	 and	 skills	 related	 to	 design,	 manage	 and	 secure	 data,
applications	 and	 infrastructure	 in	 the	 cloud	 using	 best	 practices,	 policies	 and
procedure	established	by	the	cybersecurity	experts	at	(ISC)2	.
The	following	topics	are	general	guidelines	for	the	content	likely	to	be	included
on	the	exam
  ➢								Architectural	Concepts	&	Design	Requirements 	                                             	19%
  ➢								Cloud	Data	Security 	                          																																																	20%
  ➢								Cloud	Platform	&	Infrastructure
        Security																																						19%																										
  ➢								Cloud	Application	Security																																																																	15%
  ➢								Operations																																																																																									15%
  ➢								Legal	&	Compliance                	               																										12%

How	to	become	CCSP?
Step	1:	Pre-requisites

           1.	 Candidates	must	have	a	minimum	of	five	years	cumulative,	paid,	full-
               time	work	experience	in	information	technology.
           2.	 Three	years	must	be	in	information	security,	and	one	year	must	be	in
               one	 or	 more	 of	 the	 six	 domains	 of	 the	 CCSP	 Common	 Body	 of
               Knowledge	(CBK).
           3.	 Earning	 (ISC)2	 CISSP	 credential	 can	 be	 substituted	 for	 the	 entire
               CCSP	experience	requirement.
Step2:	Prepare	for	the	CCSP	Exam
Exam	 preparation	 can	 be	 accomplished	 through	 self-study	 with	 textbooks,
practice	exams,	and	on-site	classroom	programs.	This	workbook	provides	you	all
the	 information	 and	 knowledge	 to	 help	 you	 pass	 the	 CCSP	 Exam.	 Your	 study
will	be	divided	into	two	distinct	parts:
  ➢								Understanding	the	technologies	as	per	exam	blueprint
   ➢								Implementing	and	practicing	the	technologies
IPSpecialist	provides	full	support	to	the	candidates	in	order	for	them	to	pass	the
exam.
Step	3:	Register	for	the	exam
Certification	exams	are	offered	at	locations	throughout	the	world.	To	register	for
an	exam,	contact	the	authorized	test	delivery	partner	of	CCSP,	contact	Pearson
VUE	,	who	will	administer	the	exam	in	a	secure,	proctored	environment.
Prior	 to	 registration,	 decide	 which	 exam	 to	 take,	 note	 the	 exam	 name	 and
number	.
How	much	does	an	exam	cost?
Computer-based	 certification	 exam	 prices	 (written	 exam)	 depend	 on	 scope	 and
exam	length.
Step	4:	Getting	the	Results
After	 you	 complete	 an	 exam	 at	 an	 authorized	 testing	 centre,	 you'll	 get
immediate,	online	notification	of	your	pass	or	fail	status,	a	printed	examination
score	 report	 that	 indicates	 your	 pass	 or	 fail	 status,	 and	 your	 exam	 results	 by
section.
Congratulations!	You	are	now	CCSP	Certified.
Chapter	01:	Architectural	Concepts	&	Design
Requirements
Technology	Brief
Cloud	 computing	 is	 a	 new	 operational	 model	 and	 set	 of	 technologies	 for
managing	shared	pools	of	computing	resources.	Cloud	computing	is	the	practice
of	using	a	network	of	remote	servers	hosted	on	the	internet	to	store,	manage	and
process	 data	 efficiently	 rather	 than	 using	 primitive	 means	 like	 on-premises
servers	or	personal	computer.	It	is	an	on-demand	service	of	computing	resources
through	a	cloud	services	platform	with	the	covenience	of	pay-as-you-go	pricing.
It	is	a	powerful	source	for	an	organization	to	grow	their	business	in	terms	of	time
saving,	 improved	 cost	 efficiency	 and	 exteneded	 scalability.	 Cloud	 computing
provides	 a	 lot	 of	 advantages	 to	 the	 users	 and	 makes	 their	 work	 much	 easier.
Some	of	its	advantages	are:

           Variable	Pricing:
   Variable	pricing	is	another	eminent	feature	of	cloud	computing	which	means
   to	pay-as-you-go.	It	is	more	convenient	and	cost-efficient	to	pay	only	for	the
   resources	you	avail	rather	than	deploying	and	maintaining	costly	on-premises
   data	centers.	Cloud	computing	providers	such	as	Amazon,	Google	and	Azure
   build	their	own	data	centers	and	provide	services	in	lower	prices.

           Estimation	and	Scalability:
   Access	as	much	or	as	little	resources	you	need	instead	of	buying	too	much	or
   too	fewer	resources	by	guessing	your	needs.	Scale	up	and	down	as	required
   with	no	long-term	contracts.
   Auto-scalability	allows	you	to	scale-up	or	down	your	computation	resources
   automatically	with	respect	to	the	defined	threshold	level.	Monitoring	services
   help	you	to	monitor	your	running	instances.

           Increased	Speed	and	Agility:
   New	IT	resources	are	readily	available	on	Cloud	so	their	functionality	can	be
   tuned	according	to	the	demand.	The	result	is	a	dramatic	increase	in	agility	for
   the	organizations.
           Free	from	Maintenance	Expense:
   Cloud	 computing	 also	 cuts	 short	 the	 added	 expenses	 of	 running	 and
   maintaining	 data	 centers.	 No	 more	 requirements	 of	 installing	 hardwares,
   power	 supplies,	 AC	 and	 other	 tools	 as	 the	 entire	 data	 center	 is	 on	 cloud,
   which	is	managed	by	cloud	service	providers.

            Low	Latency:
   Cloud	service	latency	is	one	the	most	critical	factor	in	availing	cloud	services.
   Higher	latency	in	data	exchanges	from	cloud	across	the	internet	results	into
   higher	cost	for	users.	The	cloud	datacenters	are	deployed	in	different	regions
   of	 the	 world	 to	 minimize	 the	 latency	 which	 results	 in	 efficient	 service
   delivery	to	the	hosts	with	lower	latency	rate.

           Trade	capital	expense	for	variable	expense:
   On-demand	 services	 and	 Pay-as-you-go	 features	 bills	 only	 for	 the	 availed
   services	which	results	into	less	expensive	resources	on	cloud.
Cloud	Computing	Concepts
About	ISO/IEC	17788
ISO/IEC	17788 	gives	an	overview	of	cloud	computing	along	with	other	various
terms	 and	 definitions.	 It	 is	 a	 terminology	 foundation	 for	 cloud	 computing
standards.	 It	 is	 applicable	 to	 a	 wide	 range	 of	 associations	 (e.g.,	 commercial
enterprise,	non-profit	organizations	government	agencies).
Cloud	Computing	Terminologies
Confidentiality:	 It	 focuses	 on	 protecting	 information	 from	 any	 unauthorized
disclosure.	 We	 want	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 our	 secret	 and	 sensitive	 data	 is	 secure.
Confidentiality	means	that	only	authorized	personnel	can	work	with	and	see	our
infrastructure’s	digital	resources.	It	also	implies	that	unauthorized	persons	should
not	have	any	access	to	the	data.	There	are	two	types	of	data	in	general:	data	in
motion	 as	 it	 moves	 across	 the	 network	 and	 data	 at	 rest,	 when	 data	 is	 in	 any
media	storage	(such	as	servers,	local	hard	drives,	cloud).	For	data	in	motion,	we
need	 to	 ensure	 data	 encryption	 before	 sending	 it	 over	 the	 network.	 Another
option	 we	 can	 use	 along	 with	 encryption	 is	 to	 use	 a	 separate	 network	 for
sensitive	data.	For	data	at	rest,	we	can	apply	encryption	on	storage	media	drives
so	that	no	one	can	read	it	in	case	of	theft.
Integrity:	 Ensuring	 that	 authorized	 information	 is	 not	 subject	 to	 unauthorized
modification	 or	 impersonation.	 We	 do	 not	 want	 our	 data	 to	 be	 accessible	 or
manipulated	by	unauthorized	persons.	Data	integrity	ensures	that	only	authorized
parties	 can	 access	 or	 modify	 data.	 The	 integrity	 of	 a	 message	 is	 preserved	 by
signing	the	entire	message.	If	any	content	of	the	message	is	changed,	it	will	not
get	the	 same	 signature.	Integrity	is	 signing	and	verifying	the	message	 obtained
by	using	Hash	Functions.
Availability:	Availability	applies	to	services	and	data.	If	authorized	personnel	is
unable	to	access	data	due	to	general	network	failure	or	Denial-of-Service	(DoS)
attack,	then	it	is	considered	as	a	sevier	problem	from	a	business	point	of	view.
Apparently	 because	 it	 may	 result	 in	 loss	 of	 revenues	 and	 reputation.	 An
organization	may	lose	recording	of	some	important	results.	Availability	ensures
access	 to	 services	 at	 anytime,	 anywhere	 for	 legitimate	 users	 and	 running
processes.
Interoperability:	Interoperability	is	the	property	that	allows	for	the	unrestricted
sharing	of	resources	between	different	systems.	Interoperability	is	the	ability	of
two	 or	 more	 components	 or	 systems	 (typically	 manufactured	 by	 different
vendors)	 to	 exchange	 information	 and	 to	 use	 the	 information	 that	 has	 been
exchanged.
Party:	A	legal	person	or	natural	person,	whether	or	not	incorporated,	or	a	group
of	either.
Service	 Level	 Agreement(SLA):	 Service	 Level	 Agreement	 (SLA)	 defines	 a
working	 relationship	 between	 parties	 for	 a	 service	 contract.	 It	 is	 generally
applicable	 to	 businesses	 than	 to	 consumers	 and	 involves	 one	 or	 more	 end	 user
parties	and	a	service	provider.	SLA	documents	the	services	standards	helping	the
service	provider	to	meet	the	obligated	terms.	SLA	also	helps	to	manage	and	meet
the	customer's	expectation.
Cloud	Computing	Roles
Cloud	Service	Customer
An	individual	or	organization	that	utilizes	or	subscribes	to	cloud-based	services
or	resource	s 	.
Cloud	Service	Provider
A	 Cloud	 Service	 Provider	 (CSP)	 offers	 cloud-based	 platform,	 application,
infrastructure,	 or	 storage	 services.	 The	 CSP	 will	 possess	 the	 data	 centre,	 owns
and	deals	with	the	resources	(hardware	or	software),	employs	the	staff,	monitors
service	 provision	 and	 security,	 and	 gives	 administrative	 assistance	 to	 the
customer.	 The	 popular	 cloud	 service	 providers	 are	 Amazon	 Web	 Services,
Microsoft’s	Azure,	Google	and	Rackspace.
Cloud	Service	Partner
Any	 party	 which	 is	 associated	 or	 assistant	 to,	 activities	 of	 either	 the	 Cloud
Service	Provider	or	the	Cloud	Service	Customer.
Key	Cloud	Computing	Characteristics
On-demand	Self-Service
Cloud	 Service	 Customer	 can	 customize	 their	 requirement	 of	 	 computing
resources,	 such	 as	 no	 of	 instances,	 storage	 or	 other	 computational	 resourcesas
required	without	requiring	the	involvement	of	an	IT	staff.
Broad	Network	Access
Broad	network	access	implies	that	all	resources	are	accessible	across	the	globe.
You	can	have	both	console	&	remote	access	to	all	of	your	network	and	services
without	physically	accessing	the	data	center.	In	rare	cases,	where	physical	access
is	requried	such	as	power	failure	or	broken	network	links,	support	staff	of	cloud
service	provider	will	take	care	of	running	hardwares..
Multi-Tenancy
Shared	 resources	 are	 served	 to	 multiple	 customers	 using	 a	 multi-tenant	 model,
where	 various	 physical	 and	 virtual	 resources	 progressively	 assigned	 and
reassigned	 according	 to	 the	 costumer’s	 request.	 Data	 of	 multiple	 tenants	 are
completely	isolated	from	each	other.
Rapid	Elasticity	and	Scalability
Traditionally,	 systems	 are	 needed	 to	 be	 designed	 in	 	 a	 way	 that	 makes	 them
capable	 of	 growing	 and	 expanding	 over	 time	 with	 no	 drop	 in	 performance.
Cloud	 based	 architectures	 can	 be	 manually	 up	 or	 down-scale	 (on-demand
scalling)	 or	 setup	 for	 auto-scalling	 to	 expand	 or	 shrink	 the	 resources	 to	 keep
them	highly	available	with	optimum	cost	as	per	traffic.
Resource	Pooling
Resource	 pooling	 feature	 allows	 the	 cloud	 service	 providers	 to	 manage	 a	 large
pool	 of	 physical	 and	 virtual	 resources	 like	 storage,	 CPUs,	 memory,	 network
bandwidth,	 and	 much	 more	 in	 order	 to	 serve	 customers	 or	 end-users.	 These
resources	 can	 be	 allocated	 dynamically	 (assignment	 and	 re-assignment	 of
resources)	from	the	resource	pool	as	per	customer’s	demand	using	multi-tenant
model.
Measured	Service
Measured	service	is	another	feature	to	deliver	metered	services	to	the	end-users
where	usually	monitoring,	controlled	services,	reporting,	and	billing	is	required.
Building	Block	Technologies
Virtualization
Virtualization	 is	 a	 technique	 of	 deploying	 multiple	 machines	 on	 a	 single	 on-
premises	 or	 remote	 hardware.	 Physical	 hardware	 hosting	 a	 dedicated	 machine
for	 a	 service	 can	 also	 be	 migrated	 on	 a	 powerful	 hardware	 running	 multiple
virtual	 machines	 on	 it	 in	either	isolated	or	shared	environment.	Virtualizing	 on
cloud	offers	much	more	scalability	and	ease	of	management	comparatively	to	an
on-premises	virtualization.
The	fundamental	concept	of	virtualization	is	to	deal	with	the	burden	of	workload
by	transforming	the	traditional	computing	into	modern;	making	it	more	scalable,
efficient	and	economical.	Virtualization	can	be	classified	into:

            Hardware-level	virtualization
            Operating	system	virtualization
            Server	virtualization.
Innovation	 of	 virtualization	 technology	 is	 an	 antidote	 to	 the	 need	 of	 having
multiple	 hardware’s,	 cost	 and	 energy	 saving,	 quick	 management	 of	 computing
and	networking.
Cloud	computing	depends	on	the	concepts	of	virtualization.	In	cloud	computing,
computational	 resource	 like	 space/memory	 and	 processors	 are	 allotted	 to	 the
users	which	requires	a	host	(either	an	operating	system	or	the	hypervisor).
The	virtualization	model	is	consist	of	cloud	users,	service	providers,	virtualized
models	and	its	host	softwares.	Virtualization	model	makes	it	conceivable	to	run
numerous	operating	systems	and	different	applications	on	the	same	server	at	the
same	time.
Advantages	of	Virtualization	Technology
The	advantages	of	virtualization	technology	are:

           Ease	of	deployment,	networking	and	management.
           It	helps	to	make	cloud	computing	more	efficient	and	eco-friendly
           It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 cost-saving,	 hardware-reducing	 and	 energy-saving
           technique
           Isolation
           Resource	sharing
           Aggregation	of	resources
           Dynamical	resources
Storage
In	Cloud,	data	is	stored	on	remote	storage	servers.	Cloud	storage	is	a	critical	part
of	cloud	computing	as	all	the	data	accessed	by	the	applications	is	stored	there.
All	 applications	 including	 databases,	 data	 warehouses,	 big	 data	 analytics,
Internet	of	Things	(IoTs),	and	backup	and	archive	depends	heavily	on	some	form
of	 data	 storage	 architecture.	 Different	 cloud	 service	 providers	 offer	 variety	 of
low-cost	 cloud	 storage	 services	 with	 high	 durability	 and	 availability.	 It	 offers
object,	 file,	 and	 blocks	 storage	 choices	 to	 support	 application	 and	 archival
requirements	as	well	as	disaster	recovery	use	cases.
Networking
Cloud	 networking	 introduces	 an	 easy	 way	 to	 deploy,	 operate,	 and	 manage	 a
network.	 It	 offers	 advance	 networking	 capabilities	 with	 highly	 secure
environment.	 To	 imply	 an	 additional	 layer	 of	 security,	 Cloud	 service	 porviders
also	offer	the	third-party	security	services	at	very	low	cost.	You	can	isolate	your
cloud	infrastructure	to	make	it	private,	connect	it	to	internet	for	making	available
for	public	or	design	a	hydrid	architecture.
Unlike	 traditional	 hardware–based	 legacy	 solutions,	 Cloud	 networking
mechanizes	exceptionally	complex	tasks	and	make	them	extraordinarily	easy.	It
enables	 enterprises	 to	 deploy	 locations	 in	 minutes	 and	 operate	 distributed
networks	 with	 services	 provided	 by	 the	 means	 of	 a	 cloud	 infrastructure,	 while
providing	phenomenal	levels	of	centralized	control	and	network	visibility.	Cloud
services	 are	 typically	 subscription-based	 and	 therefore	 decrease	 any	 upfront
capital	costs.
Public	 cloud	 networking	 and	 Private	 cloud	 networking	 are	 two	 distinctive
services.	 Public	 cloud	 networking	 makes	 networking	 applications	 accessible	 to
IT	 users	 over	 the	 internet	 with	 little	 to	 no	 deployment	 required	 inside	 the
company’s	IT	infrastructure.
Private	cloud	networking	services	allude	to	an	exclusive	computing	networking
architecture	 that	 give	 hosted	 services	 to	 the	 set	 number	 of	 users	 behind	 a
firewall.	 Such	 as	 a	 company’s	 internal	 IT	 department	 utilizing	 a	 private	 cloud
infrastructure,	basically	hosts	applications	inside	their	own	private	network	and
gives	them	to	their	own	IT	users.
Databases
Cloud	 database	 conveys	 ventures	 a	 scalable,	 reliable	 database	 solution.
Customers	 have	 Service	 Level	 Agreement(s)	 for	 their	 cloud	 environment,	 with
the	capacity	to	burst	both	execution	levels	and	infrastructure	as	needed,	to	oblige
the	varying	requests	that	are	set	on	their	database	environment.	Cloud	database
is	deployed	across	a	non-virtualized	environment,	giving	the	databases	access	to
the	 full	 limit	 of	 the	 fundamental	 hardware.	 Cloud	 database	 provides	 a	 clear
differentiation	from	other	database	solutions	available	in	the	market.	Following
are	some	features	of	cloud	based	databases:

           Agility
           Availability
           Scalability

Advantages	of	Cloud	Database:
Some	of	the	advantages	of	cloud	database	are:

           No	software	licensing
           On-demand	Oracle	and	MS	SQL	server	solution
           No	hardware	provisioning
           Portal-based	self-service	database	solution
           Cost	effective	estimated	20%	to	75%	lower	cost.

Cloud	Reference	Architecture
Cloud	Service	Categories
SaaS	(Software	as	a	Service)

           A	software	model	which	gives	accessibility	to	the	customer	to	use	the
           provider’s	application	running	on	a	Cloud	infrastructure
           The	applications	are	available	for	different	client	devices	such	as	PCs,
           laptops	and	smart	phones
           SaaS	is	a	complete	service	that	is	managed	and	hosted	by	the	service
           provider.
           The	customer	does	not	manage	or	control	the	application	parameters
           such	as	network,	servers,	operating	systems,	storage
           For	example,	Google	Apps,	Caspio,	Nivio,	Microsoft	Office	365

PaaS	(Platform	as	a	Service)

           A	 category	 of	 cloud	 services	 which	 offers	 a	 platform	 to	 the	 cloud
           customers.	 These	 platforms	 are	 capable	 to	 run,	 deploy	 and	 manage
           the	 applications	 without	 building	 a	 complex	 infrastructure	 typically
           required	for	application	development
          Platforms	as	a	service	remove	 the	need	for	organizations	to	 manage
          the	 underlying	 infrastructure	 (usually	 hardware	 and	 operating
          systems)
          The	customer	has	control	over	the	applications
          For	 example,	 Windows	 Azure,	 Salesforce	 Heroku,	 AWS	 Elastic
          Beanstalk,	Engine	Yard

IaaS	(Infrastructure	as	a	Service)

          A	category	of	cloud	services	which	gives	ability	to	the	customer		to
          provision	 processing,	 storage,	 networks,	 and	 other	 fundamental
          computing	resources
          The	 customer	 is	 able	 to	 deploy	 and	 run	 subjective	 software,	 which
          can	 incorporate	 operating	 systems	 and	 networking,	 hardware,	 and
          data	storage	space
          The	 customer	 does	 not	 manage	 or	 control	 the	 fundamental	 cloud
          infrastructure	 but	 has	 control	 over	 operating	 systems,	 storage,	 and
          network
          For	 example,	 Amazon	 EC2,	 Windows	 Azure,	 Rackspace,	 Google
          Compute	Engine




                          Figure	1-1:	Cloud	Service	Categories

NaaS	(Network	as	a	Service)

          Network	 as	 a	 service	 (NaaS)	 is	 another	 model	 for	 delivering	 virtual
            enterprise-wide	area	network	services
            It	requires	configuration	of	network	devices	such	as	routers,	firewalls,
            Software-defined	WAN	endpoints	and	other	related	component
            NaaS	can	incorporate	flexible	and	expanded	Virtual	Private	Network
            (VPN),	 bandwidth	 on	 interest,	 custom	 routing,	 multicast	 protocols,
            security	 firewall,	 instrustions	 detection	 and	 prevention,	 Wide	 Area
            Network	(WAN),	content	monitoring	and	filtering,	and	antivirus

DSaaS	(Data	Storage	as	a	Service)

            Storage	service	allows	the	user	to	pay	for	the	measure	of	data	storage
            space
            Storage	service	rents	the	data	storage	space	to	customers
            Storage	 as	 a	 service	 promotes	 a	 convenient	 way	 to	 manage	 backup
            and	secondary	storage	option
            SaaS	provider	typically	are	agreed	to	rent	storage	space	on	a	cost-per-
            gigabyte-stored	and	cost-per-data-transfer	basis
            Common	examples	of	Storage	as	a	service	are	Amazon	S3,	Google,
            Bigtable	etc


Cloud	Deployment	Models
Public	Cloud
A	Public	Cloud	is	one	of	the	most	vital	model,	in	which	service	providers	create
resources,	 such	 as	 storage	 and	 application,	 available	 to	 the	 overall	 public	 over
the	internet	or	web	applications/web	services.	Perhaps	public	cloud	services	are
free	or	offered	on	a	“pay-as-you-go”	pricing.
In	 Public	 Cloud	 hardware,	 application	 and	 bandwidth	 costs	 are	 secured	 by	 the
service	 provider	 so	 it	 is	 simple	 and	 economical	 set-up	 to	 the	 user.	 Google
AppEngine,	Windows	Azure	Services	Platform,	Amazon	Elastic	Compute	Cloud
(EC2)	are	example	of	public	clouds.
Private	Cloud
Private	 cloud	 offers	 complete	 control	 over	 the	 architecture	 than	 using	 a	 Public
cloud	Private	cloud	may	be	exists	off	premises	and	can	be	managed	by	a	third
party	Private	cloud	is	useful	for	companies	own	privacy	policies	however,	from
in	advanced	capital	cost,	it	is	not	that	much	gainfull	“still	it	cost	money	to	buy,
build	and	manage”.	Amazon’s	Elastic	Compute	Cloud	(EC2)	or	Simple	Storage
Service	(S3)	is	example	of	Private	Cloud.
Hybrid	Cloud
A	 Hybrid	 Cloud	 is	 the	 combination	 of	 Public	 and	 Private	 cloud	 where	 the
infrastructure	 partially	 hosted	 inside	 the	 organization	 and	 remotely	 in	 a	 Public
cloud.	 For	 example,	 an	 association	 may	 use	 Amazon	 Simple	 Storage	 Service
(Amazon	S3)	as	Public	cloud	service	to	records	their	data	but	at	the	same	time
continue	 in-house	 storage	 for	 instant	 access	 operational	 customer	 data.	 Hybrid
storage	clouds	are	frequently	important	for	record	keeping	and	backup	function.
It	 is	 a	 decent	 methodology	 for	 a	 business	 to	 exploit	 the	 cost	 effectiveness	 and
scalability.




                             Figure	1-2:	Cloud	Deployment	Models

Community	Cloud
A	 Community	 Cloud	 can	 be	 perceived	 where	 various	 associations	 have
comparable	necessities	andare	willing	to	share	infrastructure	in	order	to	take	in
the	 advantages	 of	 cloud	 computing.	 Costs	 are	 typically	 higher	 than	 a	 Public
cloud	.	Google’s	“Gov	Cloud”	is	a	good	example	of	community	cloud.
Cloud	Cross-Cutting	Aspects
Interoperability
Application	interoperability	is	the	capability	between	the	application	segments	to
communicate	with	the	other	applications	and	processes.	An	application	segment
may	be	a	total	monolithic	application	or	a	piece	of	a	distributed	application.
Interoperability	is	required	among	various	segments	as	well	as	between	identical
parts	 running	 in	 various	 clouds.	 For	 example,	 In	 a	 Hybrid	 cloud	 solution,	 an
application	part	may	be	deployed	in	a	Private	cloud,	with	arrangement	for	a	copy
to	be	run	in	a	Public	cloud	to	handle	traffic	peaks.
Portability
The	concept	of	portability	in	cloud	environment	is	the	ability	to	shift	your	data
or	 application	 to	 another	 environment	 with	 no	 or	 minimal	 disruptions.	 This
migration	 may	 in	 between	 cloud	 service	 providers	 or	 in	 between	 deployment
models.	 A	 portable	 part	 can	 be	 moved	 easily	 and	 reused	 regardless	 of	 the
provider,	 operating	 system,	 platform,	 storage	 or	 other	 elements	 of	 surrounding
environment.
Portability	is	defined	into	two	separate	areas

                Cloud	data	portability
                Cloud	application	portability
Cloud	 data	 portability	 is	 the	 capacity	 to	 easily	 transfer	 data	 from	 one	 cloud
service	 to	 another	 cloud	 service	 or	 between	 a	 cloud	 service	 customer’s	 system
and	a	cloud	service.
Cloud	application	portability	is	the	capacity	to	easily	transfer	an	application	or
application	components	from	one	cloud	service	to	a	comparable	cloud	service	or
from	a	cloud	customer’s	system	to	a	cloud	service.
Reversibility
Reversibility	 is	 a	 process	 for	 cloud	 customers	 to	 recover	 their	 data	 and
application	artefacts.	Reversibility	allows	the	customer	to	modify	or	rollback	the
projects	 and	 deployments.	 For	 example,	 customer	 can	 rollback	 a	 self-managed
environment	to	a	cloud-based	or	third-party	managed	settings.
Security
In	 an	 on-premises	 environment,	 security	 implementation,	 auditing	 and
monitoring	 is	 a	 periodic	 process	 which	 is	 usually	 either	 managed	 by	 the
administrator	or	managed	with	co-operation	of	third-party.	In	cloud	environment,
plenty	 of	 advance	 automated	 security	 services,	 advance	 monitoring	 tools	 and
governance	 features	 allows	 you	 to	 continuously	 monitor	 your	 infrastructure.	 It
also	allows	you	to	enforce	control	policies	intended	to	adhere	as	per	regulatory
compliance	rules,	protect	information,	 data	applications	and	infrastructures	and
controlled	management	of	identity	and	access.
Security	in	cloud	is	much	like	security	in	traditional	IT	on-premises	data	centers,
only	 without	 the	 costs	 of	 maintaining	 facilities	 and	 hardware.	 This	 includes
protecting	critical	information	from	theft,	data	leakage,	integrity,	and	deletion.	In
the	cloud	scenario,	the	service	provider	handles	management	of	physical	servers
or	 storage	 devices	 while	 the	 customer	 uses	 software-based	 security	 tools	 to
monitor	 and	 protect	 the	 flow	 of	 information	 into	 and	 of	 out	 of	 the	 Cloud
resources.




                        Figure	1-3:	Simple	Cloud	Security	Model	by	CSA

The	 infrastructure	 of	 cloud	 platform	 is	 secured	 by	 the	 service	 provider	 itself.
Whereas	 the	 services	 availed	 by	 the	 customers	 from	 the	 providers	 are	 secure
with	 shared	 responsibilities	 manner.	 Cloud	 services	 providers	 run	 compliance
programs	with	accreditation	bodies,	CSA	recommends	the	following	models:

            CSA	Enterprise	Architecture
            CSA	Cloud	Controls	Matrix
            Cloud	 Computing	 Security	 Reference	 Architecture	 (NIST	 Special
            Publication	500-299)
            ISO/IEC	FDIS	27017	Information	technology	–	Security	techniques	–
            Code	of	practice	for	information	security	controls	based	on	ISO/IEC
            27002	for	Cloud	services.

Privacy
The	capacity	of	cloud	computing	to	sufficiently	address	privacy	regulations	has
been	 called	 into	 inquiries.	 Associations	 today	 face	 various	 diverse	 necessities
attempting	to	protect	the	privacy	of	individual’s	information,	and	it	is	not	clear
(i.e.,	 not	 yet	 established)	 whether	 the	 cloud	 computing	 model	 gives	 adequate
protection	of	such	information,	or	whether	associations	will	be	found	in	violation
of	regulations	because	of	this	new	model.
As	 we	 know,	 Cloud	 is	 a	 highly	 distributed	 infrastructure.	 Each	 operational
position	 of	 cloud	 technology	 has	 to	 pay	 strong	 attention	 to	 the	 privacy	 and
compliance	implications.
It	is	the	responsibility	of	cloud	service	providers	to	ensure	customer	data	is	not
exposed	 to	 employees	 or	 other	 administrators	 using	 technical	 and	 process
controls.	 Cloud	 providers	 should	 enforce	 the	 compliance	 standards,	 rules	 and
regulations	 upon	 their	 customers.	 Cloud	 users	 should	 consider	 use	 of	 data
masking	or	obfuscation	when	considering	a	service	that	does	not	meet	security,
privacy,	or	compliance	requirements
Resiliency
Resiliency	is	the	capacity	to	deal	with	failures	gracefully	and	recover	the	whole
system.	 This	 is	 a	 huge	 a	 challenge	 for	 services	 and	 applications	 where	 the
components	 rely	 upon	 internal	 or	 external	 segments/services	 that	 should	 be
always	functional	and	available	for	all	processes.	Planning	will	help	to	identify,
fix,	log	and	recover	from	these	failures.
There	are	three	essential	techniques	which	are	used	to	expand	the	strength	of	a
Cloud	system:

           Continuous	checking	and	monitoring
           Checkpoints,	Recovery	points	and	System	restoring
           Replication

Governance
Governance	is	a	general	term	which	defines	how	a	governing	process	will	run.
Governing	a	cloud	computing	includes	policies	and	controls	that	comprise	how
an	 organization	 is	 run.	 Governance	 is	 the	 ability	 to	 govern	 and	 measure	 the
functionality,	 risk	 and	 production	 including	 legal	 precedence	 of	 breaches,
responsibilities	 to	 secure	 sensitive	 information	 and	 much	 more.	 Following	 are
the	types	of	governance:

        ISO/IEC	38500:2015	-	 Information	Technology	-	Governance	of	 IT
        for	the	organization:	ISO/IEC	38500:2015	provides	guiding	principles
        for	members	of	governing	bodies	of	organizations	(which	can	comprise
        owners,	 directors,	 partners,	 executive	 managers,	 or	 similar)	 on	 the
        effective,	 efficient,	 and	 acceptable	 use	 of	 information	 technology	 (IT)
        within	their	organizations.
         ISACA	-	COBIT	-	A	Business	Framework	for	the	Governance	and
         Management	 of	 Enterprise	 IT:	 The	 COBIT	 5	 framework	 is	 built	 on
         five	basic	principles	which	includes	extensive	guidance	on	enablers	for
         governance	and	management	of	enterprise	IT.
         ISO/IEC	27014:2013	-	Information	Technology	-	Security	techniques
         -	Governance	of	Information	Security:	ISO/IEC	27014:2013	provides
         guidance	 on	concepts	and	principles	for	the	governance	of	information
         security,	 by	 which	 organizations	 can	 evaluate,	 direct,	 monitor	 and
         communicate	 the	 information	 security	 related	 activities	 within	 the
         organization.

Maintenance	and	Versioning
Cloud-based	Computerized	Maintenance	Management	Systems	(CMMS)	can	be
accessed	 by	 a	 web	 browser	 or	 application.	 This	 implies	 that	 support	 staff	 can
recover	 relevant	 information	 wherever	 they	 are	 found.	 Maintenance	 can	 be
planned,	 monitored,	 scheduled	 and	 automated	 from	 a	 web	 browser.	 It	 is	 a
software	 package	 that	 maintains	 a	 computer	 database	 of	 information	 about	 an
organization's	maintenance	operations.
Auditability
Auditability	 is	 a	 detail	 for	 the	 presentation	 of	 information	 about	 how	 a	 cloud
computing	 service	 provider	 organization	 tends	 to	 control	 frameworks.	 The
objective	 of	 Cloud	 Audit	 is	 to	 provide	 service	 providers	 with	 an	 approach	 to
make	their	execution	and	security	data	readily	accessible	for	potential	customers.
The	 specification	 provides	 a	 standard	 method	 to	 present	 and	 share	 detailed,
automated	statistics	about	performance	and	security.
Security	Concepts	Relevant	to	Cloud	Computing
Cryptography
In	Cloud	computing,	the	idea	of	cryptography	that	employs	encryption	methods
to	secure	data	in	motion	or	at	rest.	It	enables	users	to	conveniently	and	securely
access	 shared	 cloud	 services,	 as	 any	 data	 that	 is	 hosted	 by	 cloud	 providers	 is
secured	 with	 encryption.	 Cryptography	 secures	 sensitive	 data	 without	 delaying
information	exchange.
Encryption
Encryption	is	an	important	security	measure	that	is	used	in	not	only	on-premises
environment	 but	 necessarily	 in	 cloud-based	 environments.	 Encryption	 secures
both	states	of	 data,	data	at	rest	and	data	in	motion.	Data	in	motion	is	typically
secured	 with	 Internet	 Protocol	 (IP)	 Security	 Protocol	 (IPSec),	 Virtual	 Private
Network	(VPN),	or	Transport	Layer	Security/Secure	Sockets	Layer	(TLS/SSL).
Similar	 to	 data	 in	 motion,	 encryption	 techniques	 used	 for	 data	 at	 rest	 are	 AES
and	 RSA.	 Data	 encryption,	 which	 prevents	 data	 visibility	 in	 the	 event	 of	 its
unauthorized	 access	 or	 theft,	 is	 commonly	 used	 to	 protect	 data	 in	 motion	 and
increasingly	promoted	for	protecting	data	at	rest.	In	these	models,	Cloud	storage
providers	encrypt	data	upon	receipt,	passing	encryption	keys	to	the	customers	so
that	data	can	be	securely	decrypted	when	needed.
Encryption	is	one	of	the	most	effective	approaches	to	data	security,	scrambling
the	substance	of	any	system,	file,	or	database	in	such	a	way	that	it’s	impossible
to	 decipher	 without	 a	 decryption	 key.	 By	 applying	 encryption	 and	 practicing
secure	encryption	key	management,	companies	can	guarantee	that	only	approved
users	have	access	to	sensitive	data.
Advantages	of	Cloud	Encryption:
The	advantage	of	Cloud	encryption	is	same	as	application	of	encryption.

            Encrypted	data	is	only	readable	for	authorized	parties	with	access	to
            the	decryption	keys.	Encrypting	data	guarantees	that	if	that	data	falls
            into	the	wrong	hand,	it	is	useless	as	long	as	its	keys	stay	secure.
            Cloud	encryption	is	critical	for	industries	that	need	to	meet	regulatory
            compliance	requirements

In-Motion
Data	 in-motion	 is	 data	 moving	 from	 one	 location	 to	 another	 such	 as	 between
source	 to	 destination	 across	 the	 public	 internet	 or	 a	 private	 network	 or	 in
between	 processes	 of	 different	 applications.	 Data	 security	 in	 motion	 is	 the
insurance	 of	 this	 data	 while	 it	 is	 travelling	 from	 network	 to	 network	 or	 being
transferred	from	a	local	storage	device	to	a	Cloud	storage	device.
Encryption	plays	an	important	role	in	data	assurance	and	is	a	popular	instrument
for	 securing	 data	 both	 in	 motion	 and	 at	 rest.	 For	 protecting	 data	 in	 motion,
enterprises	 often	 choose	 to	 encrypt	 sensitive	 data	 preceding	 to	 moving	 and/or
use	 encrypted	 connections	 (HTTPS,	 TLS,	 FTPS,	 SSL,	 etc)	 to	 protect	 the
contents	of	data	in	motion.
At	Rest
Data	 at	 rest,	 is	 data	 that	 is	 not	 effectively	 moving	 from	 device	 to	 device	 or
network	 to	 network	 such	 as	 data	 stored	 on	 a	 hard	 drive,	 flash	 drive,	 laptop,	 or
stored	in	some	other	way.	Data	protection	at	rest,	aims	to	secure	in	active	data
stored	on	any	devices	or	network.
For	 protecting	 data	 at	 rest,	 enterprises	 can	 essentially	 encrypt	 sensitives	 files
prior	to	storing	them	and/or	choose	to	encrypt	the	storage	drive	itself.
Key	Management
Key	 management	 is	 the	 process	 whereby	 the	 keys	 in	 a	 cryptosystem	 are
managed,	 including	 their	 generation,	 exchange,	 disposal	 and	 use.	 This
incorporate	 various	 protocols	 that	 intend	 to	 keep	 the	 keys	 secure	 consistently,
granting	access	to	them	only	to	authorised	entities.
When	implementing	a	key	management	system,	one	needs	to	think	about	where
the	 encryption	 keys	 must	 be	 stored.	 These	 keys	 may	 be	 stored	 in	 one	 of	 three
main	locations.
Placing	keys	in	an	enterprise	data	center:
When	using	an	enterprise	data	center	to	store	the	keys,	these	are	maintained	with
large	amounts	of	security,	ensuring	that	these	are	not	compromised	.
Using	SaaS	to	manage	keys:
Keys	 may	 alternatively	 be	 stored	 using	 SaaS	 key	 management	 solution	 where
the	application	provider	will	manage	and	store	the	keys.	This	high	reliance	upon
the	provider	raises	various	security	concerns,	including	the	possibility	of	having
the	keys	unavailable	in	case	of	an	outage.
Using	IaaS	to	manage	keys
A	third	approach	is	to	use	the	encryption	and	key	management	services	provided
by	IaaS.	Like	the	SaaS	option,	such	a	system	results	in	strong	dependence	upon
the	provider	if	the	customer	decides	to	enable	the	provider	to	deal	with	the	keys.
However,	some	IaaS	providers	also	 provide	 their	customers	 with	the	chance	to
deal	 with	 the	 encryption	 keys	 themselves,	 bringing	 about	 better	 separation	 of
duties.	Amazon	S3	Storage	(Amazon	Web	Services)	is	an	example.
Access	Control
Access	Control	is	a	security	method	that	controls	the	person	who	may	view	or
use	 assets	 in	 a	 computing	 environment.	 It	 is	 a	 basic	 concept	 in	 security	 that
reduces	risk	to	the	business	or	organization.	The	main	purpose	of	access	control
is	 to	 reduce	 the	 risk	 of	 unauthorized	 access	 to	 logical	 and	 physical	 systems.
Access	 control	 is	 a	 basic	 part	 of	 security	 compliance	 programs	 that	 protect
security	 technology	 and	 access	 control	 policies	 in	 place,	 to	 ensure	 confidential
information,	for	example	customer	data.
Features	of	Cloud	Based	Access	Control:
There	 are	 lot	 of	 features	 in	 cloud	 based	 access	 control	 to	 make	 its	 use
convenient.	The	processes	are	managed	remotely	following	as:

            Adding	new	users	to	the	access	control
            Verification	of	the	system	operation
            Changing	user’s	rights
            Revoking	rights	to	access	certain	facilities
            Access	point	reprogramming
Security	of	remote	sites	can	be	put	under	one	umbrella,	because	of	data	received
from	each	source	is	saved	in	one	single	place.	By	having	a	cloud	based	physical
access	control	system	turn	capital	expenses	into	operational	ones.	There	are	no
high	costs	connected	with	the	purchase	of	servers	and	wiring	that	will	associate
all	the	parts	of	access	control.
Access	 Control	 offers	 verity	 of	 features	 to	 keep	 your	 cloud	 account	 and
resources	safe	from	unauthorized	access	or	abuse.	This	includes	credentials	for
access	 control,	 HTTPS	 endpoints	 for	 coded	 data	 transmission,	 the	 creation	 of
separate	 Identity	 and	 Access	 Management	 (IAM)	 user	 accounts,	 and	 user
activity	logging	for	security	check.	You	can	take	benefit	from	all	these	security
tools,	 no	 matter	 which	 service	 you	 are	 associated	 with.	 To	 ensure	 only
authorized	user	and	processes	access	the	resources,	many	types	of	credentials	for
authentication	 are	 employed.	 These	 include	 passwords,	 digital	 signatures,
cryptographic	 keys,	 and	 certificates.	 Cloud	 service	 provider	 also	 provides	 the
option	of	requiring	Multi-Factor	Authentication	to	log	in.	Some	credentials	are
defined	below:

            Username/Password
            Multi-Factor	Authentication	(MFA)
            Access	key
            Key	pair
            X.509	Certificates

Data	and	Media	Sanitization
The	fundamental	concern	about	media	and	data	sanitization	is	securely	disposing
the	 information	 and	 sanitizing	 the	 media	 from	 recorded	 information.	 The
security	 concern	 i.e.	 confidentiality	 about	 information,	 media	 disposal	 process
should	 securely	 and	 completely	 be	 removing	 the	 sensitive	 information	 that	 is
recorded	 intentionally	 or	 unintentionally	 on	 a	 storage	 media.	 This	 activity	 may
be	for	maintenance	reasons,	system	upgrades,	or	during	a	configuration	update.
The	 process	 of	 media	 sanitization	 should	 be	 irreversible	 i.e.	 removing	 the
information	from	the	media	permanently.
Media	sanitization	is	the	key	element	in	assuring	confidentiality.	Confidentiality
is	 “Preserving	 authorized	 restrictions	 on	 information	 access	 and	 disclosure,
including	means	for	protecting	personal	privacy	and	proprietary	information”	In
order	 for	 organization	 to	 have	 appropriate	 controls	 on	 the	 information	 they	 are
responsible	for	safeguarding,	they	must	properly	dispose	of	used	media.
There	are	two	types	of	media	are	as	follow:

        1.	 Hard	Copy:
   Hard	copy	media	is	the	physically	recorded	information	such	as	documents,
   files,	printouts,	drums	and	platens.
   This	type	of	media	is	often	the	most	uncontrolled.	Information	tossed	into	the
   recycle	 bins	 and	 trash	 containers	 exposes	 a	 significant	 vulnerability	 to
   “dumpster	 divers”,	 and	 overcurious	 employees,	 risking	 accidental
   disclosures.

         2.	 Soft	Copy:
    Softcopies	 are	 the	 digital	 information	 such	 as	 data	 in	 a	 digital	 form,	 digital
    document,	pictures,	videos,	recordings,	and	other	digital	form	of	data	stored
    in	an	electronic	media	in	bits	and	bytes.	Electronic	media	holding	softcopies
    may	 include	 hard	 drives,	 Random	 Access	 Memory	 (RAM),	 Read-Only
    Memory	(ROM)	and	disks.
Types	of	Sanitization
The	key	in	deciding	how	to	manage	media	in	an	organization	is	to	first	consider
the	 information,	 then	 the	 media	 type.	 The	 security	 categorization	 of	 the
information,	 along	 with	 internal	 environmental	 factors,	 should	 drive	 the
decisions	 on	 how	 to	 deal	 with	 the	 media.	 The	 key	 is	 to	 first	 think	 in	 terms	 of
information	confidentiality,	then	by	media	type.
There	are	different	types	of	sanitization	for	each	type	of	media	as:
Disposal:	 Disposal	 is	 the	 act	 of	 discarding	 media	 with	 no	 other	 sanitization
considerations.
Clearing:	 Clearing	 information	 is	 a	 level	 of	 media	 sanitization	 that	 would
protect	 the	 confidentiality	 of	 information	 against	 a	 robust	 keyboard	 attack.
Clearing	 should	 not	 allow	 information	 to	 be	 retrieved	 by	 data,	 disk,	 or	 file
recovery	utilities.	It	should	be	resistant	to	keystroke	recovery	attempts	executed
from	 standard	 input	 devices	 and	 form	 data	 scavenging	 tools.	 Such	 as,
overwriting	is	an	acceptable	method	for	clearing	media.
Purging:	Purging	 information	 is	 a	 media	 sanitization	 process	 that	 protects	 the
confidentiality	 of	 information	 against	 a	 laboratory	 attack.	 For	 some	 media,
clearing	media	would	not	suffice	for	purging.	A	laboratory	attack	would	involve
a	 threat	 with	 the	 resources	 and	 knowledge	 to	 use	 sub-standard	 systems	 to
conduct	 data	 recovery	 attempts	 on	 media	 outside	 their	 normal	 operating
environment.
Destroying:	 Destruction	 of	 media	 is	 the	 ultimate	 form	 of	 sanitization.	 After
media	 is	 destroyed,	 it	 cannot	 be	 reused	 as	 originally	 intended.	 Physical
destruction	 can	 be	 accomplished	 using	 a	 variety	 of	 methods,	 including
disintegration,	incineration,	shredding	and	melting.
Disintegration,	 Incineration,	 Pulverization	 and	 Melting	 these	 sanitization
methods	 are	 designed	 to	 completely	 destroy	 the	 media.	 They	 are	 typically
carried	 out	 at	 an	 outsourced	 metal	 destruction	 or	 incineration	 facility	 with	 the
specific	capabilities	to	perform	these	activities,	securely,	and	safely
Shredding:	 Paper	 shredders	 can	 be	 used	 to	 destroy	 flexible	 media	 such	 as
diskettes,	once	the	media	is	physically	removed	from	their	outer	containers.	The
shred	 size	 should	 be	 small	 enough	 that	 there	 is	 reasonable	 assurance	 in
proportion	 to	 the	 data	 confidentiality	 level	 that	 the	 information	 cannot	 be
reconstructed.
Cryptographic	Erase
As	media	has	expanded	over	time,	new	technologies	such	as	solid-state	storage
has	come	into	widespread	use.	Organizations	have	sought	to	minimize	the	time
required	to	perform	sanitization,	even	on	devices	having	sanitization	commands.
The	 increasing	 use	 of	 encryption	 for	 data	 at	 rest,	 has	 provided	 a	 very	 fast
technique	of	cryptographic	erase.
Cryptographic	erase	basically	involves	destroying	the	encryption	key	for	the	data
and	 thus	 forcing	 an	 adversary	 to	 conduct	 an	 attack	 against	 the	 cryptologic
implementation	in	order	to	gain	access	to	the	sanitized	data.	Another	advantage
of	cryptographic	erase	is	its	high	granularity.
For	example,	it	is	theoretically	possible	to	cryptographically	erase	a	single	field
in	a	database	by	encrypting	it	under	a	random	key	that	is	immediately	sanitized.
Cryptographic	 erase	 may	 also	 be	 the	 only	 effective	 technique	 for	 sanitizing
certain	types	of	media	(such	as	flash-based	solid-state	storage).
Though	it	sounds	deceptively	easy	to	implement	and	very	attractive	because	of
its	speed,	there	is	a	number	of	critical	requirements	to	be	met:

            Encryption	 must	 be	 applied	 before	 any	 data	 is	 written	 to	 the	 drive-
            this	 requirement	 assures	 that	 there	 is	 no	 data	 on	 the	 media	 in	 clear-
            text	form.
            High-pedigree	 encryption	 is	 required.	 This	 requires	 that	 the
            cryptographic	 algorithms	 themselves	 and	 their	 implementation	 must
            be	 reliable.	 This	 is	 to	 assure	 that	 there	 are	 no	 weakness	 in	 the
            implementation	that	would	make	it	easier	for	an	adversary	to	access
            the	encrypted	information.
            Effective	 key	 management	 is	 required.	 In	 order	 to	 conduct
            cryptographic	erase,	all	copies	of	the	relevant	key	must	be	sanitized.
            Proof	 of	 encryption	 is	 required.	 For	 cryptographic	 erase	 to	 be
            accepted	 as	 a	 sanitization	 method,	 it	 should	 be	 reliably	 documented
            that	the	data	was	encrypted	appropriately	in	the	first	place

Virtualization	Security
Virtualization	 is	 the	 process	 of	 hosting	 a	 number	 of	 operating	 systems	 or
softwares	virtually	on	a	single	hardware	instead	of	hosting	an	OS	on	a	physical
device.	 This	 virtualization	 can	 be	 deployed	 on	 an	 on-premises	 server	 or	 on	 a
remotely	 server	 hosted	 on	 cloud.	 Each	 virtual	 instance	 is	 known	 as	 Virtual
Machine	 (VM).	 The	 operating	 system	 providing	 the	 virtualization	 environment
is	called	Hypervisor.	There	are	two	types	of	hypervisor.

        1.	 Hypervisor	 type-1	 is	 referred	 as	 bare-metal	 hypervisor	 which	 runs
            directly	 on	 a	 host	 physical	 machine.	 Hypervisors	 such	 as	 VMware
            ESXi,	Microsoft	Hyper-V	server	and	open	source	KVM	are	examples
            of	Type	1	hypervisors.
        2.	 Hypervisor	type-2	is	referred	as	hosted-hypervisor	that	is	installed	on
            the	 top	 of	 existing	 operating	 system.	 Type	 2	 hypervisors	 include
            VMware	Fusion,	Oracle	VM	Virtual	Box,	Oracle	VM	Server	for	x86,
            Oracle	Solaris	Zones,	Parallels	and	VMware	Workstation.




                          Figure	1-4:	Hypervisor	Type-1	and	Type-2

Virtualization	 is	 a	 trending	 and	 cutting-edge	 technology	 because	 of	 the	 rapid
growth	 and	 demand	 of	 Cloud	 computing.	 The	 two	 types	 of	 virtualization
architecture	are	Hosted	Virtualization	and	Native	Virtualization
In	Native	or	Hardware	Virtualization	the	hypervisor-type	1	runs	directly	on	the
hardware	providing	all	hardware	resources	to	be	available	for	virtualization.	In	a
Hosted	 virtualization,	 the	 hypervisor	 runs	 on	 a	 hosted	 OS.	 With	 the
implementation	 of	 the	 Virtualization	 in	 a	 Cloud,	 four	 new	 fundamental
characteristics	are	present	in	the	system	that	change	the	way	security	mechanism
can	be	utilized.
         1.	 Virtualization	creates	a	new	management	layer	with	the	hypervisor.
         2.	 Because	 of	 the	 nature	 of	 virtualization,	 a	 concentration	 of	 VMs	 on
             each	machine	is	present.
         3.	 VMs	 have	 variable	 states	 compared	 to	 continuous	 running	 physical
             machines.
         4.	 VMs	mobility	allows	them	to	move	from	physical	locations	easily.
The	secure	solutions	based	on	virtual	architecture	aim	to	provide	secure	virtual
environment	 by	 considering	 security	 of	 all	 virtualization	 components.
Hypervisor	security	is	the	first	line	of	defense.
Hypervisor	Security
There	are	several	virtual	machines	running	in	a	virtual	environment	which	may
have	independent	security	zones	or	deployed	in	isolated	manner	so	that	they	are
not	accessible	from	other	virtual	machines.	A	hypervisor	is	the	core	operator	of
this	virtual	environment	and	the	security	of	hypervisor	is	even	more	imporatant
concern	as	it	is	the	controlling	agent	for	everything	in	virtual	environment.	Any
modification	or	compromise	in	hypervisor	can	affect	all	of	the	virtual	machines
running	within	the	virtualization	host.
Advantages	of	Hypervisor	Security:
Hypervisor-based	 virtualization	 technology	 is	 the	 best	 choice	 of	 implementing
methods	to	achieve	a	secure	Cloud	environment.	Its	ability	to	manage	resources,
has	 the	 potential	 to	 secure	 the	 infrastructure	 of	 Cloud.	 Some	 reasons	 for
choosing	this	technology:

            Hypervisor	controls	the	hardware,	and	it	is	only	way	to	access	it.	This
            capability	 allows	 hypervisor-based	 virtualization	 to	 have	 a	 secure
            infrastructure.	 Hypervisor	 can	 act	 as	 a	 firewall	 and	 will	 be	 able	 to
            prevent	 malicious	 users	 to	 from	 compromising	 the	 hardware
            infrastructure.
            The	hypervisor	is	used	as	a	layer	of	abstraction	to	isolate	the	virtual
            environment	from	the	hardware	underneath.
            Hypervisor	 is	 implemented	 below	 the	 guest	 OS	 in	 the	 Cloud
            computing	 hierarchy,	 which	 means	 that	 if	 an	 attack	 passes	 the
            security	systems	in	the	guest	OS,	the	hypervisor	can	detect	it.
            The	hypervisor-	level	of	virtualization	controls	all	the	access	between
            the	guests	OSs	and	shared	hardware	underside.	Therefore,	hypervisor
            is	 able	 to	 simplify	 the	 transaction-monitoring	 process	 in	 the	 Cloud
            environment.
Common	Threats
There	are	common	threats	to	Cloud	computing	such	as
Accountability	and	Data	Risk:
In	 cloud	 computing,	 several	 organizations	 are	 opting	 for	 the	 public	 cloud	 for
their	 business,	 where	 the	 cloud	 service	 provider	 has	 the	 control	 over	 the	 data
security,	not	the	data	owners.
The	lack	of	control	on	the	hand	of	data	owner	will	increase	the	risk	of	sensitive
data.	 Most	 of	 the	 cloud	 service	 providers	 are	 using	 the	 multi-tenancy	 storage
architecture,	which	allows	the	multiple	customers	to	store	their	data	in	one	place.
There	is	a	chance	for	cross	data	harvesting	in	case	the	storage	architecture	is	not
stable.
How	to	mitigate:

            The	organization	should	be	clear	about	the	data	recovering	procedure
            of	 the	 providers	 to	 make	 sure	 the	 attackers	 should	 not	 be	 able	 to
            recover	the	deleted	data	in	cloud
            The	provider	should	ensure	proper	backup	process.
            Data	 should	 be	 maintained	 in	 encrypted	 format	 both	 at	 rest	 and	 in
            transit.
            The	operator	should	use	different	encryption	keys	for	different	users.

User	Identity	Federation:
In	an	event	when	an	association	is	moving	their	services	and	application,	starting
with	one	cloud	service	provider	to	another,	it	must	have	legitimate	control	over
their	 user’s	 credentials.	 Rather	 than	 enabling	 the	 cloud	 provider	 to	 keep	 up
identities	 making	 authentication	 overhead	 users,	 associations	 are	 utilizing	 user
identity	federation.	The	methodology	includes	SAML,	an	open	source	protocols
that	permits	single	sign-on	over	various	cloud	service	providers.	It	kills	different
identities	assigned	to	an	individual	user.
There	 are	 a	 lot	 of	 advantages	 of	 user	 identity	 federation,	 but	 this	 methodology
accompanies	with	it	some	security	challenges.

            It	includes	risk	of	the	unauthorized	access,	on	the	off	chance	that	the
            services	allowing	access	to	the	user	are	inappropriately	configured.
            Any	 attack	 on	 the	 SAML	 can	 enable	 the	 attackers	 to	 increase
            unauthorized	access	by	taking	user	credentials.
            Moreover,	the	single	sign-on	ability	builds	up	the	chances	of	a	single
            purpose	of	failure.

How	to	mitigate

            The	 organization	 must	 be	 clear	 in	 how	 the	 user	 identities	 &	 AAA
            protocols	like	SAML	are	implemented.
            The	 federation	 partners	 must	 follow	 the	 security	 policies	 and
            standards.
            Single	sign-on	in	the	enterprise
            Federated	identity	with	multiple	partners
            Federated	identity	in	SaaS	applications
            If	 there's	 more	 than	 one	 identity	 provider	 configured	 for	 the	 STS,	 it
            must	 detect	 which	 identity	 provider	 the	 user	 should	 be	 redirected	 to
            for	authentication.	This	process	is	called	home	realm	discovery.

Regulatory	Compliance:
Data	is	stored	at	a	random	place	in	cloud-based	solution.	In	most	of	the	cases,
customers	 are	 not	 even	 aware	 where	 they	 are	 hosted.	 Following	 different
regulatory	rules	at	different	countries,	the	data	that	is	supposed	to	be	protected	in
one	country	is	not	supposed	to	be	protected	in	another	country.
As	 a	 result	 of	 the	 lack	 of	 transparency	 in	 the	 execution,	 data	 owners	 discover
hard	to	show	compliance.	There	is	a	lack	of	consistent	standards	and	in	addition,
necessities	 for	 the	 worldwide	 regulatory	 compliance.	 For	 example,	 the	 US
nationalist	act	gives	no	limitations	to	the	government	organizations	to	access	to
the	 corporate	 data.	 Then	 again,	 the	 European	 Union	 has	 strict	 privacy	 laws,
consequently	the	data	stored	in	the	US	according	to	the	US	compliance	appear	to
be	compliance	violation	in	Europe.
How	to	mitigate

            Ensuring	 the	 provider	 made	 a	 contractual	 commitment	 in	 order	 to
            obey	the	local	privacy	requirements.
            To	avoid	compliance	violation,	the	organization	must	make	sure	that
            their	 Cloud	 service	 provider	 is	 storing	 their	 data	 in	 specific
            jurisdictions.

Business	Continuity	&	Resilience:
The	 organization	 must	 ensure	 that	 their	 business	 can	 be	 performed	 even	 in	 an
accidental	 situation	 to	 achieve	 business	 growth.	 In	 Cloud	 computing,	 it	 is
essential	to	make	sure	that	data	will	be	available	even	in	an	unexpected	incident
occurs.
An	 ongoing	 research	 shows	 that	 blackouts	 of	 most	 cloud	 services	 portray	 that
100	 %	 availability	 may	 not	 be	 guaranteed.	 In	 cloud	 computing,	 the	 duty	 of
business	 continuity	 and	 resilience	 goes	 to	 cloud	 providers	 rather	 than	 the
organization.	This	will	expand	the	chance	of	risk	due	to	not	providing	suitable
business	continuity	when	a	disaster	happens.
How	to	Mitigate

            The	 organization	 has	 to	 make	 sure	 the	 RTOS	 (Recovery	 Time
            Objectives)	are	clearly	defined	in	the	contractual	agreement
            Ensure	the	provider	comprise	approved	business	continuity	policy	in
            place.

User	Privacy	and	Secondary	Usage	of	Data:
The	 accessibility	 of	 information	 especially	 Personal	 Identifiable	 Information
(PII)	 and	 Personal	 Health	 Information	 (PHI)	 are	 the	 most	 critical	 security
concern.	 This	 is	 a	 sensitive	 stored	 personal	 information	 and	 is	 at	 direct	 risk	 of
confidentiality.	 As	 PII	 represents	 the	 hobbies,	 daily	 routine,	 personal	 interest
whereas	 PHI	 represents	 records	 of	 wellness,	 illness	 and	 test	 results.	 The
probability	of	secondary	use	of	these	information	is	a	confidentiality	and	privacy
concern.
How	to	mitigate

            The	organization	must	re-ensure	that	their	provider	is	not	using	their
            user’s	private	data	for	any	secondary	purpose.
            Enforce	 policy	 for	 privacy	 and	 acceptable	 usage,	 consent	 and
            secondary	usage.

Service	and	Data	Integration:
The	security	of	data	in	transit	must	be	a	great	concern	to	every	organization.	In
the	cloud	computing	solution,	the	data	is	transmitted	between	the	end	user	and
cloud	 data	 center.	 While	 utilizing	 cloud,	 the	 transmission	 is	 carried	 over	 the
internet,	where	there	is	an	increase	in	risk	for	the	organization.
As	 like	 the	 traditional	 computing	 model,	 the	 transmission	 of	 secure	 data	 is
vulnerable	to	interception	and	compromise.
How	to	Mitigate:
            The	 provider	 must	 ensure	 that	 the	 data	 transferred	 between	 the	 end
            user	and	data	center	over	the	internet	are	appropriately	protected.
            They	 must	 ensure	 that	 they	 are	 suing	 SSL	 or	 other	 stronger
            encryption	protocols	for	securing	data	in	transit.

Multi-Tenancy	&	Physical	Security
Most	organizations	prefer	cloud	computing	because	of	its	multi-tenancy	feature,
that	is	they	can	share	resources	like	networking,	storage,	computing	as	well	as
functionality	related	components.
Risk	in	Multi-Tenancy
In	 a	 multi-tenant	 environment,	 security	 dependencies	 are	 more	 on	 logical
segregation	 instead	 of	 physical	 resource	 separation.	 The	 inadequate	 logical
security	 control,	 the	 chance	 of	 the	 presence	 of	 ignorance	 or	 malicious	 tenants,
and	co-mingled	tenant	dataincreases	the	security	risk.
How	to	Mitigate

            Organizations	should	provide	transparency	to	tenants.
            Make	 sure	 the	 tenants	 are	 provided	 with	 the	 proper	 knowledge	 on
            administrative	access	to	their	resources.

Incidence	Analysis	&	Forensics	Risk
When	 security	 breaches,	 policy	 violation	 or	 attack	 occurs,	 it	 is	 important	 to
analyze	that	incident	and	conduct	a	forensic	investigation.	The	existing	incident
handling	 and	 forensics	 principle	 is	 commonly	 intended	 for	 the	 off-line
investigation.
Risk	in	Incident	Analysis	&	Forensics
The	evidence	of	the	incident	is	likely	to	be	stored	in	a	place	beyond	the	instant
control	 of	 the	 investigator.	 Since	 the	 logging	 is	 distributed	 over	 multiple	 hosts
and	 cloud	 data	 centers	 are	 placed	 in	 various	 countries,	 thereby	 governed	 by
various	 laws,	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 investigate	 the	 incident.	 As	 well	 as	 multiple
customers	are	storing	the	data	in	same	shared	hardware	and	data	center,	issues	in
law	enforcement	will	arise	during	forensic	recovery	.
How	to	Mitigate

            Maintain	 comprehensive	 logging	 without	 any	 compromise	 in
            performance.
            Employ	enthusiastic	forensic	VM	images.
Infrastructure	Security:
The	 security	 of	 the	 data	 present	 in	 	 Cloud	 is	 influenced	 greatly	 by	 the
infrastructure	 component’s	 security,	 which	 sets	 up	 the	 application	 platform.
Failure	 to	 consider	 the	 best	 practices	 to	 ensure	 security	 can	 lead	 to	 loss	 of
reputation,	data	and	availability.
Risk	in	Infrastructure	Security
Failure	to	keep	the	system	and	network	device	up-to-date	might	compromise	the
system’s	 security.	 Running	 of	 services	 that	 includes	 security-related	 bugs	 will
enhance	 the	 possibility	 of	 infrastructure	 becoming	 a	 target	 for	 the	 security
exploit.
How	to	mitigate

            Isolate	infrastructure	component
            Employ	tired	solution	architecture
            Enforce	 role-based	 administrative	 access	 and	 regular	 vulnerability
            assessments

Non-production	Environment	Exposure
Organizations	 generally	 use	 non-production	 environment	 internally	 to	 design,
develop	and	test	their	software	or	application.	This	environment	is	not	as	much
secure	as	the	production	environment.	Hence,	there	is	a	minimum	risk	in	security
when	 compared	 to	 a	 cloud-based	 solution	 where	 the	 non-production
environment	is	beyond	the	control	of	the	organization.
Risk	in	Non-Production	Environment
In	 cloud	 computing,	 there	 is	 a	 risk	 of	 malicious	 user	 accessibility	 in	 the	 non-
production	environment.	This	environment	often	includes	generic	authentication
credentials	which	may	not	be	aligned	with	the	standard	password	policy	of	the
organization.	Hence,	it	makes	it	effortless	to	achieve	unauthorized	access.	With
unauthorized	access,	attacker	can	make	the	environment	useless	or	they	can	even
delete	it	entirely.
How	to	mitigate

            Enforce	strong	credentials	which	are	aligned	with	the	same	standards
            of	 production	 environment	 for	 accessing	 as	 the	 non-production
            environment.
            Make	 sure	 the	 non-production	 environment	 does	 not	 include	 the
            sensitive	data	that	is	present	in	the	production	environment
Security	Considerations	for	Different	Cloud	Categories
As	 we	 know,	 there	 are	 different	 cloud	 categories	 for	 difference	 nature	 of
requirements.	 There	 is	 no	 way	 to	 cover	 all	 conceivable	 security	 options.
Following	are	the	best	practices	for	securing	data	within	various	Cloud	models.
SaaS
In	Software	as	a	Service,	most	of	the	control	of	the	environment	is	ceded	to	the
provider.	 Cloud	 customer	 will	 not	 have	 ownership	 of	 the	 hardware	 or	 the
software,	 because	 the	 customer	 only	 supplies	 and	 processes	 data	 to	 and	 in	 the
system.	 The	 cloud	 provider	 is	 responsible	 for	 all	 security	 counter-measures,
system	 maintenance,	 and	 the	 vast	 majority	 of	 policy	 affecting	 the	 data.	 Cloud
provider	performs	background	checks	and	continual	monitoring	of	all	personnel
with	access	to	the	data	center,	extreme	physical	security	measures	at	data	center
location,	 assignment	 of	 contractual	 liability	 to	 the	 provider,	 and	 encryption	 of
data	processed	and	stored	in	Cloud.	It	is	important	to	remember	that	the	residual
risk	of	loss	of	data	to	physical	access	will	always	exist.
PaaS
In	Platform	as	a	Service	(PaaS),	Cloud	customer	loses	still	more	control	of	the
environment	as	to	the	Cloud	provider	is	responsible	for	maintaining,	installing,
and	administering	OS.	This	will	demand	more	adjustment	of	the	security	policy
and	 additional	 efforts	 to	 guarantee	 regulatory	 compliance.	 The	 responsibilities
for	updating	and	maintaining	the	software	will	also	be	shared	by	the	customer.
Updates	and	administration	of	the	OS	falls	under	the	provider’s	responsibilities.
PaaS	 security	 includes	 four	 main	 areas	 such	 as	 system	 and	 resource	 isolation,
user	access	management,	user	level	permission,	and	protection	against	malware,
backdoors	and	Trojans.
User	Access	Management
It	allows	the	users	to	access	resources,	IT	services,	data,	and	other	assets.	Access
management	helps	to	ensure	the	Confidentiality,	Integrity	and	Availability	(CIA)
of	 these	 assets	 and	 resources,	 protecting	 that	 only	 those	 authorized	 users	 can
access	them.	In	recent	years,	traditional	standalone	access	control	methods	have
developed	less	consumed,	with	more	holistic	methods	to	unite	the	authentication
of	 users	 becoming	 favoured.	 (This	 includes	 single	 sign-on.)	 For	 successful
functioning	of	user	access	management	processes	and	controls,	it	is	important	to
agree	upon	execution	of	the	rules,	and	organizational	policies	for	access	to	data
and	 assets.	 The	 basic	 components	 of	 user	 access	 management	 include
authentication,	authorization,	administration,	intelligence	.
User-Level	Permissions:
Each	 occasion	of	 a	service	must	have	 its	 own	 notion	 of	user-level	entitlements
(permissions).	 If	 the	 instances	 share	 mutual	 policies,	 suitable	 counter-measures
and	 controls	 must	 be	 allowed	 by	 the	 Cloud	 security	 professional	 to	 reduce
authorization	creep	or	the	inheritance	of	permissions	over	time.
System	and	Resource	Isolation:
PaaS	 tenants	 must	 not	 have	 shell	 access	 to	 the	 servers	 running	 their	 instances
(even	while	virtualized).	The	rationale	behind	this	is	to	maximise	the	chance	and
likelihood	of	configuration	or	system	changes	affecting	multiple	tenants.	Where
possible,	 administration	 facilities	 must	 be	 restricted	 to	 siloed	 containers	 to
decrease	this	risk.	Careful	consideration	must	be	given	before	access	is	provided
to	 the	 basic	 infrastructure	 hosting	 a	 PaaS	 instance.	 It	 takes	 time	 and	 effort	 to
undo	tenant-related	fixes	to	their	environments.
Protection	against	Malware,	Backdoors,	and	Trojans:
The	 challenge	 with	 these	 is	 that	 once	 backdoors	 are	 generated,	 they	 offer	 a
constant	vector	for	attackers	to	target	and	possibly	increase	access	to	the	relevant
PaaS	resources.	You	have	heard	of	the	story	in	which	attackers	increased	access
through	 a	 backdoor,	 only	 to	 create	 additional	 backdoors	 whereas	 removing	 the
legitimate	 backdoors,	 basically	 holding	 the	 systems,	 resources	 and	 associated
services,	hostage.	More	recently,	attackers	have	used	embedded	and	hardcoded
malware	as	a	way	of	obtaining	unauthorized	access	and	retaining	this	access	for
a	prolonged	and	extended	period.	Most	particularly,	malware	has	been	placed	in
point-of-sale	 (PoS)	 devices,	 handheld	 card-processing	 devices,	 and	 other
platforms,	thus	divulging	large	amounts	of	sensitive	data	(including	credit	card
numbers,	customer	details,	and	so	on).
Since	 PaaS	 is	 so	 differing,	 it	 may	 not	 cover	 every	 single	 potential	 options	 are
following	list:

            Client/application	 Encryption:	 Data	 is	 encoded	 in	 the	 PaaS
            application,	or	the	customer	accessing	to	the	platform.
            Database	 Encryption:	 Data	 is	 encoded	 in	 the	 database	 utilizing
            encryption	worked	in	and	supported	by	the	database	platform.
            Proxy	Encryption:	 Data	 passes	 through	 an	 encryption	 intermediary
            before	being	sent	to	the	platform.
            Other:	 Additional	 alternatives	 may	 incorporate	 APIs	 incorporated
            with	 the	 platform,	 external	 encryption	 services,	 and	 different
            varieties.
IaaS
In	 Infrastructure	 as	 a	 Service,	 cloud	 customer	 has	 the	 most	 responsibility	 and
authority	 of	 all	 possible	 cloud	 models.	 The	 customer,	 however,	 is	 incharge	 of
everything,	from	the	operating	system	and	up,	all	software	will	be	installed	and
administered	by	the	customer,	and	the	customer	will	supply	and	manage	all	the
data.	In	terms	of	security,	the	cloud	customer	is	quiet	behind	some	of	the	control
featured	 in	 the	 legacy	 situation.	 For	 instance,	 the	 customer	 obviously	 does	 not
acquire	 to	 select	 the	 particular	 IT	 assets,	 thus	 the	 security	 of	 the	 acquisition
process	(during	which	we	normally	vet	vendors	and	suppliers)	must	be	assigned
to	 the	 cloud	 provider.	 The	 cloud	 customer	 may	 also	 lose	 some	 capability	 to
monitor	network	traffic	inside	the	data	center—the	cloud	provider	might	not	be
willing	to	enable	the	customer	to	place	monitoring	equipment	or	sensors	on	the
provider’s	 infrastructure,	 and	 also	 might	 refuse	 to	 share	 traffic	 data	 they,	 the
provider,	 have	 collected	 themselves.	 This	 makes	 auditing	 difficult,	 which	 also
affects	security	policy	and	regulatory	compliance.	An	organization	migrating	to
the	cloud	will	necessarily	have	to	significantly	adapt	its	security	policy	to	reflect
the	new	limits,	and	will	have	to	find	some	way	to	offer	the	required	deliverables
to	 appease	 regulators.	 This	 must	 be	 negotiated	 at	 the	 outset	 of	 migration,	 and
early	communication	with	regulators	is	highly	suitable.
Understand	Design	Principles	of	Secure	Cloud	Computing
Before	 we	 can	 discuss	 specific	 data	 security	 controls,	 we	 need	 a	 model	 to
understand	and	manage	our	information.	In	the	data	security	section,	we	discuss
the	specific	technical	controls	and	recommendations	to	monitor	and	enforce	this
governance.
Cloud	Secure	Data	Life	Cycle
The	 Data	 Security	 Life	 Cycle	 is	 different	 from	 Information	 Life	 Cycle
Management,	reflecting	the	different	needs	of	the	security	audience.
                            Figure	1-5:	Cloud	Secure	Data	Life	Cycle

There	 are	 six	 stages,	 from	 creation	 to	 destruction,	 in	 the	 concept	 of	 life	 cycle.
However,	 we	 display	 it	 as	 a	 linear	 progression,	 once	 created,	 data	 can	 bounce
between	phases	without	limitation,	and	may	not	pass	across	all	stages	(such	as,
not	all	data	is	eventually	destroyed).
Create:
Data	 will	 most	 often	 be	 created	 by	 the	 users	 accessing	 cloud	 remotely.	 Create
applies	 to	 creating	 or	 changing	 a	 data/content	 element,	 not	 just	 a	 document	 or
database.	It	is	the	generation	of	new	digital	content,	or	the	alteration/updating	of
existing	content.
Store:
From	the	perspective	of	the	life-cycle	diagram,	the	store	stage	takes	place	right
after	 the	 create	 stage,	 and	 before	 the	 use	 and	 share	 stages.	 Store	 is	 the	 act
committing	 the	 digital	 data	 to	 some	 sort	 of	 storage	 repository,	 and	 typically
occurs	nearly	simultaneously	with	creation.
Use:
Data	 security	 in	 the	 use	 requires	 considering	 other	 operational	 aspects	 as	 well.
Data	is	viewed,	processed,	or	otherwise	used	in	some	sort	of	activity.
Share:
Information	 is	 made	 accessible	 to	 others,	 for	 example,	 between	 users,	 to
customers,	and	to	partners	.
Archive:
Archive	is	the	stage	for	long-term	storage,	and	we	necessarily	must	consider	this
for	longer	time-frame	when	planning	security	controls	for	the	data.
Destroy:
Data	 is	 permanently	 destroyed	 using	 physical	 or	 digital	 means	 (e.g.,	 crypto-
shredding).	Crypto-shredding	is	the	only	feasible	and	thorough	means	currently
available	for	the	purpose,	in	the	cloud	environment.
Crypto-shredding	 or	 digital	 shredding	 is	 the	 encryption	 of	 data	 before	 being
disposed	of	Important	aspect	of	data	protection	method,	crypto-shredding	is	the
procedure	of	deliberately	destroying	the	encryption	keys	that	are	used	to	encrypt
the	data	originally.
Cloud	Based	Business	Continuity/Disaster	Recovery	Planning
Business	continuity	management	is	the	process	where	risks	and	threats	to	the	on-
going	 business	 functions,	 availability	 of	 services,	 and	 the	 organization	 are
dynamically	 managed	 and	 reviewed	 at	 set	 intervals	 as	 part	 of	 the	 overall	 risk-
management	 process.	 The	 main	 purpose	 of	 business	 continuity	 is	 to	 keep	 the
business	operating	and	functioning	in	the	event	of	interference.
Disaster	 Recovery	 Plan	 (DRP)	 is	 the	 process	 of	 recovering	 access	 to	 data,
hardware	and	software	necessary	to	continue	critical	business	operations	after	a
human-induced	or	natural	disaster	(such	as	storm,	flood,	tornado,	etc.).	The	main
purpose	of	DRP	is	to	rapidly	re-establish,	or	recover	critical	areas	or	element	of
the	business	after	a	disaster	or	similar	incident.	DRP	is	part	of	a	larger	process
known	as	business	continuity	planning.
From	 cloud	 customer’s	 point	 of	 view,	 business	 continuity	 elements	 contain	 the
related	 security	 pillars	 of	 availability,	 integrity,	 and	 confidentiality.	 The
availability	of	the	related	resources	and	services	is	regularly	the	key	requirement,
along	 with	 the	 uptime	 and	 capability	 to	 access	 these	 on	 demand.	 Failure	 to
guarantee	these,	results	in	major	impacts	including	loss	of	opportunities,	loss	of
earnings,	 and	loss	of	confidence	 between	the	customer	 and	the	provider.	 Many
security	professionals	struggle	to	retain	their	business	continuity	processes.		once
they	have	started	to	use	cloud-based	services.	Similarly,	many	fail	to	effectively
update,	 adjust,	 and	 keep	 their	 business	 continuity	 plans	 up	 to	 date	 in	 terms	 of
whole	coverage	of	services.	This	may	be	because	of	a	number	of	factors,	but	the
root	 factor	 contributing	to	it	is	that	business	continuity	is	continually	operated,
mostly	at	set	intervals	and	is	not	integrated	as	a	continuous	process	into	on-going
business	 operations.	 That	 is,	 business	 continuity	 events	 are	 performed	 only
annually	or	biannually,	which	may	not	take	into	account	the	prominent	changes
in	business	operations	(such	as	cloud)	within	related	business	units,	systems,	or
sections	.
Two	 critical	 success	 factors	 for	 business	 continuity	 while	 using	 cloud-based
services	are:
To	understand	your	responsibilities	compared	to	the	CSP’s	responsibilities

           Customer	responsibilities
           CSP	responsibilities
           Understanding	 any	 interdependencies	 or	 third	 parties	 (supply	 chain
           risks)
           Order	of	restoration	(priority)
           Suitable	 frameworks	 and	 certifications	 held	 by	 the	 facility,	 services,
           and	processes
           Right	to	audit	and	make	regular	assessments	of	continuity	capabilities
           Communications	of	any	issues	or	limited	services
           Understanding	 the	 need	 for	 backups	 to	 be	 held	 on-site	 or	 off-site	 or
           with	another	CSP
The	 following	 components	 of	 business	 continuity	 and	 disaster	 recovery	 are
covered	as

           Penalties	and	compensation	for	loss	of	service
           RTOs	and	RPOs
           Loss	of	integrity	or	confidentiality
           Points	of	contact	and	escalation	processes
           Failure	to	keep	compliance
           Changes	being	communicated	in	a	timely	manner
           Clearly	defined	responsibilities
           Where	usage	of	third	parties	is	prerequisite	per	the	agreed-upon	SLA
The	 cloud	 customer	 should	 adhere	 to	 the	 agreement	 after	 he/she	 is	 completely
satisfied	 with	 all	 the	 details	 relating	 to	 BCDR	 (with	 recovery	 times,
responsibilities,	 and	 more),	 prior	 to	 signing	 any	 documentation	 or	 agreements
that	show	acceptance	of	the	terms	for	system	operation.
Cost	Benefit	Analysis
There	 appears	 to	 be	 exceptional	 cost-cutting	 advantages	 in	 using	 Cloud
computing	 services.	 Investment	 and	 operating	 costs	 reduction,	 high	 service
elasticity	and	greater	flexibility	are	few	most	apparent	advantages.	On	the	other
hand,	it	is	non-trivial	to	adopt	Cloud	computing	in	business	environments.	Cost-
cutting	is	often	referred	to	as	the	key	component	for	adopting	Cloud	computing.
The	 challenge	 of	 making	 decisions	 on	 costs	 savings	 alone	 or	 exclusively,	 can
bring	back	the	aspect	of	risk	for	any	company	that	does	not	take	into	account	the
relevant	consequences.
 The	 model	 that	 would	 be	 used	 by	 organizations	 to	 conduct	 the	 cost-benefit
analysis	is	in	three	layers.




                     Figure	1-6:	Standard	Architecture	of	Disaster	Recovery

Layer	 1	 is	 base	 cost	 optimization.	 As	 we	 know	 that,	 now	 a	 days	 Cloud
computing	use	on-demand	pricing	so	you	can	customize	and	maintain	the	cost	of
Infrastructure	(in-house).	For	most	of	the	components,	the	concept	of	Total	Cost
of	 Ownership	 (TCO)	 is	 used.	 TCO	 is	 the	 determination	 of	 the	 real	 cost
attributing	 to	 owning	 and	 managing	 IT	 infrastructure.	 A	 number	 of	 9
components	 including	 Amortization,	 Server	 costs,	 Networking	 costs,	 Power
costs,	 Software	 costs,	 cooling	 costs,	 Immovable	 costs,	 Installation	 cost	 and
Support	and	Maintenance	costs	are	considered	in	the	base	cost	estimate.

           Amortization	 -	 For	 servers	 and	 other	 facilities	 the	 amortization
           parameter	will	be	calculated,	in	order	to	achieve	fair	cost	allocations
           for	 different	 IT	 resources	 (hardware	 /	 programming).	 The	 cost	 of
           amortization	 for	 each	 item	 of	 construction	 considered	 must	 be
           calculated	on	a	monthly	basis.
           Cost	of	servers	-	Servers	are	usually	installed	on	racks,	with	similar
           configurations	 assumed	 for	 all	 servers.	 This	 is	 assumed	 to	 facilitate
           server	cost	calculations.
           Network	Cost	-	 It	 deals	 with	 the	 cost	 of	 switches,	 ports,	 cables	 and
           the	implementation	costs.
           Power	Cost	-	Power	is	the	single	largest	cost.	In	an	organization,	IT
           infrastructure	 contributing	 to	 the	 power	 consumption	 comprises
           computer	 infrastructure	 (servers,	 switches,	 etc.),	 physical
           infrastructure	 of	 critical	 networks,	 transformers,	 continuous	 supply,
           suppliers,	air	conditioners,	pumps,	lighting,	etc.
           Software	 Cost	 -	 It	 includes	 cost	 of	 installation	 of	 OS	 patches	 and
           resources	for	load	balancing.	It	is	included	in	base	cost	optimization
           because	 of	 licence	 payment.	 Software	 cost	 divide	 into	 two	 Class	 A
           include	OS	and	Class	B	include	other	software.
           Cooling	 Cost	 -	 It	 represents	 the	 energy	 consumed	 by	 the	 1W	 heat
           dissipation	cooling	equipment.
           Real	Estate	 Cost	-	 It	 deals	 with	 monthly	 cost	 of	 real	 estate	 used	 by
           infrastructure.
           Facility	Cost	-	 These	 are	 tangible	 as	 well	 as	 intangible	 components
           that	are	essential	to	normal	equipment	functioning.	These	installations
           are	 wrapped	 in	 racks	 containing	 the	 servers.	 Components	 such	 as
           PDU,	KVM	(keypad	/	video	/	mouse),	cables,	etc.	may	be	included.
           Support	and	Maintenance	Cost	-	It	includes	cost	of	maintenance.
Layer	 2	 deals	 with	 data	 size,	 time	 required	 for	 computational	 resources,
predicted	demand,	actual	demand	and	amount	of	server	that	meet	the	demand.	It
has	 two	 analysis;	 Time	 analysis	 and	 Demand	 estimation.	 Time	 analysis	 will
recommend	 that	 cloud	 computing	 be	 adopted	 based	 on	 the	 time	 needed	 to
process	and	compare	data	of	in-house	with	cloud.	Demand	analysis	will	provide
the	advantages	and	disadvantages	of	cloud	computing	resource	provisioning	for
demand	of	an	organization.
Layer	 3	 shows	 overall	 project	 cost.	 This	 cost	 is	 obtained	 by	 using	 all	 the	 cost
components	in	layer	1.	Instead	of	the	total	servers	in-house	for	an	organization,
the	number	of	estimated	servers	required	for	a	project	under	consideration	would
be	 the	 input	 to	 cloud	 computing	 cost	 estimation	 model.	 With	 this	 you	 can
identify	 that	 whether	 the	 existing	 infrastructure	 would	 be	 beneficial	 to	 execute
for	 future	 project.	 In	 this	 layer	 cost	 of	 project	 software	 cost	 is	 also	 included
which	 is	 the	 cost	 of	 software	 used	 in	 design,	 deployment	 and	 development	 of
project.
Functional	Security	Requirements
Portability:
The	 concept	 of	 portability	 provides	 the	 ability	 to	 be	 easily	 carried	 or	 moved.
Portability	 in	 cloud	 ensures	 application	 and	 it’s	 components	 to	 continue	 their
functions	in	the	same	way	when	moved.	Cloud	environment	to	another	without
any	changes.	A	portable	part	can	be	moved	easily	and	re-used	regardless	of	the
provider,	 operating	 system,	 platform,	 storage	 or	 other	 elements	 of	 surrounding
environment.
Portability	of	applications	means	that	application	running	on	one	cloud	platform
can	be	moved	to	a	new	cloud	platform	and	operate	as	before	without	having	to
be	re-designed,	re-coded,	or	re-compiled.	If	the	new	cloud	platform	is	a	different
operating	 platform	 for	 example,	 when	 an	 application	 moves	 from	 a	 Windows
host	 to	 a	 Linux	 host,	 the	 application	 will	 run	 without	 any	 requirement	 of
changes/modification.
There	are	number	of	issues	standing	in	the	path	of	moving	to	cloud.	Portability
considerations	and	recommendations	that	impact	upon	moving	to	cloud	include:
Security	 integrations	 also	 includes	 End-to-End	 security	 to	 ensure	 compliance
and	 data	 confidentiality.	 Cloud	 introduces	 unique	 portability	 concerns	 for
maintaining	security,	including:

            Authentication	and	identity	mechanisms	for	user	or	process	access	to
            systems	now	must	operate	across	all	components	of	a	cloud	system.	
            Single	 sign-on	 using	 authentication	 against	 an	 enterprise	 Active
            Directory	 may	 pose	 a	 risk	 when	 outside	 components	 cannot
            authenticate	to	an	internal	LDAP	repository.		Ensuring	authentication
            extends	 appropriately	 to	 the	 divergent	 systems	 required	 for	 a	 cloud
            application.	
            Access	controls	must	extend	from	the	internal	environment	to		cloud.	
            Preventing	 access	 to	 users	 within	 the	 corporate	 perimeter	 is	 an
            established	practice	today.		cloud	applications	running	on	the	internet
            now	 require	 access	 management	 to	 appropriately	 restrict	 access	 for
            anyone	using	the	internet.
            Data	 encryption	 must	 be	 applied	 to	 data	 moving	 to	 cloud.	 	 The
            systems	 one	 which	 your	 data	 resides	 will	 not	 be	 owned	 by	 your
            organization,	and	they	will	most	often	be	managed	and	maintained	by
            outside	parties.		To	ensure	there	is	no	loss	of	control	of	sensitive	data
            or	risk	of	falling	out	of	compliance,	encrypt	data	before	it	moves	to	
            cloud.	 	 Remove	 risks	 to	 portability	 by	 placing	 data	 into	 universally
            portable	secure	formats	that	are	published	such	as	OpenPGP	or	ZIP.	
            Encryption	keys	should	not	be	turned	over	to	the	cloud	providers.

Interoperability:
The	 concept	 of	 interoperability,	 as	 it	 applied	 to	 cloud	 computing,	 is	 at	 its
simplest;	 the	 necessity	 for	 the	 components	 of	 a	 processing	 system	 to	 work
together	to	accomplish	their	intended	result.	Components	should	be	replaceable
by	new	or	different	components	from	different	providers	and	continue	to	work.
Components	 that	 make	 up	 a	 system	 consists	 of	 the	 hardware	 and	 software
elements	 required	 to	 build	 and	 operate	 it.	 Typical	 components	 required	 of	 a
cloud	system	include:

            Hardware
            Operating	systems
            Virtualizations
            Networks
            Storage
            Software
            Data	security
In	security,	applications	and	data	in		cloud	reside	on	systems	you	do	not	own	and
likely	have	only	limited	control	over.	A	number	of	important	items	to	consider
for	interoperable	security	include:

        1.	 Make	 sure	 authentication	 controls	 for	 system	 and	 client	 account
            access	 to	 certifications	 are	 perfect	 to	 ensure	 continued	 and	 steady
            system	access	to	security	and	integrity.

               This	 incorporates	 maintaining	 similar	 authentication	 factor	 level
               (for	example	single	versus	double).
               Assess	 whether	 client	 or	 process	 authentication	 needs	 an
               adjustment	in	credentials
               If	 Smart	 card	 or	 other	 removable	 key	 storage	 is	 used,	 ensure
               support	is	given,	or	use	roaming	credentials.

        2.	 The	most	important	approach	to	ensure	sensitive	data	moved	to	Cloud
            is	through	encryption

               Encrypting	the	data	before	storing	into	Cloud.	It	will	ensure	that	it
               cannot	be	accessed	and	disclosed	to	unauthorized	users.
               Use	 only	 interoperable	 encryption,	 that	 is	 accessible	 through
               distributed	particulars,	for	example,	ZIP	or	OpenPGP,	that	directly
               and	 persistently	 ensure	 data	 and	 documents	 to	 the	 platform,
               storage	systems,	or	area	where	it	resides.

        3.	 Data	 integrity	 measures	 ensures	 the	 data	 to	 remain	 unaltered	 while
            stored	in	Cloud.

               Use	watermarks	where	proper	to	distinguish	ownership
               Increase	 the	 utilization	 of	 digital	 signing	 of	 files	 and	 reports	 to
               approve	data	identity	and	integrity
               Incorporate	time-stamps	on	digital	signatures	to	settle	content	and
               integrity	checks	in	time.
               Where	 native	 document	 format	 does	 not	 support	 digital	 signing,
               ensure	 documents	 in	 interoperable	 organizations	 that	 do.	 Such	 as
               ZIP	 and	 OpenPGP.	 Both	 of	 these	 configurations	 give	 digital
               signing	to	file	or	document.

        4.	 Log	 file	 data	 must	 be	 handled	 with	 indistinguishable	 dimension	 of
            security	 from	 every	 single	 other	 data	 moving	 to	 cloud.	 Log	 files
            contain	vital	data	for	system	analysis	and	investigation	and	frequently
            containhighly	sensitive	information	that	should	be	secured.

              Investigate	how	log	files	are	made	and	managed	within	the	cloud
              environment	where	preparing	happens.
              Determine	how	log	analysis	devices	interoperate	with	existing	log
              management	 to	 ensure	 the	 standard	 log	 management	 proceeds
              without	 interruption	 or	 determine	 what	 new	 instruments	 are
              required	to	help	logging	prerequisites	for	a	cloud	service.
Encryption	 of	 log	 file	 data	 must	 occur.	 choose	 an	 encryption	 strategy	 that	 is
interoperable	 crosswise	 over	 platform.	 It	 is	 prescribed	 to	 utilize	 secure	 ZIP
compression	 on	 all	 log	 files	 to	 ensure	 them	 and	 to	 store	 them	 effectively.	 Log
files	commonly	have	a	high	compression	factor,	frequently	as	high	up	to	90%.
	                	                   	                	                 	                  	
Figure	1-7:	Mind	Map	of	Architectural	Concepts	and	Design	Requirements
Practice	Questions

    1.	 What	is	Cloud	computing?	(Choose	the	best	answers)

     a)	 	It	 is	a	 new	operational	model	and	set	of	technologies	for	managing
     shared	pools	of	computing	resources.
     b)	 	It	is	the	practice	of	using	a	network	of	remote	servers	hosted	on	the
     internet	 to	 store,	 manage	 and	 process	 data	 rather	 than	 using	 a	 local
     server	or	personal	computer.
     c)		It	is	the	on-demand	delivery	of	computing	resources	through	a	Cloud
     services	platform	with	pay-as-you-go	pricing.
     d)		None	of	the	above
    2.	 What	are	the	advantages	of	Cloud	computing?

     a)		Increase	speed	and	agility
     b)		Go	global	in	minutes
     c)		Stop	spending	money	on	running	and	maintaining	data	centers
     d)		Benefit	from	massive	economies	of	scale
     e)		All	of	the	above
    3.	 Which	of	the	following	statement	that	ensuring	that	information	is	not
        subject	to	unauthorized	modification?

     a)			Availability
     b)			Integrity
     c)			Confidentiality
     d)		None	of	the	above
    4.	 Which	 role	 in	 cloud	 environment	    offers	 cloud-based	 platform,	 application,
        infrastructure,	or	storage	services	?

     a)		Cloud	Service	Partner
     b)		Cloud	Service	Provider
     c)		Cloud	Service	Customer
     d)		Cloud	Service	Provider	and	Cloud	Service	Partner
    5.	 Which	of	the	following	are	key	cloud	computing	characteristics?

     a)		Broad	network	access
 b)			Multi-tenancy
 c)		On-demand	self	service
 d)		None	of	the	above

6.	 Which	of	the	following	statement	is	true	that	resources	are	accessible
    over	 the	 network	 and	 available	 through	 standard	 devices	 including
    laptops	and	mobile	devices?

 a)		On-demand	self	service
 b)		Broad	network	access
 c)			Resource	pooling
 d)			Multi-tenancy
7.	 What	is	on-demand	self-service?

 a)		Accessible	over	the	network	and	available	when	required.
 b)		Manually	scaling	up	or	down	as	per	requirement.
 c)		Auto-scaling	of	resources.
 d)		None	of	the	above
8.	 What	is	Virtualization?

 a)		Virtual	versioning	of	servers,	storages	or	an	operating	system.
 b)	 	 Resources	pooling	 to	 serve	various	 end-users	with	 various	physical
 and	virtual	resources.
 c)		A	technology	providing	broad	network	accessibility.
 d)		None	of	the	above.
9.	 What	are	the	advantages	of	virtualization	technology?

 a)			Isolation
 b)			Resource	sharing
 c)			Dynamical	resources
 d)		All	of	the	above
    10.	Which	of	the	following	are	cloud	service	models?

 a)			SaaS
 b)			PaaS
 c)			Iaas
 d)		None	of	the	above
   11.	Which	 of	 the	 following	 statement	 introduces	 another	 path	 to
 deploy,	 operate,	 and	 manage	 distributed	 enterprise	 networks	 through
 cloud?

a)			Storage
b)			Database
c)			Naa	S
d)			Virtualization
   12.	What	are	the	advantages	of	cloud	database?

a)		No	hardware	provisioning
b)		Cost	effective	estimated	20%	to	75%	lower	cost
c)		No	software	licensing
d)		All	of	the	above
   13.	What	is	cloud	database?

a)		Primary	backup	of	an	organization	stored	on	cloud
b)		Secondary	backup	of	an	organization	stored	on	cloud
c)		Cloud	based	database	service	for	customers
d)		None	of	the	above
   14.	What	is	the	acronym	of	DSaaS?

a)		Data	Storage	as	a	Service
b)		Database	Software	as	a	Service
c)		Data	Security	as	a	Service
   15.	A	category	of	cloud	computing	services	that	provides	a	platform
 allowing	customers	to	develop,	run,	and	manage	applications	without
 the	complexity	of	building	and	maintaining	the	infrastructure?

a)			SaaS
b)			PaaS
c)			IaaS
   16.	What	is	DSaaS?

a)		Cloud	based	data	security	service	encrypting	the	data	before	storing	it
on	cloud.
b)	 	Data	Storage	service	for	cloud	customers	with	flexible,	pay-as-you-
go	pricing	and	scalability
c)		Cloud	based	data	sharing	service.
d)		None	of	the	above.
   17.	What	are	the	advantages	of	Cloud	encryption?

a)	 	Encrypted	data	is	only	readable	for	authorized	parties	with	access	to
the	 decryption	 keys.	 Encrypting	 data	 guarantees	 that	 if	 that	 data	 falls
into	the	wrong	hand,	it	is	useless	as	long	as	its	keys	stay	secure	.
b)		Cloud	encryption	is	critical	for	industries	that	need	to	meet	regulatory
compliance	requirements
c)		Both	of	them
d)						None	of	the	above

    18.	Which	 of	 the	 following	 data	 is	 effectively	 moving	 from	 one
  location	 to	 another	 such	 as	 across	 the	 internet	 or	 through	 a	 private
  network?

a)		Data	at	rest
b)		Data	in	motion
c)		Both	of	them
d)		None	of	the	above
   19.	Which	of	the	following	is	a	type	of	Sanitization?

a)			Purging
b)			Clearing
c)			Disposal
d)						All	of	the	above
Chapter	02:	Cloud	Data	Security
Data	security	is	the	main	component	of	cloud	security.	Cloud	Service	Providers
(CSP)	 will	 often	 share	 the	 responsibility	 for	 security	 with	 the	 customer.	 Roles
such	 as	 the	 Chief	 Information	 Security	 Officer	 (CISO),	 Chief	 Security	 Officer
(CSO),	 Chief	 Technology	 Officer	 (CTO),	 Enterprise	 Security	 Architect,	 and
Network	 Administrator	 may	 all	 play	 a	 part	 in	 providing	 elements	 of	 a	 security
solution	for	the	enterprise.




                                Figure	2-1:	Cloud	Data	Security

The	 goal	 of	 the	 cloud	 data	 security	 is	 to	 provide	 a	 knowledge	 of	 the	 types	 of
controls	necessary	to	administer	several	levels	of	availability,	confidentiality,	and
integrity	about	securing	data	in	cloud.
The	 most	 significant	 part	 of	 any	 system	 or	 application	 is	 the	 data	 contained
within	it;	the	data	holds	the	most	value	for	any	organization	or	company.	While
several	 principles	 of	 protection	 and	 data	 security	 are	 the	 same	 within	 a	 cloud
environment	 as	 in	 a	 traditional	 data	 center,	 there	 are	 some	 challenges	 and
differences	unique	to	the	cloud	environment.
Cloud	Data	Life	Cycle	(CSA	Guidance)
The	 Data	 Security	 Life	 Cycle,	 as	 introduced	 in	 the	 Cloud	 Security	 Alliance
(CSA)	guidance,	enables	the	organization	to	map	the	different	phases	in	the	data
life	cycle	against	the	required	controls	that	are	important	to	each	phase.
The	life	cycle	contains	the	following	steps:

            Map	the	different	life	cycle	phases.
            Integrate	the	access	types	and	different	data	locations.
            Map	into	actors,	controls,	and	functions.
The	data	life	cycle	guidance	provides	a	framework	to	map	significant	use	cases
for	data	access	while	assisting	in	the	development	of	proper	controls	within	each
life	cycle	stage.
The	 life	 cycle	 model	 serves	 as	 a	 reference	 and	 framework	 to	 provide	 a
standardized	 approach	 for	 data	 life	 cycle	 and	 data	 security.	 Not	 all
implementations	or	situations	will	align	fully	or	comprehensively.
Phases
Data	in	the	cloud	must	be	perceived,	in	the	general	case,	to	have	the	same	needs
and	properties	as	data	in	the	legacy	environment.	The	data	life	cycle	still	has	a
purpose;	only	the	implemented	particulars	will	change.	Typical	stages	in	the	data
life	cycle	are	shown:




                             Figure	2-2:	Cloud	Data	Life	Cycle

Create
Cloud	customers	generate,	alter	or	modify	the	information	on	Cloud.	Depending
on	 the	 use	 phase,	 the	 data	 may	 be	 created	 locally	 or	 internally.	 Externally,
creation	can	be	performed	on	remote	workstations,	and	then	uploaded	onto	the
cloud.	 Creation	 phase	 is	 more	 important	 because	 it	 is	 an	 appropriate	 time	 to
classify	 the	 sensitivity	 of	 the	 created	 information	 and	 its	 value	 to	 an
organization.	 This	 classification	 is	 an	 important	 factor	 to	 apply	 proper	 security
controls.
Data	Created	Remotely
Data	 created	 by	 the	 user	 must	 be	 encrypted	 before	 uploading	 to	 the	 cloud.	 We
need	 to	 protect	 against	 apparent	 vulnerabilities,	 including	 man-in-the-middle
attacks	and	insider	threat	at	the	cloud	data	center.	The	cryptosystem	used	for	this
purpose	should	have	a	high	work	factor	and	listed	in	the	FIPS	140-2	approved
crypto	solutions.	We	must	implement	good	key	management	practices	as	well.
The	connection	used	to	upload	the	data	should	also	be	secure,	preferably	with	an
IPSec	VPN	solution.
 Note:	“The	Federal	Information	Processing	Standard	(FIPS)	Publication	140-
 2,	(FIPS	PUB	140-2),	is	a	U.S.	government	computer	security	standard	used	to
 approve	cryptographic	modules.”
Data	Created	within	the	Cloud
Similarly,	 data	 created	 within	 the	 cloud	 through	 remote	 manipulation	 must	 be
encrypted	 upon	 creation,	 to	 obviate	 unnecessary	 access	 or	 view	 by	 data	 center
personnel.

Store
After	 the	 data	 is	 created,	 it	 must	 be	 stored	 in	 a	 way	 that	 is	 useable	 to	 the
application	 or	 system.	 Data	 can	 be	 stored	 in	 several	 ways.	 Storage	 methods
include	data	written	to	a	database,	remote	object	storage	in	a	cloud	and	files	on	a
file	 system.	 All	 storage	 of	 data	 should	 be	 complete	 by	 the	 data	 classification
determined	during	the	Create	phase.
The	store	phase	is	the	first	place	where	the	security	control	can	be	implemented
to	secure	the	data	at	rest,	and	the	cloud	security	professional	should	make	sure
that	all	storage	methods	employ	whatever	technologies	are	necessary	for	its	data
classification	 level,	 including	 the	 auditing,	 encryption,	 access	 controls,
monitoring	and	logging.	The	use	of	appropriate	redundancy	and	backup	methods
also	comes	into	play	immediately	in	the	store	phase	to	protect	the	data	on	top	of
the	security	controls.
Use
In	 use	 phase,	 data	 is	 accessed,	 processed,	 viewed	 and	 being	 involved	 in	 some
sort	of	activity	other	than	modification	and	alteration.	Being	in	process,	the	data
is	 in	 its	 most	 vulnerable	 state	 because	 it	 is	 more	 exposed,	 decrypted,	 might	 be
transported	to	unsecure	location	and	increase	the	chance	of	leak	or	compromise.
At	 this	 time,	 when	 the	 state	 of	 data	 is	 transiting	 from	 rest	 to	 motion,	 controls
must	be	employed	to	secure	the	data	such	as	Data	Loss	Prevention	(DLP)	policy,
Information	Right	Management	(IRM),	databases	and	file	access	monitoring	to
record	and	audit	data	access	and	prevent	unauthorized	access.
Using	the	information	or	data	is	only	possible	when	it	is	in	decrypted	state.	As
we	 discussed	 in	 storage	 phase	 to	 encrypt	 the	 data	 while	 storing,	 exposing
unencrypted	 state	 of	 data	 in	 use	 phase	 requires	 logging	 and	 auditing.
Additionally,	 granting	 least	 privileges	 considering	 read-only	 mode	 ensures	 that
no	further	modification	or	alteration	is	possible.
Share
In	 sharing	 phase,	 the	 data	 is	 available	 for	 use	 between	 users,	 partners	 and
customers.	 It	 depends	 upon	 the	 nature	 of	 data	 if	 it	 is	 to	 be	 shared	 with	 all	 or
among	selected	ones.	It	is	a	big	challenge	to	make	sure	that	proper	protections
are	in	place,	once	the	data	leaves	the	system	and	is	shared.	Unlike	the	Use	phase,
the	 data	 is	 being	 allowed	 to	 be	 accessed	 and	 used	 by	 contractors,	 partners,
customers,	 and	 other	 associated	 groups,	 and	 once	 the	 data	 leaves	 the	 central
system,	 it	 is	 no	 longer	 under	 the	 employed	 security	 control	 mechanisms.
Technologies	 such	 as	 DLP	 (Data	 Loss	 Prevention)	 and	 numerous	 rights
management	 packages	 can	 be	 utilized	 to	 detect	 either	 additional	 attempt	 or
sharing	to	prevent	modification.	However,	neither	method	is	entirely	secure.
Archive
In	 the	 archive	 phase,	 data	 moves	 to	 long-term	 storage,	 thus	 removing	 it	 from
being	active	within	a	system.	The	archiving	process	can	range	from	moving	data
to	 a	 lower	 storage	 tier	 that	 is	 slower	 and	 not	 as	 redundant	 but	 still	 accessible
from	the	system,	all	the	way	up	to	removing	it	from	the	active	system	entirely
and	 placing	 it	 on	 different	 media	 altogether.	 Additionally,	 the	 data	 can	 be
recovered	 and	 read	 by	 the	 system	 again,	 but	 typically	 will	 involve	 more	 time,
effort,	 or	 cost	 to	 do	 so.	 In	 many	 cases	 where	 the	 data	 is	 completely	 removed
from	 the	 active	 system,	 it	 is	 also	 stored	 offsite	 for	 disaster	 recovery	 reasons—
sometimes	 even	 being	 hundreds	 or	 thousands	 of	 miles	 away.	 More	 than	 one
overlooked	 aspects	 of	 archiving	 data	 are	 the	 ability	 to	 recover	 and	 retrieve	 as
well.
Destroy
Destroy	phase	is	the	phase	in	which	the	data	is	removed	by	the	Cloud	provider.
This	phase	can	be	interpreted	into	different	technical	meanings	according	to	data
content,	 usage,	 and	 applications	 used.	 Data	 destruction	 can	 mean	 logically
erasing	pointers	or	permanently	destroying	data	using	digital	or	physical	means.
Consideration	must	be	made	according	to	regulation,	the	type	of	Cloud	is	used
(SaaS	vs.	IaaS),	and	the	classification	of	the	data.
Relevant	Data	Security	Technologies
Cloud	Security	Models	(CSM)
Cloud	Security	Models	are	tools	to	help	guide	security	decisions.	It	can	consist
of	some	of	the	following	types:
Conceptual	Models	or	Frameworks
It	includes	descriptions	and	visualizations	used	to	explain	principles	and	Cloud
security	concepts	such	as	the	Cloud	Security	Alliance	(CSA)	logical	model.
Controls	Models	or	Frameworks
It	 can	 categorize	 and	 detail	 specific	 cloud	 security	 controls	 or	 categories	 of
controls,	such	as	the	CSA	Cloud	Controls	Matrix	(CCM).
Reference	Architectures
It	is	a	template	used	for	implementing	cloud	security,	typically	generalized	(e.g.,
an	Infrastructure	as	a	service	(IaaS)	security	reference	architecture).	They	can	be
very	 conceptual,	 intellectual,	 abstract,	 or	 quite	 detailed,	 down	 to	 specific
functions	and	controls.
Design	Patterns
It	is	a	re-usable	solution	to	specific	problems.	Insecurity,	an	example	is	IaaS	log
management.	As	with	Reference	Architectures,	they	can	be	inherently	specific	or
abstract,	common	implementation	patterns	on	specific	Cloud	platforms.
Recommended	CSA	Security	Models
CSA	Enterprise	Architecture
                                                         PRESENTATION
                                                           SERVICES
    BUSINESS                                              APPLICATION
                         INFORMATION                       SERVICES      SECURITY	&
   OPERATION
                     TECHNOLOGY	OPERATION                                   RISK
    SUPPORT                                              INFORMATION
                        &	SUPPORT	(ITOS)                                MANAGEMENT
 SERVICES	(BOSS)                                           SERVICES
                                                       INFRASTRUCTURE
                                                           SERVICES
     (SABSA)                    (ITIL)                      (TOGAF)         (Jericho)
                            Table	2-1:	CSA	Enterprise	Architectur	e

CSA	Cloud	Controls	Matrix	(CCM)

            Provides	a	fundamental	security	principle	to	guide	Cloud	vendors	and
            to	assist	prospective	cloud	customers	in	assessing	the	entire	security
            risk	of	a	cloud	provider.
            The	CSA	CCM	are	aligned	to	the	Cloud	Security	Alliance	guidance
           in	13	domains.
           Customized	 relationship	 to	 important	 industry	 security	 standards,
           guidelines,	and	controls	frameworks	such	as	the	ISACA	COBIT,	ISO
           27001/27002,	PCI,	NIST,	Jericho	Forum	and	NERC	CIP
           CCM	provides	organizations	with	the	needed	structure,	in	details	and
           clarity	 and	 relatined	 information	 security	 tailored	 into	 the	 Cloud
           industry.
           Provides	operational	risk	management	and	standardized	security,	and
           seeks	 to	 normalize	 security	 expectations,	 Cloud	 taxonomy,	 and
           terminology.
           It	has	the	following	versions:

                       Cloud	Control	Matrix	v3.0.1
                       Cloud	Control	Matrix	v3
                       Cloud	Control	Matrix	v1.4
                       Cloud	Control	Matrix	v1.3
                       Cloud	Control	Matrix	v1.2
                       Cloud	Control	Matrix	v1.1
                       Cloud	Control	Matrix	v1.0

NIST	SP	500-299
NIST	 SP	 500-299 	 is	 a	 Cloud	 Computing	 Security	 Reference	 Architecture.	 A
framework	 that	 identifies	 a	 fundamental	 security	 component	 that	 can	 be
implemented	in	the	Cloud	ecosystem.
ISO/IEC	27017
This	standard	gives	guideline	for	information	security	controls	applicable	to	the
provision	 and	 use	 of	 Cloud	 services	 by	 providing	 additional	 implementation
guidance	 for	 relevant	 controls	 specified	 in	 ISO/IEC	 27002	 .Also,	 provides
additional	control	with	implementation	guidance	that	relates	explicitly	to	Cloud
services.
This	 Recommendation	 and	 International	 Standard	 provides	 controls	 and
implementation	 guidance	 for	 both	 Cloud	 service	 providers	 and	 Cloud	 service
customers.
Cloud	Data	Storage	Architectures
NIST	recommends	three	service	models,	which	define	the	different	foundational
categories	of	Cloud	services:
           IaaS	(Infrastructure	as	a	Service)
           PaaS	(Platform	as	a	Service)
           SaaS	(Software	as	a	Service)
Infrastructure	as	a	Service	(IaaS)
IaaS	provides	access	to	a	resource	pool	of	basic	computing	infrastructures,	such
as	computer,	network,	or	storage.	IaaS	has	the	following	storage	options:

           Content	 Delivery	 Network	 (CDN):	 It	 is	 also	 known	 as	 a	 content
           distribution	 network.	 A	 content	 is	 stored	 in	 object	 storage,	 which	 is
           distributed	 to	 various	 geographically	 distributed	 nodes	 to	 increase
           Internet	consumption	speeds.
           Object	Storage:	Object	storage	is	referred	to	as	file	storage.	Instead
           of	 a	 virtual	 hard	 drive,	 object	 storage	 is	 similar	 to	 a	 file	 share
           accessed	 through	 a	 web	 interface	 or	 Application	 Programming
           Interface	(API).
           Raw	Storage:	This	type	of	storage	includes	the	physical	media	where
           the	 data	 is	 stored.	 It	 can	 be	 mapped	 for	 direct	 access	 in	 specific
           private	cloud	configurations.
           Volume	storage:	This	 type	 of	 storage	 includes	 volumes	 attached	 to
           IaaS	 instances,	 usually	 as	 a	 virtual	 hard	 drive.	 Volumes	 usually	 use
           data	dispersion	to	support	resiliency	and	security.
Platform	as	a	Service	(PaaS)
PaaS	provides	and	relies	on	an	extensive	range	of	storage	options,	including:
PaaS	may	provide:

           Application	Storage	:	This	includes	storage	options	built	into	a	PaaS
           application	platform	and	consumable	through	APIs	that	does	not	fall
           into	other	storage	categories.
           Big	 Data	 as	 a	 Service	 :	 This	 application	 is	 offered	 as	 a	 cloud
           platform.	 Data	 is	 stored	 in	 object	 storage	 or	 another	 distributed	 file
           system.	Data	needs	to	be	close	to	the	processing	environment	and	can
           be	moved	temporally	if	needed	for	processing.
           Database	as	a	Service(DBaaS)	:	A	multi-tenant	database	architecture
           that	is	directly	consumable	as	a	service.	Users	consume	the	database
           through	 direct	 SQL	 calls	 or	 APIs,	 depending	 on	 the	 offering.	 Each
           customer’s	 data	 is	 separated	 and	 isolated	 from	 other	 tenants.
           Databases	may	be	relational,	flat,	or	any	other	common	structure
PaaS	may	consume	:

            Databases:	 Content	 and	 information	 may	 be	 directly	 stored	 in	 the
            database	 (as	 text	 or	 binary	 objects),	 or	 as	 files	 referenced	 by	 the
            database.	 The	 database	 itself	 may	 be	 a	 collection	 of	 IaaS	 instances
            sharing	common	back-end	storage.
            Object/File	Storage	:	Files	or	other	data	are	stored	in	object	storage,
            but	only	accessed	via	the	PaaS	API.
            Volume	 Storage	 :	 Data	 may	 be	 stored	 in	 IaaS	 volumes	 attached	 to
            instances	dedicated	to	providing	the	PaaS	service.
Software	as	a	Service	(SaaS)
As	with	PaaS,	SaaS	uses	an	extensive	range	of	storage	and	consumption	models.
SaaS	 storage	 is	 accessed	 through	 a	 web-based	 user	 interface	 or	 server/client
application.	 If	 the	 storage	 is	 accessible	 through	 API,	 then	 it	 is	 considered	 as	 a
PaaS.	 Numerous	 SaaS	 providers	 also	 offer	 PaaS	 APIs.	 The	 two	 most	 common
storage	types	are:

            Information	 Storage	 and	 Management	 :	 Data	 is	 arrived	 into	 the
            system	 through	 the	 web	 interface	 and	 stored	 within	 the	 SaaS
            application	(with	a	back-end	database	application).
            Content	 and	 File	 Storage	 :	 A	 File-based	 content	 is	 stored	 in	 the
            SaaS	 application	 such	 as	 documents,	 reports,	 image	 files,	 and	 made
            accessible	through	a	web	based	user	interface.
Examples	of	IaaS,	PaaS,	SaaS
 IaaS           DigitalOcean,	Linode,	Rackspace,	Amazon	Web	Services	(AWS),
                Cisco	 Metapod,	 Microsoft	 Azure,	 Google	 Compute	 Engine
                (GCE)
 PaaS           AWS	 Elastic	 Beanstalk,	 Windows	 Azure,	 Heroku,	 Force.com,
                Google	App	Engine,	Apache	Stratos,	OpenShift
 SaaS           Google	 Apps,	 Dropbox,	 Salesforce,	 Cisco	 WebEx,	 Concur,
                GoToMeeting
                             Table	2-2:	Examples	of	IaaS,	PaaS,	SaaS

Storage	Types	(e.g.,	long-term,	ephemeral,	raw-disk)
Long-term	Storage
Few	 vendors	 provide	 a	 Cloud	 storage	 service	 tailored	 to	 the	 needs	 of	 data
archiving.	 These	 include	 features	 such	 as	 data	 life	 cycle	 management,
guaranteed	immutability,	and	search.
For	Example:
HP	Autonomy	Digital	Safe	Archiving	Service
This	 service	 uses	 an	 on-premises	 appliance,	 which	 connects	 to	 customers’	 data
stores	via	API	and	allows	the	user	to	search	.
Digital	 Safe	 offers	 read-only	 Write	 Once	 Read	 Many	 (WORM),	 e-discovery,	
legal	hold,	and	all	the	features	associated	with	enterprise	archiving.	Its	appliance
carries	out	data	deduplication	before	transmission	to	the	data	repository.
Ephemeral	Storage
Ephemeral	storage	is	significant	for	IaaS	instances	and	exists	only	if	its	instance
is	 up.	 It	 is	 usually	 used	 for	 swap	 files	 and	 other	 temporary	 storage	 needs.	 It	 is
terminated	with	its	instance.
Raw-Disk
Raw	 Device	Mapping	(RDM)	 is	 a	method	of	disk	virtualization	 in	VMware	to
enable	a	storage	Logical	Unit	Number	(LUN),	is	to	be	directly	connected	to	a
virtual	machine	(VM)	from	the	Storage	Area	Network	(SAN)	.	In	a	Microsoft's
Hyper-V	platform,	this	is	accomplished	using	pass-through	disks.
Swap-File:	 A	 file	 on	 a	 hard	 disk	 that	 is	 used	 to	 provide	 space	 for	 programs
which	have	been	transferred	from	the	processor's	memory.
Data	 Deduplication:	 It	 is	 a	 technique	 for	 eliminating	 duplicate	 copies	 of
repeating	data.
Threats	to	Storage	Types	(e.g.,	ISO/IEC	27040)
There	are	many	threats	to	storage	types	defined	by	the	ISO/IEC	27040.

             Unauthorized	Usage:	In	the	cloud	environment,	data	storage	can	be
             implemented	into	unauthorized	usages,	such	as	by	account	hijacking
             or	 uploading	 illegal	 content.	 The	 multi-tenancy	 of	 the	 cloud	 storage
             makes	tracking	unauthorized	usage	more	challenging.
             Unauthorized	 Access:	 This	 can	 happen	 due	 to	 hijacking,	 non-
             regulated	permissions	in	a	multi-tenant’s	environment,	or	an	internal
             cloud	provider	employee.
             Liability	 due	 to	 Regulatory	 Non-Compliance:	 Certain	 controls
             such	 as	 encryption	 might	 be	 required	 for	 specific	 regulations,	 some
             cloud	services	enable	all	relevant	data	controls.
             Distributed	Denial	of	Service	(DDoS)	and	Denial	of	Service	(DoS)
             attacks	 on	 storage:	 Availability	 is	 a	 definite	 concern	 for	 cloud
            storage.	Without	data,	no	instances	can	be	launched.
            Corruption	 or	 Modification	 and	 Destruction	 of	 Data:	 A	 wide
            variety	of	sources	can	cause	this:	human	errors,	hardware	or	software
            failure,	events	such	as	fire	or	flood,	or	intentional	hacks.	It	can	also
            affect	a	particular	portion	of	the	storage	or	the	entire	array.
            Data	leakage	or	Data	breaches:	Customers	always	have	to	be	aware
            that	 cloud	 data	 is	 exposed	 to	 data	 breaches.	 Maybe	 external	 or
            coming	 from	 a	 cloud	 provider	 employee	 with	 storage	 access.	 Data
            tends	 to	 be	 replicated	 and	 moved	 into	 cloud,	 which	 increases	 the
            likelihood	of	a	leak.
            Theft/Accident	 Loss	 of	 Media:	 This	 threat	 applies	 to	 portable
            storage,	 but	 as	 	 cloud	 datacenters	 grow	 and	 storage	 devices	 are
            getting	 smaller,	 there	 are	 increasingly	 more	 vectors	 for	 them	 to
            experience	theft	or	similar	threats	as	well.
            Malware	 Attack:	 The	 objective	 of	 almost	 every	 malware	 is
            eventually	reaching	the	data	storage.
            Improper	Treatment:	End	of	use	is	more	challenging	and	complex
            in	 cloud	 computing	 since	 most	 often,	 we	 cannot	 enforce	 physical
            destruction	 of	 media.	 However,	 the	 dynamic	 nature	 of	 data,	 where
            data	is	kept	in	different	storages	with	multiple-tenants,	mitigates	the
            risk	where	digital	remnants	are	located.

Technologies	Available	to	Address	Threats
A	significant	approach	and	concept	employed	in	a	cloud	environment	to	protect
data	 are	 called	 Data	 Loss	 Prevention	 (DLP)	 and	 also	 known	 as	 data	 leakage
prevention.
Data	Loss	Prevention:
DLP	 is	 a	 set	 of	 controls	 and	 practices	 used	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 data	 is	 only
accessible	 and	 exposed	 to	 those	 systems	 and	 users	 authorized	 to	 have	 it.	 The
objective	of	a	DLP	strategy	for	an	organization	is	to	manage	and	minimize	risk,
maintain	 compliance	 with	 regulatory	 requirements,	 and	 show	 due	 diligence	 on
the	 part	 of	 the	 application	 and	 data	 owner.	 However,	 it	 is	 vital	 for	 any
organization	to	take	a	holistic	view	of	DLP	and	not	focus	on	individual	systems
or	hosting	environments.	The	DLP	strategy	must	involve	their	entire	enterprise,
particularly	with	hybrid	cloud	environments,	or	those	where	there	is	a	mixture	of
traditional	and	cloud	data	center	installations.
DLP	Components
DLP	consists	of	three	components:

          Discovery	 and	 Classification:	This	 is	 the	 first	 component	 of	 DLP,
          also	 a	 recurring	 process,	 and	 the	 majority	 of	 cloud-based	 DLP
          technologies	 are	 predominantly	 focused	 on	 this	 component.	 The
          discovery	 process	 usually	 maps	 data	 in	 cloud	 storage	 services	 and
          databases.	 It	 enables	 classification	 based	 on	 data	 categories	 such	 as
          classified	data,	credit	card	data,	and	public	data.
          Monitoring:	Data	usage	monitoring	forms	the	key	function	of	DLP.
          Effective	 DLP	 strategies	 monitor	 the	 usage	 of	 data	 across	 locations
          and	platforms	while	enabling	administrators	to	define	more	than	one
          usage	 policies.	 The	 ability	 to	 monitor	 data	 can	 be	 executed	 on
          gateways,	 servers,	 and	 storage	 as	 well	 as	 workstations	 and	 endpoint
          devices.	Recently,	the	increased	adoption	of	external	services	to	assist
          with	DLP	“as	a	service”	has	increased,	along	with	many	cloud-based
          DLP	 solutions.	 The	 monitoring	 application	 must	 be	 able	 to	 cover
          most	 sharing	 options	 available	 for	 users	 (email	 application,	 portable
          media,	and	internet	browsing)	and	alert	them	of	policy	violations.
          Enforcement	:	Many	DLP	tools	provide	the	capability	to	interrogate
          data	and	compare	its	location,	use,	or	transmission	destination	against
          a	set	of	policies	to	prevent	data	loss.	If	a	policy	violation	is	detected,
          specified	 appropriate	 enforcement	 actions	 can	 automatically	 be
          performed.	 Enforcement	 option	 can	 include	 the	 ability	 to	 alert	 and
          log,	block	data	transfer,	or	re-route	them	for	additional	validation,	or
          to	encrypt	the	data	before	leaving	the	organizational	boundaries.

DLP	Architecture
DLP	tool	implementations	typically	conform	to	the	following	topologies:

          Data	in	Motion	(DIM)	:	This	referred	to	a	gateway	or	network-based
          DLP.	In	this	type	of	topology,	the	monitoring	engine	is	deployed	near
          the	 organizational	 gateway	 to	 monitor	 outgoing	 protocols	 such	 as
          FTP,	HTTP/HTTPS,	and	SMTP.	The	topology	can	be	a	combination
          of	 proxy-based,	 bridge,	 network	 tapping,	 or	 SMTP	 relays.	 To	 scan
          encrypted	 HTTPS	 traffic,	 proper	 mechanisms	 to	 enable	 SSL
          interception/broker	 is	 required	 to	 be	 integrated	 into	 the	 system
          architecture.
          Data	at	Rest	(DAR):	This	referred	to	as	storage-based	data.	In	this
          type	of	topology,	the	DLP	engine	is	installed	where	the	data	is	at	rest,
typically	more	than	one	storage	sub-systems,	also	file	and	application
servers.	 This	 topology	 is	 very	 useful	 for	 data	 discovery	 and	 for
tracking	usage	but	may	require	integration	with	network	or	endpoint
based	DLP	for	policy	enforcement.
Data	 in	 Use	 (DIU):	 This	 referred	 to	 as	 a	 client	 or	 endpoint-based
data.	The	DLP	application	is	installed	on	the	user’s	workstations	and
endpoint	 devices.	 This	 topology	 offer	 insight	 into	 how	 the	 data	 is
used	by	users,	with	the	ability	to	add	the	protection	that	the	network
DLP	 may	 not	 be	 capable	 of	 providing.	 The	 challenge	 with	 client-
based	DLP	is	the	time,	complexity,	and	resources	to	implement	across
all	 the	 endpoint	 devices,	 often	 across	 multiple	 locations	 and	 a
significant	number	of	users.
Cloud-Based	DLP	Considerations
Some	important	considerations	for	cloud-based	DLP	include:

            Data	 in	 the	 Cloud	 tend	 to	 move	 and	 replicate	 :	 Whether	 it	 is
            between	 locations,	 backups,	 data	 centers,	 or	 backward	 and	 forward
            into	 the	 organizations,	 the	 movement	 and	 replication	 can	 present	 a
            challenge	to	any	DLP	deployment.
            Administrative	 access	 for	 enterprise	 data	 in	 the	 cloud	 could	 be
            tricky:	Ensure	that	you	could	understand	how	to	perform	discovery
            and	classification	within	cloud-based	storage.
            DLP	 technology	 can	 affect	 overall	 performance:	 Gateway	 or
            network	 DLP,	 which	 scans	 all	 traffic	 for	 pre-defined	 content,	 could
            affect	 network	 performance.	 Customer-based	 DLPs	 scan	 all
            workstation	access	to	data;	this	should	have	a	performance	impact	on
            the	workstation's	operation.	The	overall	impact	should	be	considered
            during	testing.
 Note	:	A	holistic	approach	means	thinking	about	the	big	picture.	Whether	you
 are	 doing	 holistic	 website	 design,	 holistic	 parenting,	 or	 holistic	 medicine,
 know	that	each	change	you	make	to	one	part	affects	the	entire	approach.

Data	Security	Strategies
Many	technologies	and	tool	sets	are	commonly	used	as	data	security	strategies:
Encryption
As	we	know,	encryption	is	a	process	of	encoding	a	message	or	an	information	in
a	 way	 that	 it	 can	 only	 be	 decrypted	 by	 authorized	 parties.	 Plain	 text	 data	 is
readable	 information	 by	 users	 or	 applications	 whereas	 an	 encrypted	 data	 also
known	 as	 Cipher	 text	 is	 a	 random	 and	 meaningless	 piece	 of	 code.	 Decryption
key	 is	 required	 to	 decrypt	 the	 data	 back	 to	 plain	 text.	 Encryption	 across	 the
enterprise	architecture	could	reduce	the	risks	associated	with	unauthorized	data
access	 and	 exposure	 but	 may	 raise	 performance	 issues	 as	 every	 piece	 of
information	is	encrypted	at	sender’s	end	and	decrypted	at	destination	end.
It	 is	 a	 responsibility	to	a	CSP	 to	implement	encryption	within	the	enterprise	in
such	a	way	that	it	provides	the	most	security	benefits,	safeguarding	the	mission-
critical	 data	 while	 minimizing	 system	 performance	 issues	 as	 a	 result	 of	 the
encryption.
Encryption	Implementation
Encryption	can	be	implemented	within	different	phases	of	the	data	life	cycle:
          Data	 in	 Motion	 (DIM):	 Encrypting	 data	 in	 motion	 are	 mature	 and
          include	IPSEC	or	VPN,	TLS/SSL,	and	other	same	types	of	protocols.
          Data	at	Rest	(DAR)	:	When	the	data	is	archived	or	stored,	different
          encryption	techniques	must	be	used.	The	encryption	mechanism	itself
          may	vary	in	the	manner	it	is	deployed,	dependent	on	the	timeframe	or
          indeed	the	period	for	which	the	data	will	be	stored,	such	as	extended
          retention	versus	short-term	storage,	data	located	in	a	database	versus
          a	file	system,	and	so	on.
          Data	in	Use	(DIU):	Data	that	is	being	shared,	processed,	or	viewed.
          This	stage	of	data	life	cycle	is	less	mature	than	other	data	encryption
          techniques	and	typically	focused	on	IRM/DRM	solutions.




                        Figure	2-3	–	Encryption	Implementation

Sample	Use	Cases	for	Encryption
There	are	following	some	use	cases	for	encryption:
           Inbound	 and	 Outbound	 traffic	 to	 cloud-	 for	 archiving,	 sharing,	 or
           processing-	 we	 use	 encryption	 for	 data	 in	 motion	 methods	 such	 as
           VPN	 or	 SSL/TLS	 to	 avoid	 data	 leakage	 or	 information	 exposure
           while	in	motion.
           You	 are	 protecting	 data	 at	 rest	 such	 as	 application	 components,
           archiving,	backup	applications,	database	information,	and	file	storage.
           Objects	or	files	should	be	protected	when	stored,	shared,	or	used	in	
           Cloud.
           While	 complying	 with	 regulations	 such	 as	 HIPAA	 and	 PCI-DSS	 ,
           which	 in	 turn	 requires	 proper	 protection	 of	 data	 traversing	 of
           untrusted	networks,	along	with	the	protection	of	specific	data	types.
           Protection	from	third-party	access	through	a	lawful	interception.
           Increased	 mechanisms	 or	 creating	 enhanced	 for	 logical	 separation
           between	different	clients'	data	in	the	Cloud.
           Logical	 destruction	 of	 data	 when	 physical	 destruction	 is	 not
           technically	possible	or	feasible.
 Note:	HIPAA	is	a	US’	Health	Insurance	Portability	and	Accountability	Act.
Payment	Card	Industry	Data	Security	Standard	(PCI	DSS)	:	Payment	Card
Industry	 Data	 Security	 Standard	 (PCI-DSS)	 is	 a	 global	 information	 security
standard	 created	 by	 “PCI	 Security	 Standards	 Council,”	 It	 was	 created	 for
organizations	 to	 develop,	 enhance	 and	 assess	 security	 standards	 required	 for
handling	 cardholder	 information	 and	 payment	 account	 security.	 PCI	 Security
Standards	 Council	 develops	 security	 standards	 for	 payment	 card	 industry	 and
provides	 tools	 required	 for	 enforcement	 of	 these	 standards	 like	 training,
certification,	assessment,	and	scanning.
Founding	members	of	this	council	are:

           American	Express
           Discover	Financial	Services
           JCB	International
           MasterCard
           Visa	Inc.

PCI	data	security	standard	deals	basically	with	cardholder	data	security	for	debit,
credit,	 prepaid,	 e-purse,	 POS,	 and	 ATM	 cards.	 A	 high-level	 overview	 of	 PCI-
DSS	provide:

           Secure	Network
            Strong	Access	Control
            Cardholder	data	security
            Regular	Monitoring	and	Evaluation	of	Network
            Maintaining	Vulnerability	program
            Information	security	policy

Cloud	Encryption	Challenges
There	 are	 many	 factors	 influencing	 encryption,	 considerations	 and	 associated
implementation	 in	 the	 enterprise.	 Using	 encryption	 should	 always	 be	 directly
concern	 to	 the	 business	 considerations,	 regulatory	 requirements,	 and	 additional
constraints	that	the	organization	may	have	to	address.	There	are	many	different
techniques	will	be	used	based	on	the	location	of	data	at	rest,	in	transit,	or	use-
while	in	the	Cloud.
Different	 options	 could	 be	 applied	 when	 dealing	 with	 specific	 threats,	 such	 as
protecting	 Personally	 Identifiable	 Information	 (PII)	 or	 legally	 regulated
information,	 or	 when	 defending	 against	 unauthorized	 access	 and	 viewing	 from
systems	and	platform	administrators.
Encryption	Challenges
The	following	challenges	are	associated	with	encryption:

            The	 integrity	 of	 encryption	 is	 heavily	 dependent	 on	 the	 control	 and
            management	of	the	relevant	encryption	keys,	including	how	they	are
            secured.	If	the	cloud	provider	holds	the	keys,	then	not	all	data	threats
            are	mitigated	against,	as	 unauthorized	actors	may	gain	access	to	the
            data	 through	 the	 acquisition	 of	 the	 keys	 via	 a	 search	 warrant,	 legal
            ruling,	 or	 theft	 and	 misappropriation.	 Equally,	 if	 the	 customer	 is
            holding	 the	 encryption	 keys,	 this	 presents	 different	 challenges	 to
            make	 sure	 they	 are	 protected	 from	 unauthorized	 usage	 as	 well	 as
            compromise.
            Encryption	can	be	challenging	to	implement	effectively	when	a	cloud
            provider	 is	 required	 to	 process	 the	 encrypted	 data.	 This	 is	 true	 even
            for	 simple	 tasks	 such	 as	 indexing,	 along	 with	 the	 gathering	 of
            metadata.
            Data	 in	 the	 cloud	 is	 highly	 portable.	 The	 data	 can	 be	 replicated,
            copied,	 and	 backed	 up	 extensively,	 making	 encryption	 and	 key
            management	a	challenge.
            Multi-tenant	 cloud	 environments	 and	 the	 shared	 use	 of	 physical
            hardware	 present	 challenges	 for	 the	 protection	 of	 keys	 in	 volatile
            memory	such	as	RAM	caches.
            Secure	 hardware	 for	 encrypting	 keys	 may	 not	 exist	 in	 cloud
            environments,	 and	 software-based	 key	 storage	 is	 often	 more
            vulnerable.
            Storage-level	 encryption	 is	 typically	 less	 complicated	 and	 can	 be
            most	 easily	 exploited	 (given	 sufficient	 time	 and	 resources).	 The
            higher	you	go	up	towards	the	application	level,	the	more	it	becomes
            to	 deploy	 and	 implement	 encryption.	 However,	 encryption
            implemented	 at	 the	 application	 level	 will	 technically	 be	 more
            effective	in	protecting	the	confidentiality	of	the	relevant	resources	or
            assets.
            Encryption	 can	 negatively	 affect	 performance,	 especially	 high-
            performance	 data	 processing	 mechanisms	 such	 as	 data	 warehouses
            and	data	cubes.
            The	 nature	 of	 cloud	 environment	 typically	 requires	 us	 to	 manage
            more	 keys	 like	 API	 keys,	 access	 keys,	 encryption	 keys,	 and	 shared
            keys.
 Note:	Multi-tenancy	is	an	architecture	in	which	a	single	instance	of	a	software
 application	serves	multiple	customers.	Each	customer	is	called	a	tenant.
Data	Cube:	“It	is	a	multi-dimensional	array	of	values.”
Object	Storage	Encryption
Most	 of	 the	 object	 storage	 services	 offer	 server-side	 storage-level	 encryption.
This	 kind	 of	 encryption	 offers	 limited	 effectiveness,	 with	 the	 recommendation
for	external	encryption	mechanisms	to	be	encrypting	the	data	before	its	entrance
within	the	cloud	environments.	Potential	external	mechanisms	include:

            Application-level	 Encryption	 :	 In	 this	 mechanism,	 the	 encryption
            engine	 resides	 in	 the	 application	 that	 is	 using	 the	 object	 storage.	 It
            could	be	integrated	into	the	application	component	or	by	a	proxy	that
            is	responsible	for	encrypting	the	data	before	moving	to	the	cloud.	The
            proxy	 can	 be	 implemented	 on	 the	 client	 gateway	 or	 as	 a	 service
            residing	at	the	external	provider.
            File-level	Encryption	:	Such	as	Digital	Rights	Management	(DRM)
            or	 Information	 Rights	 Management	 (IRM)	 solutions,	 both	 of	 which
            can	be	very	efficient	when	used	in	conjunction	with	sharing	services
            and	file	hosting	that	typically	rely	on	object	storage.	The	encryption
          engine	 is	 generally	 implemented	 at	 the	 client	 side	 and	 will	 preserve
          the	format	of	the	original	file.

Database	Encryption
There	are	following	database	encryption:

          Application-level	Encryption	:	The	encryption	engine	resides	at	the
          application	that	is	using	the	database.
          File-level	 Encryption	 :	 Database	 servers	 reside	 on	 volume	 storage.
          For	 this	 deployment,	 we	 are	 encrypting	 the	 folder	 or	 volume	 of	 the
          database,	 with	 the	 encryption	 engine	 and	 keys	 residing	 on	 the
          instances	 attached	 to	 the	 volume.	 External	 file	 system	 encryption
          secures	 from	 lost	 backup,	 media	 theft,	 and	 external	 attack	 but	 not
          secure	 against	 attacks	 with	 access	 to	 the	 application	 layer,	 the
          instances	OS,	or	the	database	itself.
          Transparent	Encryption	 :	 Various	 Database	 Management	 Systems
          (DBMS)	contain	the	ability	to	encrypt	the	entire	database	or	specific
          portions,	such	as	tables.	The	encryption	engine	resides	within	the	DB,
          and	 it	 is	 transparent	 to	 the	 application.	 Keys	 typically	 reside	 within
          the	 instance,	 although	 processing	 and	 managing	 them	 might	 be
          offload	 to	 an	 external	 Key	 Management	 System	 (KMS).	 This
          encryption	 can	 provide	 sufficient	 protection	 from	 backup	 system
          intrusions,	 media	 theft,	 and	 specific	 database	 and	 application	 level
          attacks.

Key	Management
Key	 management	 is	 the	 most	 challenging	 components	 of	 any	 encryption
implementation.	 Although	 new	 standards	 such	 as	 Key	 Management
Interoperability	Protocol	(KMIP)	are	protection	keys,	emerging	and	appropriate
management	of	keys	are	still	the	most	difficult	tasks	you	will	need	to	engage	in
when	planning	cloud	data	security.
Common	challenges	with	key	management	are:

          Access	 to	 the	 keys:	 Best	 practices	 coupled	 with	 regulatory
          requirements	 might	 set	 particular	 criteria	 for	 key	 access,	 along	 with
          restricting	or	not	permitting	access	to	keys	by	cloud	Service	Provider
          employees	or	personnel.
          Replication	 and	 Backup:	 The	 nature	 of	 	 cloud	 results	 in	 data
          replication	 and	 backups	 across	 some	 different	 formats.	 This	 can
          impact	 the	 ability	 for	 long	 and	 short-term	 key	 management	 to	 be
          managed	and	maintained	adequately.
          Key	Storage:		 Secure	 storage	 for	 the	 keys	 is	 crucial	 to	 protect	 the
          data.	 In	 traditional	 environments,	 keys	 were	 able	 to	 be	 stored	 in
          secure	 dedicated	 hardware.	 This	 might	 not	 always	 be	 possible	 in
          cloud	environments.

Key	Management	Considerations
Considerations	when	planning	key	management	include:

          Lack	of	access	to	the	encryption	keys	will	result	in	a	lack	of	access	to
          the	data.
          Random	number	generation	must	conduct	as	a	trusted	process.
          Throughout	 the	 life	 cycle,	 cryptographic	 keys	 could	 never	 be
          transmitted	in	the	clean	environment	and	always	remain	in	a	“trusted”
          environment.
          Where	 possible,	 key	 management	 functions	 must	 be	 conducted
          separately	from	the	cloud	provider	to	enforce	separation	of	duties	and
          force	collusion	to	occur	if	unauthorized	data	access	is	attempted.
          When	 considering	 key	 management	 or	 key	 escrow	 “as	 a	 service,”
          carefully	plan	to	take	into	account	all	relevant	regulations,	laws,	and
          jurisdictional	requirements.
Note:	 Key	 escrow	 is	 an	 arrangement	 in	 which	 the	 keys	 required	 to	 decrypt
encrypted	 data	 are	 held	 in	 escrow	 so	 that,	 under	 desirable	 conditions,	 an
authorized	third	party	might	gain	access	to	those	keys.
Key	Storage	in	the	Cloud
It	is	generally	implemented	using	more	than	one	of	the	following	approaches:

            Externally	 Managed	 :	 In	 this	 approach,	 keys	 are	 maintained
            separately	 from	 the	 data	 and	 encryption	 engine.	 They	 can	 be	 on	 a
            similar	 cloud	 platform,	 internally	 within	 the	 organization,	 or	 on	 a
            different	cloud	platform.	The	actual	storage	can	be	a	separate	instance
            (hardened	especially	for	this	specific	task)	or	on	a	Hardware	Security
            Module	 (HSM).	 When	 implementing	 external	 key	 storage,	 consider
            how	 the	 key	 management	 system	 is	 integrated	 with	 the	 encryption
            engine	 and	 how	 the	 entire	 life	 cycle	 of	 key	 creation	 through	 to
            retirement	is	managed.
            Internally	 Managed:	 In	 this	 approach,	 the	 keys	 are	 stored	 on	 the
            application	 component	 or	 virtual	 machine	 that	 is	 also	 acting	 as	 the
            encryption	engine.	This	type	of	key	management	is	typically	used	in
            storage-level	 encryption,	 internal	 database	 encryption,	 or	 backup
            application	 encryption.	 This	 approach	 can	 be	 helpful	 for	 mitigating
            against	the	risks	associated	with	lost	media.
            Managed	 by	 a	 Third	 Party	 :	 This	 is	 when	 a	 trusted	 third	 party
            provides	 key	 escrow	 services.	 Key	 management	 providers	 use
            specifically	 developed	 secure	 infrastructure	 and	 integration	 services
            for	key	management.	You	should	evaluate	any	third-party	key	storage
            services	 provider	 that	 might	 be	 contracted	 by	 the	 organization	 to
            make	sure	that	the	risks	of	allowing	a	third	party	to	hold	encryption
            keys	are	well	understood	and	documented.

Key	Management	in	Software	Environments
Cloud	 Service	 Providers	 (CSP)	 secure	 keys	 using	 software-based	 solutions	 to
avoid	the	additional	cost	and	overhead	of	hardware-based	security	models.
Software-based	 key	 management	 solutions	 do	 not	 meet	 the	 physical	 security
requirements	 specified	 in	 the	 National	 Institute	 of	 Standards	 and	 Technology
(NIST)	 Federal	 Information	 Processing	 Standards	 Publication	 FIPS	 140-2	 or
140-3	specifications."	The	ability	for	software	to	provide	evidence	of	tampering
is	 unlikely.	 The	 lack	 of	 FIPS	 certification	 for	 encryption	 might	 be	 an	 issue	 for
U.S.	Federal	Government	agencies	and	other	organizations.
Masking
Data	 masking	 is	 the	 process	 of	 replacing,	 hiding,	 or	 omitting	 sensitive
information	 from	 a	 specific	 dataset.	 Data	 masking	 is	 also	 known	 as	 Data
Obfuscation.
Data	 masking	 is	 usually	 used	 to	 secure	 specific	 datasets	 such	 as	 PII	 or
commercially	 sensitive	 data	 or	 to	 comply	 with	 specific	 regulations	 such	 as
HIPAA	or	PCI-DSS	.
Data	 masking	 is	 also	 widely	 used	 for	 test	 platforms	 where	 suitable	 test	 data	 is
not	 available.	 Both	 techniques	 are	 usually	 applied	 when	 migrating,	 developing
testing	 or	 protecting	 production	 environments	 from	 threats	 such	 as	 data
exposure.
The	primary	methods	of	masking	data	are:
    Static	Masking                                Dynamic	masking
 A	 new	 copy	 of	 the     It	 referred	 to	 as	 "on-the-fly"	 masking,	 adds	 a	 layer	 of
 data	 is	 created	 with   masking	between	the	application	and	the	database.	The
 the	masked	values.	It     masking	 layer	 is	 responsible	 for	 masking	 the
 is	 usually	 effective    information	 in	 the	 database	 on	 the	 fly"	 when	 the
 when	 creating	 clean     presentation	 layer	 accesses	 it.	This	type	of	masking	is
 non-production            efficient	 when	 protecting	 production	 environments.	 It
 environments.             can	 hide	 the	 full	 credit	 card	 number	 from	 customer
                           service	 representatives,	 but	 the	 data	 remains	 available
                           for	processing.
                              Table	2-3:	Method	of	Masking	Data

Conventional	approaches	to	data	masking	include:

            Algorithmic	Substitution	:	The	value	is	replaced	with	an	algorithm
            generated	value	(this	usually	permits	for	two-way	substitution).
            Deletion	:	Uses	a	null	value	or	deletes	the	data.
            Masking	:	Uses	particular	characters	to	hide	certain	parts	of	the	data.
            Commonly	applies	to	credit	cards	data	formats:	XXXX	XXXX	XX65
            5432
            Random	Substitution:	The	value	is	replaced	with	a	random	value.
            Shuffle	:	Shuffles	different	values	from	the	dataset.	Commonly	from
            a	similar	column.

Tokenization
It	 was	 initially	 introduced	 by	 the	 Payment	 Card	 Industry	 (PCI)	 as	 a	 means	 to
secure	credit	card	information,	but	tokenization	is	now	used	to	protect	all	types
of	sensitive	data.
Tokenization	is	the	method	replacing	sensitive	data	with	a	unique	identification
code,	referred	to	as	a	token.	The	token	is	a	collection	of	random	values	with	the
form	and	shape	of	the	original	data	placeholder	and	mapped	back	to	the	original
data	by	the	tokenization	solution	or	application.
Tokenization	 is	 not	 encryption	 and	 presents	 different	 challenges	 and	 benefits.
Encryption	is	using	a	key	to	obfuscate	data,	while	tokenization	removes	the	data
entirely	from	the	database,	replacing	it	with	a	mechanism	to	identify	and	access
the	resources	.
Tokenization	 is	 used	 to	 protect	 the	 sensitive	 data	 in	 a	 protected,	 secure,	 or
regulated	environment
Tokenization	 can	 be	 implemented	 internally	 where	 there	 is	 a	 need	 for	 safe,
sensitive	data	internally	or	externally	using	a	tokenization	service.
Tokenization	can	assist	with:

            Complying	with	laws	or	regulations.
            Fewer	 risks	 of	 storing	 sensitive	 data	 and	 reducing	 attack	 vectors	 on
            that	data
            Reducing	the	cost	of	compliance

Emerging	Technologies
It	 often	 seems	 that	 the	 cloud	 and	 the	 technologies	 that	 make	 it	 possible	 are
evolving	in	multiple	directions,	all	at	once.	It	is	hard	to	keep	up	with	all	of	the
new	and	innovative	technology	solutions	that	are	being	implemented	across	the
cloud	landscape.
Bit	Splitting
Bit	 splitting	 typically	 involves	 splitting	 up	 and	 storing	 encrypted	 information
across	 different	 cloud	 storage	 services.	 Depending	 on	 how	 the	 bit-splitting
system	 is	 implemented,	 some	 or	 all	 the	 dataset	 are	 required	 to	 be	 available	 in
order	to	be	decrypted	and	read.
If	a	RAID	5	solution	is	used	as	part	of	the	implementation,	then	the	system	can
provide	 data	 redundancy	 as	 well	 as	 confidentiality	 protection,	 while	 ensuring
that	a	single	cloud	provider	does	not	have	access	to	the	entire	dataset.
Benefits:

            Bit	splitting	between	different	jurisdictions/	geographies	may	make	it
            harder	to	gain	access	to	the	complete	dataset	through	a	subpoena	and
            other	legal	processes.
            Improvements	to	data	security	relating	to	confidentiality.
            It	 can	 be	 scalable,	 might	 be	 incorporated	 into	 secured	 cloud	 storage
            API	technologies,	and	might	reduce	the	risk	of	vendor	lock-in.

Challenges

             The	 whole	 dataset	 may	 not	 be	 required	 to	 be	 used	 within	 the	 same
             geographies	 that	 the	 cloud	 provider	 stores	 and	 processes	 the	 bits
             within,	leading	to	the	need	to	ensure	data	security	on	the	wire	as	part
             of	the	security	architecture	for	the	system.
             Processing	and	re-processing	the	information	to	encrypt	and	decrypt
             the	bits	is	a	CPU-intensive	activity.
             Storage	requirements	and	costs	are	usually	higher	with	a	bit	splitting
             system.	Depending	on	the	implementation,	bit	splitting	can	generate
             availability	risks,	since	all	parts	of	the	data	may	need	to	be	available
             when	decrypting	the	information.
Bit	 splitting	 can	 use	 different	 methods,	 a	 large	 amount	 of	 which	 is	 based	 on
"secret	sharing"	cryptographic	algorithms:

           Secret	 Sharing	 Made	 Short	 (SSMS)	 :	 Uses	 a	 three-phase	 process-
           encryption	 of	 information;	 use	 of	 Information	 Dispersal	 Algorithm
           (IDA),	 which	 is	 designed	 to	 split	 the	 data	 using	 care	 coding	 into
           fragments	efficiently;	then	splitting	the	encryption	key	itself	using	the
           secret	sharing	algorithm.
           All-or-Nothing	 Transform	 with	 Reed-Solomon	 (AONT-RS)	 :
           Integrates	the	AONT	and	remove	or	delete	the	coding.	This	method
           initially	 encrypts	 and	 transforms	 the	 information	 and	 the	 encryption
           key	 into	 blocks	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 the	 information	 cannot	 be
           recovered	 without	 using	 all	 the	 blocks,	 and	 then	 it	 uses	 the	 IDA	 to
           splitting	the	blocks	into	many	shares	that	are	distributed	to	different
           cloud	storage	services	(As	similar	as	in	SSMS).
Redundant	 Array	 of	 Independent	 Disks	 (RAID):	 RAID	 storage	 uses	 many
disks	to	provide	fault	tolerance,	to	improve	overall	performance,	and	to	increase
storage	capacity	in	a	system.	It	has	many	standard	levels,	and	Level	5	is	block
interleaved	distributed	parity.
Subpoena	:	It	is	a	legally	binding	order	for	the	delivery	of	evidence.
Homomorphic	Encryption
This	type	of	encryption	enables	processing	of	encrypted	data	without	the	need	to
decrypt	the	data.	It	allows	the	cloud	customer	to	upload	data	to	a	Cloud	Service
Provider	(CSP)	for	processing	without	the	requirement	to	decipher	the	data	first.
The	 advantages	 of	 homomorphic	 encryption	 are	 sizeable,	 with	 Cloud-based
services	benefitting	most,	as	it	enables	organizations	to	protect	data	in	the	Cloud
for	processing	while	eliminating	most	confidentiality	concerns.
Note	that	homomorphic	encryption	is	a	developing	area	and	does	not	represent	a
mature	 offering	 for	 most	 use	 cases.	 Many	 of	 the	 current	 implementations
represent	“partial”	implementations	of	homomorphic	encryption;	however,	these
are	typically	limited	to	particular	use	cases	involving	small	amounts	or	volumes
of	data.
Data	Discovery	and	Classification	Technologies
Data	Discovery
It	 is	 a	 departure	 from	 traditional	 business	 intelligence.	 In	 that	 it	 emphasizes
interactive,	 visual	 analytics	 rather	 than	 static	 reporting.	 The	 goal	 of	 data
discovery	 is	 to	 work	 with	 and	 enable	 people	 to	 use	 their	 intuition	 to	 find
meaningful	 and	 essential	 information	 in	 data.	 This	 process	 usually	 consists	 of
asking	questions	of	the	data	in	some	way,	seeing	results	visually,	and	refining	the
questions.
Contrast	this	with	the	traditional	approach,	which	is	for	information	consumers
to	ask	questions,	which	causes	reports	to	be	developed,	which	are	then	fed	to	the
consumer,	 which	 may	 generate	 more	 questions,	 which	 will	 generate	 more
reports.
Data	Discovery	Methodologies
Developing	 companies	 consider	 data	 to	 be	 strategic	 assets	 and	 understand	 its
importance	to	drive	innovation,	differentiation,	and	growth.	However,	leveraging
data	and	transforming	it	into	the	real	business	value	requires	a	holistic	approach
to	 business	 intelligence	 and	 analytics.	 This	 means	 going	 beyond	 the	 scope	 of
various	data	visualization	tools,	and	it's	dramatically	different	from	the	Business
Intelligence	(BI)	of	recent	years.
These	 trends	 are	 driving	 the	 continuing	 evolution	 of	 the	 data	 discovery	 in	 the
organizations	and	the	cloud:
Agile	Analytics	and	Agile	Business	Intelligence:
Business	intelligence	teams	and	data	scientists	are	adopting	more	agile,	iterative
methods	 of	 turning	 data	 into	 business	 value.	 They	 perform	 data	 discovery
processes	more	often	and	in	ways	that	are	more	diverse.
For	example:
When	 profiling	 new	datasets	for	 integration,	seeking	answers	to	new	questions
emerging	present	week	based	on	previous	week’s	new	analysis,	or	finding	alerts
about	emerging	trends	that	can	be	warranted	new	analysis	work	streams.
Big	Data:
This	type	of	projects,	data	discovery,	is	more	critical	and	challenging.	Not	only
the	 volume	 of	 data	 should	 be	 efficiently	 processed	 for	 discovery	 is	 more
significant,	but	the	diversity	of	source	and	formats	presents	challenges	that	make
various	 traditional	 methods	 of	 data	 discovery	 is	 fail.	 In	 a	 big	 data	 cases,
initiatives	also	involve	rapid	profiling	of	high-velocity	big	data	that	makes	data
profiling	are	complicated	and	less	feasible	using	existing	tool	sets	.
Real-time	Analytics:
The	 ongoing	 shift	 towards	 real-time	 analytics	 has	 created	 a	 new	 class	 of	 use
cases	 for	 data	 discovery.	 These	 use	 cases	 are	 valuable	 but	 need	 data	 discovery
tools	that	are	faster,	more	adaptive,	and	more	automated.
Different	Data	Discovery	Techniques:
Data	 discovery	 tools	 differ	 by	 technique	 and	 data	 matching	 abilities.	 Assume
you	wanted	to	find	credit	card	numbers.	Data	discovery	tools	for	databases	use	a
couple	of	methods	to	find	and	then	identify	information.	Most	use	unique	login
credentials	to	scan	internal	database	structures,	itemize	tables	and	columns,	and
then	 analyze	 what	 was	 found.	 There	 are	 three	 basic	 analysis	 methods	 are
employed:

     Content	analysis                  Metadata                        Labels

                                                             When	data	elements	are
                                                               joined	with	a	tag	that
                                                              describes	the	data,	this
                                                             can	be	completed	at	the
 In	this	form	of	analysis,
                                This	is	data	that              same	time	the	data	is
   we	examine	the	data
                            describes	itself,	and	all         created,	or	tags	can	be
    itself	by	employing
                           relational	databases	store            added	over	time	to
     pattern	matching,
                            metadata	that	describes              provide	additional
    hashing,	statistical,
                               tables	and	column                   references	and
  lexical,	or	other	forms
                                   attributes.               information	to	describe
  of	probability	analysis
                                                                the	data.	In	multiple
                                                             ways,	it	is	just	similar	to
                                                               metadata	but	slightly
                                                                     less	formal.

      Credit	Card
        Example:                                                   Example:
    When	we	search	a           Credit	Card	Example:             Some	relational
 number	that	looks	like                                        database	platforms
                                 We	would	examine
 a	credit	card	number,	a                                     provide	mechanisms	to
                                column	attributes	to
  standard	method	is	to                                        create	data	labels.
                               determine	whether	the
    perform	a	LUHN                                           However,	this	method	is
                               name	of	the	column	or
  check	on	the	number                                        more	usually	used	with
  itself.	This	is	a	simple      the	size	and	data	type,                 flat	files,	becoming
    numeric	checksum           looks	like	a	credit	card               increasingly	useful	as
    used	by	credit	card       number.	If	a	column	is	a                 more	firms	move	to
 companies	to	verify	if	a      16-digit	number	or	the                  Indexed	Sequential
 number	of	a	credit	card       name	is	something	like               Access	Method	(ISAM)
 is	valid.	If	the	number,     “Credit	Card”	or	“CC#,”                or	quasi-relational	data
 we	discover	passes	the           then	we	have	a	high                     storage,	such	as
 LUHN	check,	then	it	is        possibility	of	a	match.               Amazon’s	SimpleDB	,
  a	very	high	possibility             Moreover,	the                  to	handle	fast-growing
        that	we	have             effectiveness	of	each                datasets.	This	form	of
 discovered	a	credit	card           product	will	vary               discovery	is	same	as	to	a
      number.	Content          depending	on	how	well                  Google	search	,	with
   analysis	is	a	growing         the	analysis	rules	are               the	higher	number	of
   trend	and	one	that	is           implemented.	This                 same	labels,	the	greater
 being	used	successfully            remains	the	most                    the	possibility	of	a
  in	data	loss	prevention           common	analysis                  match.	Effectiveness	is
 (DLP)	and	web	content                 technique.                   dependent	on	the	use	of
     analysis	products.                                                         labels.


                             Table	2-4:	Data	Discovery	Techniques

LUHN:	 The	 LUHN	 algorithm,	 also	 called	 as	 the	 modulus	 10/mod	 10
algorithms,	 is	 a	 simple	 checksum	 formula	 used	 to	 validate	 a	 type	 of
identification	 numbers,	 such	 as	 IMEI	 numbers,	 credit	 card	 numbers,	 Canadian
Social	Insurance	Numbers.
ISAM	 :	 It	 is	 a	 method	 for	 creating,	 maintaining,	 and	 manipulating	 indexes	 of
key-fields	 extracted	 from	 random	 data	 file	 records	 to	 achieve	 fast	 recovery	 of
required	file	records.	IBM	developed	ISAM	for	mainframe	computers.
Problems	in	Data	Discovery:
There	are	following	problems	in	data	discovery:
Dashboards
In	the	dashboard,	these	are	the	following	problems	that	may	appear:

            Is	the	data	accurate	on	the	dashboard?
            Is	the	analytical	method	accurate?
            Most	importantly,	can	important	business	decisions	be	based	on	this
            information?
Users	modify	data	and	fields	with	no	audit	trail,	and	there	is	no	way	to	recognize
who	 changed	 what.	 This	 disconnect	 can	 lead	 to	 uneven	 insight	 and	 flawed
decisions,	increase	administration	costs,	and	inevitably	create	numerous	versions
of	the	truth.
Security	also	poses	issues	with	data	discovery	tools.	IT	staff	usually	have	little	or
no	 control	 over	 these	 types	 of	 solutions,	 which	 means	 they	 cannot	 protect
sensitive	 information.	 This	 can	 result	 in	 unencrypted	 data	 that	 is	 to	 be	 cached
locally	and	viewed	by	or	shared	with	unauthorized	users.
Hidden	Costs
A	typical	data	discovery	technique	is	to	put	all	of	the	data	into	server	RAM	to
take	advantage	of	the	fundamental	input/output	rate	improvements	over	the	disk.
Poor	Data	Quality
Data	 visualization	 tools	 are	 only	 as	 good	 as	 the	 information	 that	 is	 inputted.	 If
organizations	 want	 an	 enterprise-wide	 data	 governance	 policy,	 they	 might	 be
relying	 on	 incomplete	 or	 inaccurate	 information	 to	 create	 their	 charts	 and
dashboards.
Having	a	big	enterprise	data,	governance	policy	will	help	to	lower	the	risk	of	a
data	 breach.	 This	 consists	 defining	 rules	 and	 processes	 related	 to	 dashboard
creation,	 distribution,	 ownership,	 and	 usage;	 creating	 restrictions	 on	 who	 can
access	what	data;	and	make	sure	that	employee	follows	their	organizations’	data
usage	policies.
Data	Discovery	Challenges	in	the	Cloud
There	are	many	challenges	with	data	discovery	in	the	Cloud	that	are:
Accessing	Data:
Not	all	the	data	stored	in	the	Cloud	can	be	accessed	easily.	Sometimes	customers
do	not	have	the	necessary	administrative	rights	to	access	their	data	on	demand.
Long-term	data	can	be	visible	to	the	customer	but	not	accessible	to	download	in
acceptable	formats	to	use	offline.
The	 lack	 of	 data	 access	 might	 require	 specific	 configurations	 for	 the	 data
discovery	process,	which	in	turn	might	result	in	additional	time	and	expense	for
the	 organization.	 Data	 access	 requirements	 and	 capabilities	 can	 also	 change
during	 the	 data	 life	 cycle.	 Archiving,	 DR,	 and	 backup	 sets	 tend	 to	 offer	 less
control	and	flexibility	for	the	end	user.	Also,	metadata	such	as	indexes	and	labels
might	not	be	accessible.
Identifying	Data:
The	 ability	 to	 have	 data	 available	 on-demand,	 across	 almost	 any	 platform	 and
access	 mechanism,	 is	 an	 incredible	 advancement	 concerning	 end-user
productivity	 and	 collaboration.	 However,	 at	 the	 same	 time,	 the	 security
implications	 of	 this	 level	 of	 access	 confound	 both	 the	 enterprise	 and	 the	 CSP,
challenging	them	to	find	ways	to	secure	the	data	that	users	are	accessing	in	real
time,	from	many	locations,	across	many	platforms.
Not	knowing	where	data	is,	where	it	is	going,	and	where	it	will	be	at	any	given
moment	with	assurance	presents	significant	security	concerns	for	enterprise	data
and	the	confidentiality,	integrity,	and	availability	that	is	required	to	be	provided
by	the	Cloud	Security	Professional.
Maintenance	and	Preservation:
Ensure	 that	 preservation	 requirements	 are	 documented	 and	 supported	 by	 the
Cloud	provider	as	part	of	the	Service	Level	Agreement	(SLA).
If	the	time	required	for	preservation	exceeds	what	has	been	documented	in	the
provider	SLA,	the	data	might	be	lost.	Long-term	preservation	of	data	is	possible
and	 can	 be	 managed	 through	 an	 SLA	 with	 a	 provider	 as	 well.	 However,	 the
issues	of	data	granularity,	access,	and	visibility	all	could	need	to	be	considered
when	planning	for	data	discovery	against	long-term	stored	datasets.
Classification
Data	 classification	 as	 a	 part	 of	 the	 Information	 Life	 Cycle	 Management	 (ILM)
process	can	be	defined	as	a	tool	for	categorization	of	data	to	enable	or	help	the
organization	in	a	very	effective	way.
Data	 classification	 is	 a	 process	 that	 is	 recommended	 for	 implementing	 data
controls	such	as	encryption	and	DLP.	Data	classification	is	also	a	requirement	of
specific	regulations	and	standards,	such	as	ISO	27001	and	PCI-DSS.
Types	of	Data	Classification
There	 are	 different	 reasons	 for	 implementing	 data	 classification	 and	 therefore
many	different	parameters	and	categories	for	the	classified	data.	Also,	some	of
the	generally	used	classification	types	are:

            Business	constraints	or	contractual
            Context
            Data	type	(structure,	format)
            Jurisdiction	(of	domiciled,	origin)	and	other	legal	constraints
            The	obligation	for	retention	and	preservation
            Ownership
            Trust	levels	and	source	of	origin
            Criticality,	 sensitivity,	 and	 value	 (to	 the	 organization	 or	 the	 third
            party)
The	classification	categories	should	match	the	data	controls	to	be	used.
For	example
When	 using	 encryption,	 data	 can	 be	 classified	 as	 “not	 to	 encrypt”	 or	 “to
encrypt.”	For	DLP,	other	types	such	as	“limited	sharing”	and	“internal	use”	that
could	be	required	to	classify	the	data	correctly	.
Classification	and	labelling	relationship—data	labelling	is	commonly	referred	to
as	tagging	the	data	with	additional	information	such	as	creator,	department,	and
location.	 One	 of	 the	 labelling	 options	 can	 be	 classified	 according	 to	 a	 specific
criterion	that	is	top	secret,	secret,	and	classified.
Therefore,	 classification	 is	 typically	 considered	 as	 the	 part	 of	 data	 labeling.
Classification	can	be	manual	or	automatic	based	on	policy	rules.
Challenges	with	the	Cloud	Data
There	are	some	challenges	in	this	area	consists	of:

            Classification	Controls	:	This	could	be	administrative	(as	guidelines
            for	users	who	are	creating	the	data),	compensating,	or	preventive.
            Classification	Data	Transformation	:	This	could	be	placed	to	ensure
            that	the	relevant	metadata	or	property	can	survive	data	object	format
            changes	and	cloud	imports	or	exports.
            Data	 Creation	 :	 The	 CSP	 needs	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 proper	 security
            controls	are	in	place	so	that	whenever	data	is	modified	or	created	by
            anyone,	 they	 are	 forced	 to	 update	 or	 classify	 the	 data	 as	 part	 of	 the
            creation	or	modification	process.
            Metadata	:	Classifications	can	be	made	based	on	the	metadata	that	is
            attached	to	the	file,	such	as	location	or	owner.	This	metadata	could	be
            accessible	to	the	classification	process	to	make	the	proper	decisions.
            Reclassification	Consideration	:	Cloud	applications	should	support
            a	re-classification	process	based	on	the	data	life	cycle.	Sometimes	the
            new	classification	of	a	data	object	could	mean	enabling	new	controls
            such	as	retention	or	encryption	and	disposal.

Jurisdictional	Data	Protections	for	Personally	Identifiable
Information	(PII)
Data	Privacy	Acts
Privacy	and	Data	Protection	(P&DP)	issues	are	often	cited	as	a	concern	for	cloud
computing	 scenarios.	 The	 P&DP	 regulations	 affect	 not	 just	 those	 organization
whose	personal	data	is	processed	in	the	cloud	but	also	those	organizations	who
are	 using	 cloud	 computing	 to	 process	 others’	 data	 and	 indeed	 those	 providing
cloud	services	used	to	process	that	data.
The	world	wide	economy	is	suffering	an	information	explosion;	there	has	been
an	 enormous	 growth	 in	 the	 complexity	 and	 volume	 of	 global	 data	 services:
personal	 data	 is	 now	 vital	 source,	 and	 its	 privacy	 and	 protection	 have	 become
essential	aspects	to	enabling	the	acceptance	of	cloud	computing	services	.
The	 following	 ways	 in	 which	 different	 countries	 and	 regions	 around	 the	 world
are	addressing	the	varied	legal	issues	they	face.
Global	P&DP	Laws	in	the	United	States
There	 is	 no	 single	 federal	 law,	 privacy	 is	 recognized	 differently	 in	 individual
states	and	specific	circumstances.

            COPPA	:	Children's	Online	Privacy	Protection	Act	1998
            ECPA	and	SCA:	Electronic	Communication	Privacy	Act	and	Stored
            Communications	Act,	from	1986.	It	is	older	law	in	the	US	that	means
            to	limit	wiretaps.
            FERPA	:	Family	Educational	 Rights	and	Privacy,	to	protect	student
            data
            HIPAA	 :	 Health	 Insurance	 Portability	 and	 Accountability	 Act	 —
            Dept	Health	&	Human	Services
            GLBA	 :	 Gramm-Leach-Bliley	 Act,	 a.k.a.	 Financial	 Modernization
            Act	of	1999,	run	by	Federal	Deposit	Insurance	Corporation	(FDIC).
            SOX	 :	 Sarbanes-Oxley	 —	 created	 in	 response	 to	 Enron	 corporate
            corruption,	for	publicly-traded	companies
            Safe	Harbor	Program	:	Developed	by	Dept	of	Commerce	and	EU,
            now	discontinued,	replaced	by	EU-U.S.	Privacy	Shield.

Global	P&DP	Laws	in	the	European	Union	(UN)
Data	 Protection	 Directive	 95/46/EC	 :	 This	 act	 applies	 to	 paper	 records	 and
electronics	 but	 does	 not	 apply	 to	 purely	 household	 or	 personal	 activities,	 or	 in
operations	related	to	state	security	or	public	safety.
GDPR:	General	Data	Protection	Regulation,	it	is	updated	95/46/EU	to	include:

            Access	requests
           Consent
           Role	establishing	of	the	data	protection	officer
           Home	state	regulation
           Increased	sanctions
           Transfers	abroad
           The	right	to	be	forgotten

Global	P&DP	Laws	in	APEC
Asia-Pacific	Economic	Cooperation:	It	is	a	privacy	framework	that	makes	sure
the	 free	 flow	 of	 information	 and	 open	 conduct	 of	 business	 within	 the	 region
while	protecting	privacy	.
Difference	between	Applicable	Law	and	Jurisdiction:
For	P&DP,	it	is	particularly	important	to	distinguish	between	the	concepts	of:
             Applicable	law                                   Jurisdiction
                                                  This	typically	determines	the	ability
    This	determines	the	legal	regime
                                                 of	a	national	court	to	decide	a	case	or
     applicable	to	a	specific	matter.
                                                      enforce	a	judgment	or	order.
                          Table	2-5:	Applicable	Law	and	Jurisdiction

Implementation	of	Data	Discovery
The	 solutions	 provide	 an	 adequate	 foundation	 for	 useful	 application	 and
governance	for	any	of	the	P&DP	fulfillments.
Customer’s	Perspective
The	customer	role	of	data	controller	has	full	responsibility	for	compliance	with
the	 P&DP	 laws	 obligations;	 therefore,	 the	 implementation	 of	 data	 discovery
solutions	together	with	data	classification	techniques	provide	him	or	her	with	a
sound	basis	for	operatively	specifying	to	the	service	provider	the	requirements	to
be	 fulfilled	 and	 for	 performing	 effective	 periodic	 audit	 according	 to	 the
applicable	 P&DP	 laws,	 also	 for	 demonstrating,	 to	 the	 competent	 privacy
authorities,	his	due	accountability	according	to	the	applicable	P&DP	laws.
Service	Provider’s	Perspective:
The	service	providers,	in	the	role	of	data	processor,	have	to	implement	and	can
demonstrate	they	have	implemented	in	a	clear	and	objective	way	the	rules	and
the	security	measures	to	be	applied	in	the	processing	of	private	data	on	behalf	of
the	 controller;	 thus	 data	 discovery	 solutions	 jointly	 with	 data	 classification
techniques	provide	an	effective	enabler	factor	for	their	ability	to	comply	with	the
controller	P&DP	instructions.
Additionally,	the	service	provider	will	particularly	benefit	from	this	approach:

            Its	service	provider	responsibility	to	operatively	support	the	controller
            when	 a	 data	 subject	 exercises	 his/her	 rights.	 Thus,	 it	 is	 required
            information	about	which	data	is	processed	or	to	implement	actions	on
            this	data	(e.g.,	correct	or	destroy	the	data).
            For	 its	 duty	 to	 detect,	 promptly	 report	 to	 the	 controller,	 and
            adequately	 manage	 the	 personal	 data	 breaches	 concerning	 the
            applicable	P&DP	obligations.
            When	the	service	provider	has	to	support	the	controller	in	any	of	the
            P&DP	obligations	concerning	the	application	of	rules	or	prohibitions
            of	personal	data	transfer	through	many	countries.
            When	the	service	provider	involves	sub-service	providers,	in	order	to
            clearly	 trace	 and	 operatively	 transfer	 to	 clients.	 The	 P&DP
            requirements	 according	 to	 the	 process	 assigned	 by	 the	 service
            provider.

Classification	of	Discovered	Sensitive	Data
For	compliance	with	the	applicable	Privacy	and	Data	Protection	(P&DP),	laws
play	an	essential	part	in	the	adequate	control	of	the	elements	that	are	the	feeds
of		P&DP	fulfillments.	This	means	that	not	only	the	“nature”	of	the	data	could	be
traced	with	classification	but	its	relationship	to	the	P&DP	Act	in	which	the	data
itself	could	be	processed	as	well.
The	P&DP	fulfillments,	and	especially	the	security	measures	required	by	these
laws,	can	always	be	expressed	at	least	regarding	a	set	of	primary	entities:
The	Purpose	and	Scope	of	Processing:
It	 represents	 the	 main	 impression	 that	 effects	 the	 entire	 set	 of	 typical	 P&DP
fulfillments.
For	example
Processing	 for	 accounting	 and	 administrative	 purposes	 requires	 fewer
fulfillments	when	compared	with	the	processing	of	traffic	telephone	or	Internet
data	 for	 the	 purpose	 of	 mobile	 payment	 services,	 since	 the	 cluster	 of	 data
processed	 (personal	 data	 of	 the	 subscriber,	 his/her	 billing	 data,	 the	 kind	 of
purchased	 objects)	 assumes	 a	 more	 critical	 value	 for	 all	 the	 stakeholders
involved.	 The	 P&DP	 laws	 consequently	 require	 more	 obligations	 and	 a	 higher
level	of	protection.
Categories	of	Personal	Data	to	be	Processed:
Data	means	here	the	type	of	data	as	identified	for	a	P&DP	law,	and	usually,	it	is
entirely	different	from	the	“nature”	of	the	data,	that	is,	its	intrinsic	and	objective
value.	In	this	sense,	data	categories	include

            Personal	data
            Sensitive	data	(health,	political	belief,	religious	belief,	etc.)
            Biometric	data
            Telephone	or	Internet	data
            Categories	of	the	processing	to	be	performed

From	the	perspective	of	the	P&DP	laws,	the	processing	means	an	operation	or	a
set	 of	 combined	 operations	 that	 can	 be	 materially	 applied	 to	 data;	 therefore,	 in
this	sense	processing	can	be	one	or	more	of	the	following	operations:

             Collection
             Recording
             Organization
             Selection
             Retrieval
             Comparison
             Communication
             Dissemination
             Erasure
In	 the	 derivation	 of	 these,	 a	 secondary	 set	 of	 entities	 is	 relevant	 for	 P&DP
fulfillments:

            Data	location	allowed.
            According	 to	 the	 applicable	 P&DP	 laws,	 there	 are	 prohibitions	 or
            constraints	 to	 be	 observed,	 and	 this	 could	 be	 accurately	 reflected	 in
            the	classification	of	data	to	act	as	a	driver	in	allowing	or	blocking	the
            moving	of	data	from	one	location	to	another	one.

Categories	of	users	allowed
Accessibility	of	data	for	a	specific	category	of	users	is	another	essential	feature
for	the	P&DP	laws.
For	example
The	 role	 of	 the	 backup	 operator	 should	 not	 be	 able	 to	 read	 any	 data	 in	 the
system,	 even	 though	 the	 operator	 role	 will	 need	 to	 be	 able	 to	 interact	 with	 all
system	data	to	back	it	up.
Data-retention	constraints
The	majority	of	the	categories	of	data	processed	for	specific	scopes	and	purposes
must	 be	 retained	 for	 a	 determined	 period	 (and	 then	 erased	 or	 anonymized)
according	to	the	applicable	P&DP	laws.
For	example
Data-retention	 periods	 are	 to	 be	 respected	 for	 access	 logs	 concerning	 the
accesses	made	by	the	role	of	system	administrator,	and	there	are	data-retention
periods	to	be	respected	for	the	details	concerning	the	profiles	defined	from	the
“online	behavior”	of	Internet	users	for	marketing.	Once	the	retention	period	has
ended,	 the	 legal	 ground	 for	 retention	 of	 the	 data	 disappears,	 and	 therefore	 any
additional	processing	or	handling	of	the	data	becomes	unlawful.
Security	Measures	to	be	Ensured
The	 type	 of	 security	 measures	 can	 widely	 vary	 depending	 on	 the	 purpose	 and
data	to	be	processed.	Typically,	they	are	expressed	in	terms	of

            Accurate	 classification	 of	 the	 data	 regarding	 security	 measures	 will
            provide	the	basis	for	any	approach	of	control	based	on	data	leakage
            prevention	(DLP)	and	data-protection	processes.
            Necessary	 security	 measures	 to	 make	 sure	 a	 minimum	 level	 of
            security	regardless	of	the	type	of	data/purpose/processing
            Specific	measures	according	to	the	type	of	data/purpose/processing
            Measures	identified	regarding	output	from	a	risk	analysis	process,	to
            be	operated	by	the	Controller	or	processor	considering	the	risks	of	a
            specific	context.	It	may	be	technical	or	operational,	and	it	cannot	be
            mitigated	with	the	measures	of	the	previous	points.

Data	Breach	Constraints
Several	 P&DP	 laws	 around	 the	 world	 already	 provide	 for	 specific	 obligations
regarding	 a	 data	 breach.	 These	 obligations	 essentially	 require	 to	 do	 the
following:

            Notify	the	competent	DPA	within	tighter	time	limits	and	also	 notify
            some	specific	cases	set	forth	by	law,	the	data	subjects
            Follow	 a	 specific	 process	 of	 Incident	 Management,	 including
            activation	 of	 measures	 aimed	 at	 limiting	 the	 damages	 to	 the
            concerned	data	subjects
            Handle	a	secure	archive	concerning	the	occurred	data	breach
Therefore,	 data	 classification	 that	 can	 take	 into	 account	 the	 operational
requirements	 coming	 from	 the	 data	 breach	 constraints	 becomes	 essential,
especially	in	the	Cloud	services	context.
 Note:	 A	 Data	 Subjects	 is	 any	 person	 whose	 personal	 data	 is	 being	 collected,
 held	or	processed.
Status
As	a	consequence	of	events	such	as	a	data	breach,	data	might	be	left	in	a	specific
state	that	may	require	various	necessary	actions	or	a	state	where	specific	actions
are	 prohibited.	 The	 precise	 identification	 of	 this	 status	 regarding	 data
classification	might	be	used	to	direct	and	oversee	any	further	processing	of	the
data	according	to	the	applicable	laws.
Summary
It	provides	the	primary	input	entity	for	data	classification	about	P&DP.
 Sets             Input	Entities

                              P&DP	law
 Primary	Set                  Scope	and	purpose	of	the	processing
                              Categories	of	the	personal	data	to	be	processed
                              Categories	of	the	processing	to	be	performed

                              Data	location	allowed
                              Categories	of	users	allowed
 Secondary                    Data-retention	constraints
 Set                          Security	measures	to	be	ensured
                              Data	breach	constraints
                              Status
             Table	2-6	-	Main	Input	Entities	for	Data	Classification	for	P&DP	Purposes

Mapping	and	Definition	of	Controls
There	are	various	requirements	to	be	mapped	out	in	privacy	acts,	a	central	role
of	the	Cloud	Security	Professional	is	the	mapping	of	those	requirements	to	the
actual	security	controls	and	processes	in	place	with	both	the	application	and	the
Cloud	 environment	 under	 the	 responsibility	 of	 the	 Cloud	 provider.	 For	 large
applications	that	could	span	various	jurisdictions	and	privacy	act,	this	will	be	of
specific	importance.	The	Cloud	customer	and	Cloud	provider	will	need	to	work
together	 through	 proper	 contractual	 or	 SLA	 requirements	 to	 make	 sure
compliance	for	both	parties	regarding	the	requirements	for	regulatory	bodies	or
applicable	privacy	acts.
Application	of	Defined	Controls	for	PII	(in	consideration	of	customer’s	Data
Privacy	Acts)
The	 efficient	 application	 of	 the	 defined	 controls	 for	 the	 protection	 of	 PII	 is
generally	 affected	 by	 the	 cluster	 of	 providers	 or	 sub-providers	 involved	 in	 the
operation	of	specific	Cloud	service;	therefore,	any	attempt	to	provide	guidelines
for	this	can	be	made	only	at	a	general	level.
Since	the	application	of	data-protection	measures	has	the	ultimate	goal	to	fulfill
the	P&DP	laws	applicable	to	the	controller,	any	constraints	arising	from	specific
arrangements	 of	 a	 Cloud	 service	 operation	 will	 be	 made	 clear	 by	 the	 service
provider	to	avoid	any	consequences	for	unlawful	personal	data	processing.
For	example
About	 servers	 located	 across	 numerous	 countries,	 it	 could	 be	 challenging	 to
make	 sure	 the	 proper	 application	 of	 measures	 such	 as	 encryption	 for	 sensitive
data	on	all	systems.
Additionally,	the	service	providers	might	benefit	from	making	explicit	reference
to	 standardized	 frameworks	 of	 security	 controls	 expressly	 defined	 for	 Cloud
services	.
Cloud	Controls	Matrix	(CCM)
An	 essential	 and	 up-to-date	 security	 controls	 framework	 is	 addressed	 to	 the
Cloud	 community	 and	 stakeholders.	 A	 fundamental	 richness	 of	 the	 CCM	 is	 its
ability	to	provide	mapping	or	cross	relationships	is	widely	accepted	in	industries’
security	 standards,	 regulations,	 and	 controls	 frameworks	 such	 as	 the	 ISO
27001/27002,	ISACA’s	COBIT,	and	PCI-DSS	.
The	 CCM	 can	 be	 seen	 as	 an	 inventory	 of	 Cloud	 service	 security	 controls,
arranged	in	the	following	separate	security	domains:

            Application	and	Interface	Security

            Audit	Assurance	and	Compliance
            Business	Continuity	Management	and	Operational	Resilience
            Change	Control	and	Configuration	Management
            Data	Security	and	Information	Life	Cycle	Management
            Data	Center	Security
            Encryption	and	Key	Management
            Governance	and	Risk	Management
            Human	Resources
            Identity	and	Access	Management
            Infrastructure	and	Virtualization	Security
            Interoperability	and	Portability
            Mobile	Security
            Security	Incident	Management,	E-Discovery,	and	Cloud
            Supply	Chain	Management,	Transparency,	and	Accountability
            Threat	and	Vulnerability	Management
Although	 all	 the	 CCM	 security	 controls	 can	 be	 considered	 applicable	 in	 a
specific	 CS	 context,	 from	 the	 privacy	 and	 data-protection	 perspective,	 some	 of
them	have	greater	relevance	to	the	P&DP	fulfilments.
Therefore,	 the	 selection	 and	 implementation	 of	 controls	 for	 a	 specific	 Cloud
service	involving	processing	of	personal	data	will	be	performed:

            Within	 the	 context	 of	 information	 security	 managed	 system:	 this
            requires	at	least	the	identification	of	law	requirements,	risk	analysis,
            design	 and	 implementation	 of	 security	 policies,	 and	 related
            assessment	and	reviews.

Data	Rights	Management
Data	 right	 management	 is	 an	 extension	 of	 normal	 data	 protection,	 where
additional	 control	 and	 ACLs	 are	 placed	 on	 the	 data	 sets	 that	 require	 additional
permission	 or	 condition	 to	 access	 and	 use	 beyond	 just	 simple	 and	 traditional
security	controls.	This	is	encapsulated	with	the	concepts	of	Information	Right
Management	(IRM).
Data	 Rights	 Objectives	 (e.g.,	 provisioning,	 users	 and	 roles,	 role-based
access)
Information	 Rights	 Management	 (IRM)	 is	 not	 only	 the	 use	 of	 standard
encryption	technologies	to	provide	confidentiality	for	data;	it	also	provides	use
cases	and	features	as	well:
IRM	adds	a	layer	of	access	controls	on	top	of	the	document	and	data	object.	The
Access	 Control	 List	 (ACL)	 determines	 who	 can	 open	 the	 document	 and	 what
they	 can	 do	 with	 it	 and	 provides	 granularity	 that	 flows	 down	 to	 copying,
printing,	 saving,	 and	 similar	 options.	 Because	 IRM	 contains	 ACLs	 and	 is
embedded	into	the	actual	file,	IRM	is	agnostic	to	the	location	of	the	data,	distinct
other	 preventative	 controls	 that	 depended	 on	 file	 location.	 IRM	 protection	 will
travel	with	the	file	and	provide	continuous	protection.
IRM	 is	 useful	 for	 securing	 sensitive	 organization	 content	 such	 as	 financial
documents.	 However,	 it	 is	 not	 securing	 to	 only	 documents;	 IRM	 can	 be
implemented	 to	 protect	 database	 columns,	 emails,	 web	 pages,	 and	 other	 data
objects.	 Also,	 it	 is	 useful	 for	 setting	 up	 a	 baseline	 for	 the	 default	 Information
Protection	Policy,	that	is,	all	documents	created	by	a	specific	user,	at	a	specific
location,	will	receive	a	specific	policy.
IRM	Cloud	Challenges
IRM	 requires	 that	 all	 users	 with	 data	 access	 should	 have	 matching	 encryption
keys.	 This	 requirement	 means	 robust	 identity	 infrastructure	 is	 necessary	 when
implementing	 IRM	 and	 the	 identity	 infrastructure	 have	 to	 expand	 to	 partners,
customers,	and	any	other	organizations	with	which	data	is	shared.

            IRM	 needs	 that	 each	 resource	 will	 be	 provisioned	 with	 an	 access
            policy.	 Each	 client	 accessing	 the	 resource	 will	 be	 provisioned	 with
            account	and	keys.	Provisions	could	be	made	securely	and	efficiently
            for	the	implementation	to	be	successful.	Automation	of	provisioning
            of	 IRM	 resource	 access	 policy	 can	 help	 in	 implementing	 that	 goal.
            Automated	policy	provision	can	be	based	on	file	location,	the	origin
            of	the	document	or	keywords.
            Access	to	resources	can	be	granted	per	user	bases	or	according	to	user
            role	using	an	RBAC	model	.	Provisioning	of	users	and	roles	must	be
            integrated	into	IRM	policies.	Since	in	IRM	most	of	the	classification
            is	 in	 the	 user	 responsibility,	 or	 based	 on	 automated	 policy,
            implementing	the	right	RBAC	policy	is	essential.
            Identity	 infrastructure	 can	 be	 implemented	 by	 creating	 a	 single
            location	 where	 users	 are	 created	 and	 authenticated	 or	 by	 creating
            federation	and	trust	between	different	repositories	of	user	identities	in
            different	 systems.	 They	 carefully	 consider	 the	 most	 appropriate
            method	based	on	the	security	requirements	of	the	data.
            Many	 IRM	 implementations	 will	 force	 end	 users	 to	 install	 a	 local
            IRM	agent	either	for	key	storage	or	for	authenticating	and	retrieving
            the	 IRM	 content.	 This	 feature	 might	 limit	 certain	 implementations
            that	 involve	 external	 users	 and	 must	 be	 considered	 as	 a	 part	 of	 the
            architecture	planning	before	deployment.
            When	reading	IRM-protected	files,	the	reader	software	must	be	IRM-
            aware	 Microsoft,	and	 Adobe	products	in	their	 latest	versions	have
            high-quality	 IRM	 support,	 but	 other	 readers	 might	 encounter
            compatibility	issues	and	have	to	be	tested	before	deployment.
            The	challenges	of	IRM	compatibility	with	different	operating	systems
            and	 different	 document	 readers	 increase	 when	 the	 data	 needs	 to	 be
            read	on	mobile	devices.	The	usage	of	mobile	platforms	and	IRM	have
            also	be	tested	carefully.
            IRM	 can	 integrate	 into	 other	 security	 controls	 such	 as	 DLP	 and
            documents	discovery	tools,	adding	extra	benefits.
Note:	 Data	 Rights	 Objectives	 like	 provisioning,	 users	 and	 roles,	 role-based
access	cover	in	the	IRM	Cloud	Challenges	section.
RBAC	Model:	Role-Based	Access	Control	(RBAC)	is	an	approach	to	restricting
system	access	to	authorized	users
Appropriate	Tools	(e.g.,	Issuing	and	replication	of	certificates)	Domain
Instead	 of	 focusing	 on	 specific	 software	 technologies	 or	 implementations	 for
IRM,	we	will	focus	on	the	common	attributes	and	features	of	those	tool	sets	and
what	they	can	provide	for	IRM	and	security:

            Auditing:	 IRM	 technologies	 allow	 for	 robust	 auditing	 of	 who	 has
            viewed	 information,	 also	 provide	 proof	 as	 to	 when	 and	 where	 they
            accessed	the	data.
            Expiration:		IRM	technologies	allow	for	the	expiration	of	access	to
            data.
            Policy	Control:	IRM	technologies	allow	an	organization	to	have	very
            granular	 and	 detailed	 control	 over	 how	 their	 data	 is	 accessed	 and
            used.
            Protection	 :	 With	 the	 implementation	 of	 IRM	 technologies	 and
            controls,	any	information	under	their	protection	is	always	protected.
            Support	 for	 Applications	 and	 Formats	 :	 Most	 IRM	 technologies
            support	 a	 range	 of	 data	 formats	 and	 integration	 with	 application
            packages	 commonly	 used	 within	 organizations,	 such	 as	 e-mail	 and
            various	office	suites.

Data	Retention,	Deletion,	and	Archiving	Policies
Protection	Data	policy	should	be	active	and	ensure	compliance	with	regulatory
or	 corporate	 compliance	 requirements,	 the	 concepts	 of	 retention,	 deletion,	 and
archiving	 are	 the	 most	 important.	 While	 other	 data	 policies	 and	 practices	 are
focused	on	the	security	and	production	usage	of	data.	These	three	concepts	are
typical	of	those	that	fulfill	regulatory	obligations,	which	can	come	in	the	form	of
legal	requirements	or	mandates	from	certification	or	industry	oversight	bodies.
Data	Retention	Policies
It	 is	 a	 policy	 that	 is	 established	 within	 an	 organization,	 a	 protocol	 for	 saving
information	for	regulatory	or	operational	compliance	needs.	The	goals	of	a	data-
retention	policy	are	to	save	most	crucial	information	for	reference	or	future	use,
to	organize	information	so	it	can	be	searched	and	accessed	later,	and	to	dispose
of	the	information	that	is	no	longer	needed.	The	policy	balances	the	regulation,
legal	 and	 business	 data	 archival	 requirements	 against	 data	 storage	 costs,
complexity,	and	other	data	considerations.
A	good	data-retention	policy	should	define	Retention	periods	,	Data	formats	,
Data	 security	 ,	 and	 Data-retrieval	 procedures	 for	 the	 enterprise	 .	 A	 data-
retention	policy	for	Cloud	services	must	contain	the	following	components:
Data	Classification
Data	 classification	 is	 based	 on	 business	 usage,	 compliance	 requirements,
locations,	ownership,	or	in	other	words,	its	“value.”	It	is	used	to	decide	about	the
proper	retention	procedures	for	the	enterprise	as	well.
Data	Mapping
Data	 mapping	 is	 a	 process	 of	 mapping	 all	 relevant	 data	 to	 understand	 data
formats,	 data	 locations	 (databases,	 network	 drives,	 object,	 or	 volume	 storage),
data	types	(structured	or	unstructured)	and	file	types.
Data-Retention	Procedure
For	each	data	category,	the	data-retention	procedures	must	be	followed	based	on
the	proper	data-retention	policy	that	governs	the	data	type.	How	long	the	data	is
to	 be	 saved,	 where	 (physical	 location,	 and	 jurisdiction),	 and	 how	 (which
technology	 and	 format)	 must	 all	 be	 spelled	 out	 in	 the	 policy	 and	 implemented
through	 the	 procedure.	 The	 procedure	 must	 include	 backup	 options,	 retrieval
requirements,	and	restoration	procedures,	as	required	and	necessary	for	the	data
types	is	to	be	managed	as	well	.
Monitoring	and	Maintenance
It	 is	 a	 procedure	 for	 ensuring	 that	 the	 entire	 process	 is	 working,	 including	 a
review	of	the	policy	and	requirements	to	ensure	that	there	are	no	changes.
Legislation,	Regulation,	and	Standard	Requirements
Data-retention	 considerations	 are	 entirely	 dependent	 on	 the	 data	 type	 and	 the
required	compliance	regimes	associated	with	it.
For	example
According	to	the	Basel	II	Accords	for	Financial	Data:
“The	retention	period	for	financial	transactions	must	be	between	three	to	seven
years,	while	according	to	the	PCI-DSS	version	3.0	Requirement	10	,	complete
access	to	network	resources	and	cardholder	data	and	credit	card	transaction	data
must	be	saved	for	at	least	a	year	with	at	least	three	months	available	online.”
 PCI-DSS	version	3.0	Requirement	10:	Clarified	the	intent	and	scope	of	daily
log	reviews.
Basel	II	:	Basel	II	is	the	second	of	the	Basel	Accords	offering	recommendations
on	 banking	 laws	 and	 regulations	 issued	 by	 the	 Basel	 Committee	 on	 Banking
Supervision.
Data	Deletion	Procedures	and	Mechanisms
The	primary	objective	of	data-protection	procedures	is	the	safe	disposal	of	data
once	 it	 is	 becomes	 useless.	 Failure	 to	 do	 so	 may	 result	 in	 data	 breaches	 and
compliance	 failures.	 Safe	 disposal	 procedures	 are	 designed	 to	 make	 sure	 that
there	are	no	files,	pointers,	or	data	remnants	left	behind	in	a	system	that	can	be
used	to	restore	the	original	data.
Reasons
A	policy	is	required	for	the	following	reasons:
1.Technical	and	Business	Requirements:
The	 business	 policy	 could	 require	 safe	 disposal	 of	 data.	 Process	 such	 as
encryption	 may	 require	 safe	 disposal	 of	 clear	 text	 data	 after	 creating	 the
encrypted	copy.
2.Legislation	or	Regulation:
Certain	regulations	and	laws	need	specific	degrees	of	safe	disposal	records.
Restoring	Data:
In	a	Cloud	environment,	restoring	deleted	data	is	not	an	easy	job	for	an	attacker
because	 Cloud-based	 data	 is	 distributed,	 usually	 is	 to	 be	 stored	 in	 a	 different
physical	location	with	unique	pointers.	Achieving	any	level	of	physical	access	to
the	media	is	a	challenge	.
On	the	other	hand,	it	is	still	an	actual	attack	vector	that	you	must	consider	when
evaluating	the	business	requirements	for	data	disposal.
Data	Disposal
To	save	a	deletion	of	electronic	records,	the	following	options	are	available:
Degaussing	:	Using	strong	magnets	for	scrambling	data	on	magnetic	media	such
as	tapes	or	hard	drive.
Overwriting	 :	 Writing	 random	 data	 over	 the	 actual	 data.	 The	 more	 times	 the
overwriting	 process	 occurs,	 the	 more	 thorough	 the	 destruction	 of	 the	 data	 is
considered	to	be.
Physical	 Destruction	 :	 Physically	 destroying	 the	 media	 by	 shredding,
incineration	or	other	means.
Encryption:	To	 use	 an	 encryption	 method	 to	 rewrite	 the	 data	 in	 an	 encrypted
format	to	make	it	unreadable	without	the	encryption	key.
Crypto-Shredding
Since	 the	 first	 three	 data	 disposal	 options	 are	 not	 entirely	 suitable	 for	 Cloud
computing,	 the	 only	 remaining	 suitable	 method	 is	 the	 encryption	 ofdata.	 The
process	 of	 encrypting	 the	 data	 to	 be	 disposed	 of.	 It	 is	 known	 as	 crypto
shredding	or	digital	shredding	.
Crypto-shredding	 is	 the	 process	 of	 deliberately	 destroying	 the	 encryption	 keys
that	were	used	to	encrypt	the	data	initially.	Since	the	data	is	encrypted	with	the
keys,	the	result	is	that	the	data	is	made	unreadable	(at	least	until	the	encryption
protocol	used	can	be	broken	or	is	capable	of	being	brute-forced	by	an	attacker).
To	perform	a	proper	crypto-shredding,	consider	the	following	points:

            The	data	must	be	completely	encrypted	without	leaving	any	clear	text
            remaining.
            The	 technique	 should	 ensure	 that	 the	 encryption	 keys	 are	 entirely
            unrecoverable.	 This	 can	 be	 hard	 to	 achieve	 if	 an	 external	 Cloud
            provider	or	other	third	party	manages	the	keys.

Data	Archiving	Procedures	and	Mechanisms
A	 process	 of	 identifying	 and	 moving	 inactive	 data	 out	 of	 existing	 Cloud
environment	 and	 into	 specialized	 long-term	 archival	 storage	 systems.	 Moving
inactive	data	out	of	Cloud	environment	optimizes	the	performance	of	resources
required	 there.	 Specialized	 archival	 systems	 store	 information	 more	 efficiently
and	provide	for	retrieval	when	needed.	A	policy	for	the	Cloud	must	contain	the
following	elements	:
Ability	to	perform	eDiscovery	and	Granular	Retrieval
Archive	data	can	be	subject	to	retrieval	according	to	specified	parameters	such
as	authors,	dates,	subject,	etc.	The	archiving	platform	must	provide	the	ability	to
do	eDiscovery	on	the	data	to	decide	which	data	must	be	retrieved.
Backup	and	Disaster	Recovery	Options:
All	the	needs	for	data	backup	and	restore	must	be	specified	and	documented.	It
is	essential	to	make	sure	that	the	business	continuity	and	disaster	recovery	plans
are	updated	and	aligned	with	whatever	procedures	are	implemented.
Data-Encryption	Procedure	:
Long-term	 data	 archiving	 with	 encryption	 could	 present	 a	 challenge	 for	 the
organization	 about	 key	 management.	 The	 encryption	 policy	 should	 consider
which	media	is	used,	the	restoral	options,	and	what	the	threats	are	that	should	be
mitigated	by	the	encryption.	Bad	key	management	could	lead	to	the	destruction
of	the	entire	archive	and	therefore	requires	attention.
Data	Format	and	Media	Type:
The	 format	of	 the	data	is	 a	significant	 consideration	 because	it	might	be	saved
for	 an	 extended	 period.	 Proprietary	 formats	 can	 modify,	 thus	 leaving	 data	 in	 a
useless	 state,	 so	 selecting	 the	 suitable	 format	 is	 most	 important.	 The	 similar
consideration	should	be	made	for	media	storage	types	as	well.
Data	Monitoring	Procedure:
Data	 stored	 in	 the	 Cloud	 tend	 to	 be	 replicated	 and	 moved.	 To	 maintain	 data
governance,	 it	 is	 necessary	 that	 all	 data	 access	 and	 movements	 be	 tracked	 and
logged	to	ensure	that	all	security	controls	are	to	appropriately	applied	throughout
the	data	life	cycle.
Data	Restoration	Procedure:
Data	 restoral	 testing	 must	 start	 periodically	 to	 ensure	 that	 the	 whole	 process	 is
working.	 The	 trial	 data	 restore	 must	 be	 made	 into	 an	 isolated	 environment	 to
lesser	 risks,	 such	 as	 restoring	 an	 old	 virus	 or	 accidentally	 overwriting	 existing
data.
 Inactive	data	is	data	that	does	not	"show	up"	in	your	file	tree,	also	known	as
your	 data	 structure	 or	 directory.	 Even	 though,	 this	 data	 resides	 on	 your	 hard
drive,	 it	 cannot	 be	 accessed	 by	 the	 operating	 system	 and	 therefore	 it	 can	 no
longer	be	maintained	by	it.
eDiscovery:	Electronic	discovery	is	a	method	in	which	electronic	data	is	sought,
secured,	 located,	 and	 explored	 with	 the	 intent	 of	 using	 it	 as	 evidence	 in	 a
criminal	or	civil	legal	case	.
Auditability,	Traceability,	and	Accountability	of	Data	Events
Events	 can	 be	 defined	 as	 things	 that	 happen.	 Not	 all	 events	 are	 important,	 but
many	are,	and	 being	able	to	 discern	 which	 events	you	need	 to	pay	attention	 to
can	be	a	challenge.
Definition	of	Event	Sources
Event	sources	are	monitored	to	provide	the	raw	data	on	events	that	will	be	used
to	clarify	a	system		to	be	monitored.	Event	attributes	are	used	to	identify	the	type
of	information	and	data	that	are	associated	with	an	event	that	you	would	want	to
capture	 for	 analysis.	 Depending	 on	 the	 number	 of	 events	 and	 attributes	 being
tracked,	 a	 large	 volume	 of	 data	 will	 be	 produced.	 This	 data	 will	 be	 stored	 and
then	 analyzed	 to	 uncover	 patterns	 of	 activity	 that	 might	 identify	 vulnerabilities
or	threats,	existing	in	the	system	that	have	to	be	addressed.
Security	Information	and	Event	Management	(SIEM)
SIEM	 systems	 are	 used	 to	 collect	 and	 analyze	 the	 data	 flow	 from	 several
systems,	allowing	for	the	automation	of	this	process.
Events	 are	 essential	 and	 available	 for	 capture,	 will	 vary	 and	 depend	 on	 the
particular	Cloud	service	model	employed.	These	include	IaaS,	PaaS,	and	SaaS.
IaaS	Event	Sources:
With	 an	 IaaS	 environment,	 Cloud	 Service	 Provider	 (CSP)	 usually	 will	 have
control	of,	and	access	to	event	and	diagnostic	data.	More	or	less	all	infrastructure
level	 logs	 will	 be	 visible	 to	 the	 CSP,	 along	 with	 detailed	 application	 logs.	 To
maintain	 a	 reasonable	 investigation	 auditability,	 traceability,	 and	 accountability
of	data,	it	is	suggested	that	you	specify	the	required	data	access	requirements	in
the	Cloud	Service	Level	Agreement	(SLA)	or	contract	with	the	CSP.
The	following	logs	could	be	essential	to	examine	at	some	point	but	could	not	be
available	by	default:

            API	access	logs
            Billing	records
            Hypervisor	and	host	operating	system	logs
            Logs	from	DNS	servers
            Management	portal	logs
            Network	or	Cloud	provider	perimeter	network	logs
            Packet	captures
            Virtual	machine	monitor	(VMM)	logs

PaaS	Event	Sources:
With	 a	 PaaS	 environment,	 the	 user	 usually	 will	 have	 control	 of,	 and	 access	 to
event	and	diagnostic	 data.	 A	 few	 infrastructure-level	logs	 will	be	 visible	to	the
CSP,	along	with	detailed	application	logs.	Because	the	applications	that	will	be
monitored	are	being	built	and	designed	by	the	organization	directly,	the	level	of
application	data	that	can	be	extracted	and	monitored	is	up	to	the	developers.
To	maintain	reasonable	investigation	auditability,	traceability,	and	accountability
of	data,	it	is	suggested	that	you	work	with	the	development	team	to	understand
the	 capabilities	 of	 the	 applications	 under	 development	 and	 to	 help	 design	 and
implement	 monitoring	 regimes	 that	 will	 maximize	 the	 organization’s	 visibility
into	the	applications	and	their	data	streams.
OWASP	recommends	the	following	application	events	is	logged:

            Authentication	successes	and	failures
            Authorization	(access	control)	failures
            Application	 errors	 and	 system	 events,	 such	 as	 syntax	 and	 runtime
            errors,	etc.
            Application	 and	 related	 systems	 start-ups,	 logging	 initialization
            (starting,	pausing	or	stopping)	and	shut-downs.
            Legal	 such	 as	 permissions	 for	 mobile	 phone	 capabilities,	 terms	 and
            conditions	etc.
            Output	validation	failures	such	as	invalid	data	encoding	and	database
            recordset	mismatch.
            Session	 management	 failures	 such	 as	 cookie	 session	 identification
            value	modification.
            Use	 of	 higher-risk	 functionality	 such	 as	 network	 connections,
            addition	or	deletion	of	users,	changes	to	privileges,	assigning	users	to
            tokens,	adding	or	deleting	tokens,	Data	Event	Logging,	etc.

SaaS	Event	Sources:
With	 a	 SaaS	 environment,	 the	 user	 will	 usually	 have	 minimal	 control	 of,	 and
access	to	event	and	diagnostic	data.	Most	of	the	infrastructure	level	logs	will	not
be	 visible	 to	 the	 CSP,	 and	 they	 will	 be	 limited	 to	 the	 high-level,	 application-
generated	 logs	 that	 are	 located	 on	 a	 client	 endpoint.	 In	 order	 to	 maintain	 a
reasonable	 investigation	 capabilities,	 auditability,	 and	 traceability	 of	 data,	 it	 is
suggested	 to	 identify	 required	 data	 access	 requirements	 in	 the	 Cloud	 SLA	 or
contract	with	the	CSP.
The	 following	 data	 sources	 play	 a	 significant	 role	 in	 event	 examination	 and
documentation:

            Application	server	logs
            Billing	records
           Database	logs
           Guest	operating	system	logs
           Host	access	logs
           Network	captures
           SaaS	portal	logs	and	Virtualization	platform	logs.
           Web	server	logs
 Note:	Raw	data,	also	known	as	primary	data,	is	data	(e.g.,	numbers,	instrument
 readings,	figures,	etc.)	collected	from	a	source.
Identity	Attribution	Requirement
To	 be	 able	 to	 perform	 efficient	 audits	 and	 examinations,	 the	 event	 log	 must
contain	as	much	as	possible	of	the	relevant	data	for	the	processes	that	are	being
examined	 as	 possible.	 OWASP	 recommends	 the	 following	 data	 event	 logging
and	event	attributes	to	be	integrated	into	event	data.
     When:                Where:           Who	(Any	user):              What:
                                           Source	address,
  Log	date	and                           including	the	user’s
                       Application
       time                                device/machine
                    identifiers,	such	as                            Type	of	event
  (international                         identifier,	user’s	IP
                     name	and	version
     format).                              address,	mobile
                                          telephone	number
                                                                    The	severity	of
 Event	date	and                             User	identity	(if
                       Application                                      the	event
    time.	The                                authenticated),
                     address	such	as                                (0=emergency,
   event	time                              including	the	user
                       port	number,                                    1=alert,	...,
  stamp	might                                 database	table
                       workstation                                7=debug),	(fatal,
 be	different	to                           primary	key	value,
                    identity,	and	local                             error,	warning,
   the	time	of                                username,	and
                     device	identifier                             info,	debug,	and
     logging,                                license	number
                                                                          trace)
                                                                  Security-relevant
                                                                   event	flag	(if	the
   Interaction      Service	name	and
                                                                  logs	contain	non-
    identifier          protocol
                                                                     security	event
                                                                        data	too)
                      Geolocation                                     Description
                   Window/page/forms,
                   such	as	entry	point
                      URL	and	HTTP
                           method
                       Code	location,
                       including	the
                     script	and	module
                            name
                         Table	2-7:	Shows	an	Identify	Attributes

Storage	and	Analysis	of	Data	Events
“A	process	to	maintain	and	safeguard	the	integrity	and	original	condition	of
the	potential	digital	evidence”	defined	by	ISO	27037:2012
With	 the	 volume	 of	 logs	 created	 and	 collected	 for	 any	 application	 or	 system,
there	 is	 a	 need	 for	 a	 method	 or	 technology	 to	 catalog	 and	 make	 those	 events
reportable	 or	 searchable.	 Without	 having	 a	 system	 in	 place	 to	 synthesize	 and
process	 the	 event	 data,	 there	 could	 mainly	 be	 a	 large	 amount	 of	 data	 collected
that	does	not	serve	any	meaningful	or	useful	purpose,	and	that	is	not	accessible
for	the	fulfillment	of	regulatory	and	auditing	requirements.
The	 most	 important	 techniques	 used	 for	 this	 type	 of	 operation	 is	 called	 a
Security	and	Information	Event	Management	(SIEM)	system.
Security	and	Information	Event	Management	(SIEM):
SIEM	 is	 a	 term	 for	 product	 services	 and	 software	 that	 merges	 Security
Information	Management	(SIM)	and	 Security	 Event	 Management	 (SEM)	.
SIEM	 technology	 provides	 real-time	 analysis	 of	 security	 alerts	 generated	 by
network	hardware	and	applications.




                     Figure	2-4	–	Security	and	Information	Event	Management

SIEM	is	sold	as	appliances,	software,	or	managed	services	and	is	also	used	to	log
security	data	and	generate	reports	for	compliance	purposes	.
The	 security	 management	 segment	 that	 deals	 with	 real-time	 monitoring,
correlation	of	events,	notifications,	and	console	views	is	called	Security	 Event
Management	 (SEM)	 .	 The	 second	 part	 provides	 analysis,	 long-term	 storage,
and	reporting	of	log	data.	It	iscalled		Security	Information	Management	(SIM)
.
SIEM	systems	will	usually	provide	the	following	capabilities:
Alerting
The	automated	analysis	of	correlated	events	and	production	of	alerts,	to	inform
recipients	of	instant	issues.	Alerting	can	be	to	a	dashboard	or	sent	through	third-
party	channels	such	as	email.
Correlation
Looking	 for	 linking	 events	 and	 common	 attributes	 together	 into	 meaningful
bundles.	This	technology	provides	the	ability	to	perform	a	variety	of	correlation
techniques	 to	 integrate	 different	 sources,	 to	 turn	 data	 into	 useful	 information.
Typically,	correlation	is	a	function	of	the	Security	Event	Management,	part	of
a	full	SIEM	solution	.
Compliance
Applications	can	be	employed	to	automate	the	gathering	of	auditing	processes,
compliance	 data,	 governance,	 and	 producing	 reports	 that	 adapt	 to	 existing
security.
Data	Aggregation
Log	 management	 aggregates	 data	 from	 numerous	 sources,	 including
applications,	 databases,	 network,	 security,	 servers,	 and	 providing	 the	 ability	 to
consolidate	monitored	data	to	help	avoid	missing	important	events.
Dashboards
Tools	 that	 can	 take	 event	 data	 and	 turn	 it	 into	 informational	 charts	 to	 assist	 in
seeing	patterns	or	identifying	activity	that	is	not	creating	a	standard	pattern.
Forensic	Analysis
The	ability	to	search	across	logs	on	different	nodes	and	periods	based	on	specific
criteria.	This	should	aggregate	log	information	in	your	head	or	having	to	search
through	thousands	of	logs.
Retention
Employing	 long-term	 storage	 of	 old	 data	 to	 facilitate	 correlation	 of	 data	 over
time	and	to	provide	the	retention	necessary	for	compliance	requirements.	Long-
term	log	data	retention	is	essential	in	forensic	examinations	as	it	is	unlikely	that
the	discovery	of	a	network	breach	being	at	the	time	of	its	action	.
Continuous	Optimizations
To	support	continuous	operations,	the	following	principles	have	to	be	adopted	as
part	of	the	security	operations	policies:
New	Event	Detection
The	objective	of	auditing	is	to	identify	new	information	security	events.	Policies
have	to	be	created	that	define	what	a	security	event	is	and	how	to	address	it.
Adding	New	Rules
Rules	are	built	to	permit	detection	of	new	events.	Rules	permit	for	the	mapping
of	expected	 values	 to	log	files	to	 detect	events.	 Mode	of	continuous	 operation,
rules	have	to	be	updated	to	address	new	risks.
Reduction	of	False	Positives
The	 continuous	 operations	 audit	 logging	 quality	 is	 reliant	 on	 the	 ability	 to
decrease	 over	 time	 the	 number	 of	 false	 positives	 to	 maintain	 operational
effectiveness.	This	requires	continuous	improvement	of	the	rule	set	in	use.
Chain	of	Custody
Chain	of	custody	is	the	protection	of	evidence	and	preservation	from	the	period
it	 is	 collected	 till	 the	 time	 it	 is	 presented	 in	 court.	 In	 order	 for	 evidence	 to	 be
considered	admissible	in	court,	documentation	should	exist	in	many	ways	such
as	collection,	condition,	possession,	transfer,	and	location.	Its	access	and	analysis
performed	on	 an	 item	 from	 acquisition	 through	eventual	final	disposition.	This
concept	is	referred	to	as	the	“chain	of	custody”	of	evidence.
Creating	a	verifiable	chain	of	custody	for	evidence	within	a	Cloud-computing
environment	 where	 there	 are	 several	 data	 centers	 spread	 across	 different
jurisdictions	can	become	challenging.	Sometimes,	the	only	way	to	provide	for	a
chain	 of	 custody	 is	 to	 include	 this	 provision	 in	 the	 service	 contract	 and	 make
sure	 that	 the	 Cloud	 provider	 will	 comply	 with	 requests	 relating	 to	 chain	 of
custody	issues.
Non-repudiation
Nonrepudiation	 is	 the	 ability	 to	 confirm	 the	 origin	 or	 authenticity	 of	 data	 to	 a
high	 degree	 of	 certainty.	 This	 usually	 is	 complete	 through	 hashing	 and	 digital
signatures,	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 data	 has	 not	 been	 changed	 from	 its	 actual	 form.
This	idea	plays	directly	into	and	complements	chain	of	custody	to	make	sure	the
integrity	and	validity	of	data	.
Summary:
In	this	chapter,	Cloud	data	security	covers	a	wide	range	of	areas	focused	on	the
concepts,	structures,	principles,	and	standards	used	to	monitor	and	secure	assets.
Also,	the	controls	used	to	apply	numerous	levels	of	availability,	confidentiality,
and	 integrity	 across	 IT	 services	 through	 the	 organization.	 Cloud	 Security
Professionals	focused	on	Cloud	security	need	to	use	and	apply	standards	to	make
sure	 that	 the	 systems	 under	 their	 protection	 are	 maintained	 and	 supported
correctly.
Security	 specialists	 understand	 the	 different	 security	 frameworks,	 standards.
They	adopt	best	practices	leveraged	by	numerous	methodologies	and	how	they
may	be	used	together	to	make	systems	stronger.	Information	security	governance
and	 risk	 management	 have	 enabled	 information	 technology	 to	 be	 used	 safely,
responsibly,	 and	 securely	 in	 environments	 like	 never	 before.	 The	 ability	 to
establish	strong	system	protections	based	on	standards	and	policy	and	to	assess
the	level	and	efficacy	of	that	protection	through	auditing	and	monitoring	is	vital
to	the	success	of	Cloud	computing	security.




                        Figure	2-5:	Mind	Map	of	Cloud	Data	Securit	y
Practice	Questions

    1.	 Which	of	the	following	are	storage	types	used	with	an	Infrastructure	as
        a	Service	(IaaS)	solution?

     a)		Volume	and	block
     b)		Structured	and	object
     c)		Unstructured	and	ephemeral
     d)		Volume	and	object

    2.	 Which	 of	 the	 following	 can	 be	 deployed	 to	 help	 make	 sure	 the
        confidentiality	of	data	in	the	cloud?	(Choose	two)

     a)			Encryption
     b)		Service	Level	Agreement(s)
     c)			Masking
     d)		Continuous	monitoring

    3.	 When	 using	 transparent	 encryption	 of	 a	 database,	 where	 does	 the
        encryption	engine	reside?

     a)		At	the	application	using	the	database
     b)		On	the	instance(s)	attached	to	the	volume
     c)		In	a	key	management	system
     d)		Within	the	database

    4.	 In	the	context	of	privacy	and	data	protection,	what	is	a	controller?

     a)	 	One	who	cannot	be	identified,	directly	or	indirectly,	in	particular	by
     reference	to	an	identification	number	or	other	factors	specific	to	his/her
     physical,	physiological,	mental,	economic,	cultural,	or	social	identity
     b)	 	 The	 natural	 or	 legal	 person,	 public	 authority,	 agency,	 or	 any	 other
     body	 which	 alone	 or	 jointly	 with	 others,	 determines	 the	 purposes	 and
     means	of	processing	of	personal	data
     c)		A	natural	or	legal	person,	public	authority,	agency,	or	any	other	body,
     which	processes	personal	data	on	behalf	of	the	customer.
     d)		None	of	the	above

    5.	 Which	of	the	following	are	common	capabilities	of	Information	Rights
   Management	solutions?

 a)	 	 Persistent	 protection,	 dynamic	 policy	 control,	 automatic	 expiration,
 continuous	 audit	 trail,	 and	 support	 for	 existing	 authentication
 infrastructure
 b)	 	 Persistent	 protection,	 static	 policy	 control,	 automatic	 expiration,
 continuous	 audit	 trail,	 and	 support	 for	 existing	 authentication
 infrastructure
 c)	 	 Persistent	 protection,	 dynamic	 policy	 control,	 manual	 expiration,
 continuous	 audit	 trail,	 and	 support	 for	 existing	 authentication
 infrastructure
 d)	 	 Persistent	 protection,	 dynamic	 policy	 control,	 automatic	 expiration,
 intermittent	 audit	 trail,	 and	 support	 for	 existing	 authentication
 infrastructure.

6.	 Which	 of	 the	 following	 methods	 for	 the	 safe	 disposal	 of	 electronic
    records	can	always	be	used	within	a	cloud	environment?

 a)		Physical	destruction
 b)			Encryption
 c)			Overwriting
 d)			Degaussing

7.	 What	 are	 the	 three	 things	 that	 you	 must	 understand	 before	 you	 can
    determine	 the	 necessary	 controls	 to	 deploy	 for	 data	 protection	 in	 a
    cloud	environment?

 a)		Management,	provisioning,	and	location
 b)		Function,	location,	and	actors
 c)		Actors,	policies,	and	procedures
 d)		Life	cycle,	function,	and	cost

8.	 Which	of	the	following	data	storage	types	are	used	with	a	Platform	as
    a	Service	(PaaS)	solution?

 a)		Raw	and	block
 b)		Structured	and	unstructured
 c)		Unstructured	and	ephemeral
 d)		Tabular	and	object
9.	 Where	 would	 the	 monitoring	 engine	 be	 deployed	 when	 using	 a
    network-based	data	loss	prevention	system?

 a)		On	a	user’s	workstation
 b)		In	the	storage	system
 c)		Near	the	gateway
 d)		On	a	VLAN

     10.	What	 are	 three	 analysis	 methods	 used	 with	 data	 discovery
   techniques?

 a)		Metadata,	labels,	and	content	analysis
 b)		Metadata,	structural	analysis,	and	labels
 c)		Statistical	analysis,	labels,	and	content	analysis
 d)		Bit	splitting,	labels,	and	content	analysis

    11.	What	is	the	Cloud	Security	Alliance	Cloud	Controls	Matrix?

 a)		A	set	of	regulatory	requirements	for	cloud	service	providers
 b)		An	inventory	of	cloud	service	security	controls	that	are	arranged	into
 separate	security	domains
 c)	 	 A	 set	 of	 software	 development	 life	 cycle	 requirements	 for	 cloud
 service	providers
 d)		An	inventory	of	cloud	service	security	controls	that	are	arranged	into
 a	hierarchy	of	security	domains

    12.	What	 are	 the	 four	 elements	 that	 a	 data	 retention	 policy	 should
   define?

 a)	 	 Retention	 periods,	 data	 access	 methods,	 data	 security,	 and	 data
 retrieval	procedures
 b)	 	 Retention	 periods,	 data	 formats,	 data	 security,	 and	 data	 destruction
 procedures
 c)	 	 Retention	 periods,	 data	 formats,	 data	 security,	 and	 data
 communication	procedures
 d)	 	 Retention	 periods,	 data	 formats,	 data	 security,	 and	 data	 retrieval
 procedures

    13.	To	 support	 continuous	 operations,	 which	 of	 the	 following
   principles	 have	 to	 be	 adopted	 as	 part	 of	 the	 security	 operations
  policies?

a)		Application	logging,	contract/authority	maintenance,	secure	disposal,
and	business	continuity	preparation
b)	 	 Audit	 logging,	 contract/authority	 maintenance,	 secure	 usage,	 and
incident	response	legal	preparation
c)	 	 Audit	 logging,	 contract/authority	 maintenance,	 secure	 disposal,	 and
incident	response	legal	preparation
d)		Transaction	logging,	contract/authority	maintenance,	secure	disposal,
and	disaster	recovery	preparation

    14.	Which	 of	 the	 following	 is	 NOT	 a	 type	 of	 storage	 used	 within	 a
  cloud	environment?

a)			Structured
b)			Volume
c)			Container
d)			Object

    15.	Which	 of	 the	 following	 logs	 could	 be	 exposed	 to	 a	 cloud
  customer	 in	 a	 Software	 as	 a	 Service	 environment,	 if	 the	 contract
  allows	it?

a)		Billing	records
b)		Management	plane	logs
c)		Network	captures
d)		Operating	system	logs

   16.	Where	 would	 the	 DLP	 solution	 be	 located	 for	 data-in-use
  monitoring?

a)		On	the	application	server
b)		On	the	user’s	device
c)		On	the	network	boundary
d)		Integrated	with	the	database	server

   17.	Which	of	the	following	is	NOT	a	feature	of	a	SIEM	solution?

a)			Monitoring
b)			Aggregation
c)			Alerting
d)			Dashboards

  18.	Which	 of	 the	 following	 law	 in	 the	 United	 States	 governs	 the
 protection	of	health	data?

a)			SOX
b)			HIPAA
c)			Dodd-Frank
d)			DACA

   19.	Which	of	the	following	is	NOT	a	key	feature	of	an	IRM	solution?

a)			Expiration
b)		Policy	control
c)		Chain	of	custody
d)			Auditing

  20.	Which	 cloud	 model	 gives	 responsibility	 of	 the	 physical
 environment	to	the	cloud	customer?

a)			IaaS
b)			PaaS
c)			SaaS
d)		None	of	the	above
Chapter	03:	Cloud	Platform	&	Infrastructure
Security
Cloud	Infrastructure	Components
Cloud	 infrastructure	 is	 composed	 of	 many	 components,	 each	 with	 their	 own
significance.	 These	 components	 include	 virtualization,	 physical	 environment,
network	and	communications,	compute,	storage	and	the	management	plane.
Physical	Environment
While	a	lay	person	may	think	that	data	being	“in	the	Cloud”	mean	that	it	is	in
some	 virtual	 “other	 dimension,”	 the	 Cloud	 has	 a	 physical	 environment.	 This
physical	 environment	 is	 designed	 considering	 lowest	 chances	 of	 failure,	 high
availability	 and	 security	 considerations	 to	 deploy	 a	 scalable,	 flexible,	 highly
available,	 secure	 and	 multi-tenant	 environment	 to	 be	 acceptable	 for	 Cloud
infrastructure.
Data	Center:
Basically,	 Data	 centers	 are	 the	 physical	 environment	 where	 the	 Cloud
infrastructure	resides.	Cloud	data	centers	are	designed	to	support	protect	security
and	 availability	 of	 customer’s	 data.	 There	 are	 many	 physical	 environment
characteristics	that	require	to	be	considered	such	as:

            Convenient	floor	space
            Convenient	rack	space/cages
            Expensive	hardware
            Network	connectivity
            Geographic	considerations
            Availability	of	electricity
            Natural	disaster	considerations
            Political	risks:	Civil	unrest,	rioting	and	so	forth.
Data	Center	Design:
Another	most	common	and	very	important	consideration	in	data	center	desgin	is
Redundancy.	 Data	 center	 designing	 	 mostly	 revolves	 around	 redundancy	 in	 its
design	considering	all	failures	should	be	replicated	eliminating	the	single	point
of	failure.	Multiple	backup	power	supplies,	independant	cooling	and	ventilation
units,	 Power	 Distribution	 Units	 (PDU),	 multiple	 network	 links,	 entrance	 and
emergency	exits		ensures	a	redundant	data	center	design.
External	redundancy:

           Power	feeds/lines
           Power	substations
           Generators
           Generators	fuel	tanks
           Network	circuits
           Building	access	points
           Cooling/chilling	infrastructure
Internal	Redundancy:

             Power	distribution	units
             Power	feeds	to	racks
             Cooling	chillers	and	units
             Networking
             Storage	units
             Physical	access	points

Network	and	Communications
As	we	know	data	centers	have	several	servers	running	for	client	services.	Data
centers	 requires	 high	 bandwidth	 for	 uploading	 and	 downloading	 data	 for	 its
servers	 to	 be	 readily	 available	 anytime.	 Therefore,	 requirement	 of	 reliable
network	 connection	 and	 smooth	 communication	 is	 a	 primary	 focus	 for	 data
center	 deployment.	 Clients	 and	 endpoints	 must	 have	 ease	 of	 access	 to	 their
respective	 applications	 running	 in	 a	 data	 center.	 Traffic	 filtering	 is	 another
important	 of	 network	 and	 communication	 where	 network	 administrator	 has	 to
filter-out	 all	 undesired	 traffic	 not	 only	 to	 avoid	 network	 congestion	 but	 also	 to
prevent	malicious	and	untrusted	traffic.	These	concerns	include:

              Rate	limiting
              Bandwidth	allocation
              Filtering
              Routing
              Software	defined	networking
Software-Defined	Networking:
The	 usage	 of	 Software-Defined	 Networking	 (SDN)	 is	 an	 essential	 aspect	 of
cloud	computing.	With	SDN,	the	decisions	concerning	where	network	traffic	is
filtered	 or	 sent	 and	 the	 real	 forwarding	 of	 traffic	 are	 totally	 isolated	 from	 each
other.	With	cloud	computing,	this	isolation	is	imperative	because	it	permits	the
administrators	of	the	cloud	network	to	rapidly	and	progressively	change	network
flows	 and	 resources	 depend	 on	 the	 current	 needs	 and	 requests	 of	 the	 cloud
customers.	with	the	level	of	access	provided	and	the	sorts	of	resources	accessible
to	 control,	 a	 high	 level	 of	 security	 requires	 to	 be	 attached	 to	 any	 SDN
implementation,	with	access	firmly	controlled	and	monitored	regularly.
Compute
A	cloud	server’s	computation	relies	on	the	quantity	of	CPUs	and	the	amount	of
RAM	 associated	 with	 the	 server.	 The	 ability	 to	 allocate	 these	 resources	 is	 an
essential	 concern	 to	 avoid	 resource	 exhaustion.	 Within	 a	 cloud	 environment,
considering	resource	pooling	and	multitenancy,	the	computing	abilities	become
increasingly	complex	in	both	planning	and	management.
These	three	factors	that	affect	resource	allocation:

             Reservations
             Limits
             Shares
Reservations:
When	 a	 shared	 resource	 in	 cloud	 is	 demanded	 by	 several	 consumers
concurrently	 and	 the	 resource	 is	 not	 capable	 to	 accommodate	 all	 cloud
consumers,	 this	 situation	 leads	 into	 a	 critical	 condition	 called	 resource
constraints.	Resource	constraint	condition	may	degrade	the	performance	or	result
into	unavailability	if	it	is	not	properly	planned	before	encounter.
Resource	 reservation	 is	 a	 solution	 which	 keeps	 the	 services	 available	 using
tenants.	 Reservation	 makes	 the	 resource	 exclusively	 available	 for	 a	 designated
cloud	customer	without	actually	sharing	the	resource.	Resource	reservation	helps
to	avoid	resource	constraints	and	resource	borrowing.
Limits:
Limits	 to	 implement	 most	 extreme	 usage	 of	 memory	 or	 processing	 by	 a	 cloud
customer.	These	limits	should	either	be	possible	at	a	virtual	machine	level	or	a
comprehensive	level	for	a	customer.	They	are	intended	to	ensure	that	huge	cloud
resources	 cannot	 be	 allocated	 or	 consumed	 by	 a	 single	 host	 or	 customer	 to	 the
burden	of	other	hosts	and	customers.	Along	with	cloud	computing	components
such	as	auto-scaling	and	on-demand	self-service,	limits	can	be	either	“hard”	or
“fixed,”	 but	 can	 also	 be	 adaptable	 and	 permitted	 to	 change	 dynamically.
Commonly,	when	limits	are	allowed	to	change,	dependent	on	current	conditions
and	utilizations,	it	is	done	by	“borrowing”	extra	resources	rather	than	making	an
actual	improvement	in	the	limits	themselves.
Shares:
The	concept	of	shares	is	another	important	feature	which	arbitrates	the	issue	of
resources	contention	 in	 cloud.	 As	we	know,	cloud	services	are	accommodating
too	many	requests	from	cloud	consumers.	This	massive	traffic	creates	contention
situation	and	the	actual	resource	may	become	unavailable.	Shares	prioritize	and
weighed	 against	 share	 values,	 higher	 the	 share	 value,	 larger	 the	 remaining
resource	is	allocated	to	the	user	during	contention	period.
Virtualization
The	 utilization	 of	 amazing	 host	 machines	 providing	 shared	 resource	 pools	 to
expand	the	number	of	guests	is	both	a	basic	explanation	of	virtualization	and	the
supporting	 of	 Cloud	 computing.	 In	 fact,	 Cloud	 computing	 would	 not	 be
conceivable	 without	 virtualization.	 The	 most	 convincing	 arguments	 for	 the
utilization	of	virtualization	are:

           Increasing	the	efficiency	and	agility	of	hardware	by	sharing	resources
           A	 reduction	 in	 personnel	 resourcing	 and	 maintenance,	 leading	 to
           easier	management
           Virtualization	 also	 allows	 the	 abstraction	 from	 the	 hardware	 via	 the
           use	of	a	hypervisor.
There	are	two	types	of	hypervisors	within	virtualization:

         1.	 Type	1
         2.	 Type	2
Type	 1	 hypervisors:	 Type	 1	 Hypervisor	 is	 native	 execution	 that	 runs	 tied
directly	 into	 the	 basic	 hardware.	 It	 also	 enables	 tighter	 security	 and	 controls
because	there	are	no	extra	applications	or	utilities	running	inside	the	hypervisor,
other	than	those	to	satisfy	its	intended	mission.
Type	2	hypervisors:	Type	2	hypervisor	varies	from	type	1	hypervisor	in	that	it
runs	 under	 a	 host	 operating	 system	 as	 opposed	 to	 directly	 tied	 into	 the	 basic
hardware	 of	 the	 virtual	 host	 servers.	 With	 this	 type	 of	 executions,	 additional
security	and	architecture	concerns	become	possibly	the	most	important	factor	as
the	 interaction	 between	 the	 operating	 system	 and	 the	 hypervisor	 turns	 into	 a
basic	connection.	It	implies	that	any	security	concerns	within	the	basic	operating
system	can	affect	the	hypervisor	as	well.
 Storage
Storage	in	Cloud	environment	typically	consists	of	spinning	hard	disk	drivers	or
solid-state	drivers	(SSD).	Requirement	of	redundancy	with	respect	to	storage	can
be	 fulfilled	 by	 grouping	 the	 disk	 drivers.	 For	 reliability,	 when	 storage	 is
performed	 on	 a	 disk	 drive,	 the	 method	 used	 is	 known	 as	 Redundant	 Array	 of
Inexpensive	Disks	(RAID).	Object	storage	is	a	prominently	used	storage	solution
offered	by	Cloud	service	providers.	The	redundancy	with	object	storage	comes
by	method	of	data	storage	across	different	object	storage	server.
Management	Plane
Cloud	management	planes	enable	administrators	to	remotely	deal	all	hosts	rather
than	 physically	 visiting	 each	 host	 server	 to	 install	 software	 or	 reboot/power	 on
said	hosts.	The	final	result	is	automated	control	tasks.	Administrator	can	control
the	whole	Cloud	infrastructure	through	the	management	plane.
Analyze	Risks	Associated	to	Cloud	Infrastructure
A	Cloud-based	system	should	be	managed	and	approached	as	other	outsourced
platforms,	 with	 the	 same	 types	 of	 concerns,	 risks,	 and	 audit/governance
prerequisties	as	an	external	hosting	environment.	Eventually	all	risks	related	to	a
Cloud	 infrastructure	 must	 be	 customized	 for	 their	 individual	 needs.	 Risks	 to
consider	include

            Policy	and	organization	Risks
            Loss	of	governance
            Provider	lock-in
            Compliance	challenges
            Provider	exit

Risk	Assessment/Analysis
A	 major	 risk	 in	 Cloud	 environment	 is	 sanitization	 of	 data.	 In	 a	 traditional	 data
center,	physical	media	can	be	destroyed	to	guarantee	data	destruction,	which	is
not	 possible	 in	 a	 Cloud	 environment,	 so	 concepts	 of	 overwriting	 and
cryptographic	erasure	are	highly	used.	Data	protection	is	the	security	of	system
images	 within	 a	 Cloud	 environment.	 The	 images	 themselves	 are	 just	 files	 on	 a
file	system	without	any	physical	partition	of	servers,	shared	with	the	possibility
of	 malware	 being	 injecting	 into	 an	 image	 even	 when	 it	 is	 not	 running,	 their
security	 becomes	 essential	 in	 a	 Cloud	 environment,	 where	 the	 Cloud	 provider
bears	sole	duty	for	assurance.
Cloud	 service	 providers	 have	 a	 generally	 huge	 innovation	 scale,	 which
influences	 risk.	 This	 one	 result	 relies	 upon	 the	 circumstance.	 considerations
include:
Larger	scale	platforms	require	more	technical	skill	to	manage
Shifting	control	of	techniceal	risks	towards	Cloud	service	provider
Consolidation	of	Cloud	and	IT	infrastructure	lead	to	consolidation	of
points	of	failure.
Cloud	Attack	Vectors
In	Cloud	Computing,	the	following	are	the	most	common	attacks	that	are	being
used	by	an	attacker	to	extract	sensitive	information	such	as	credentials	or	gaining
unauthorized	access.	Cloud	Computing	Attacks	include:	-

            Service	Hijacking	using	Social	Engineering	Attacks
            Session	Hijacking	using	XSS	Attack
            Domain	Name	System	(DNS)	Attack
            SQL	Injection	Attack
            Wrapping	Attack
            Service	Hijacking	using	Network	Sniffing
            Session	Hijacking	using	Session	Riding
            Side	Channel	Attack	or	Cross-guest	VM	Breaches
            Cryptanalysis
            Dos	/	DDoS	Attacks

Service	Hijacking	using	Social	Engineering	Attacks
Using	 Social	 Engineering	 techniques,	 the	 attacker	 may	 attempt	 to	 guess	 the
password.	 Social	 Engineering	 attacks	 result	 in	 unauthorized	 access	 exposing
sensitive	information	according	to	the	privilege	level	of	the	compromised	user.
Service	Hijacking	using	Network	Sniffing
Using	 Packet	 Sniffing	 tools	 by	 placing	 himself	 in	 the	 network,	 an	 attacker	 can
capture	 sensitive	 information	 such	 as	 passwords,	 session	 ID,	 cookies,	 and
another	web	service-related	information	such	as	UDDI,	SOAP,	and	WSDL
Session	Hijacking	using	XSS	Attack
By	 launching	 Cross-Site	 Scripting	 (XSS),	 the	 attacker	 can	 steal	 cookies	 by
injecting	malicious	code	into	the	website.
Session	Hijacking	using	Session	Riding
Session	 riding	 is	 intended	 for	 session	 hijacking.	 An	 attacker	 may	 exploit	 it	 by
attempting	cross-site	request	forgery.	The	attacker	uses	currently	active	sessions
and	 rides	 on	 it	 by	 executing	 the	 requests	 such	 as	 modification	 of	 data,	 erasing
data,	online	transactions	and	password	change	by	tracking	the	user	to	click	on	a
malicious	link.
Domain	Name	System	(DNS)	Attacks
Domain	 Name	 System	 (DNS)	 attacks	 include	 DNS	 Poisoning,	 Cybersquatting,
Domain	hijacking,	and	Domain	Snipping.	An	attacker	may	attempt	to	spoof	by
poisoning	 the	 DNS	 server	 or	 cache	 to	 obtain	 credentials	 of	 internal	 users.
Domain	 Hijacking	 involves	 stealing	 Cloud	 service	 domain	 name.	 Similarly,
through	Phishing	frauds,	users	can	be	redirected	to	a	fake	website.
Side	Channel	Attacks	or	Cross-guest	VM	Breaches
Side	Channel	Attacks	or	Cross-Guest	VM	Breach	is	an	attack	that	requires	the
deployment	 of	 a	 malicious	 virtual	 machine	 on	 the	 same	 host.	 For	 example,
deploying	 a	 malicious	 VM	 co-resident	 of	 target	 VM	 will	 result	 in	 resource
sharing.	 Attacker	 can	 extract	 cryptographic	 keys.	 Similarly,	 attacker	 can	 also
exploit	 shared	 high-level	 cache	 memory	 to	 launch	 side	 channel	 attacks.	 A
malicious	insider	or	an	attacker	can	do	installation	by	impersonating	a	legitimate
user.
Similarly,	there	are	other	attackes	that	were	discussed	earlier,	are	also	vulnerable
to	 Cloud	 Computing	 such	 as	 SQL	 Injection	 attack	 (injecting	 malicious	 SQL
statements	 to	 extract	 information),	 Cryptanalysis	 Attacks	 (weak	 or	 obsolete
encryption),	 Wrapping	 Attack	 (duplicating	 the	 body	 of	 message),	 Denial-of-
Service	(DoS)	and	Distributed	Denial-of-Service	(DDoS)	Attacks.
Virtualization	Rısks
Virtualization	 can	 expand	 the	 security	 of	 IT	 because	 it	 is	 easier	 to	 set	 up	 the
correct	network	access	controls	between	machines.
Layered	 based	 approach	 in	 virtualization	 also	 raises	 some	 risks	 which	 are	 not
found	 in	 traditional	 servers	 based	 model.	 Compromising	 hypervisor	 layer	 will
also	 compromise	 the	 hosted	 virtual	 machines	 because	 hypervisor	 is	 an
authoritative	layer	over	the	hosts.	As	the	hypervisor	is	hosting	all	the	VMs	on	it,
it	 is	 a	 single	 point	 of	 failure	 resulting	 in	 denial	 of	 services.	 Any	 unauthorized
access	 to	 hypervisor	 can	 result	 into	 operational	 changes,	 access	 restrictions,
service	hijacking	and	much	more.	Similarly,	installation	of	obsolete	or	unpatched
or	 pre-configured	 virtual	 machines	 can	 also	 increase	 the	 risk	 in	 virtual
environment.	 Additionally,	 some	 virtual	 environments	 are	 over	 allocated
resulting	in	exhaust	of	resources.
Another	risk	of	server	virtualization	is	so	called	“Resource	Abuse	”,	where	one
guest	 (or	 tenant)	 is	 over-using	 the	 physical	 resources,	 in	 this	 manner	 keeping
alternate	 guests	 of	 the	 resources	 required	 to	 run	 their	 workloads.	 This	 is	 also
called	 the	 “noisy	 neighbour”	 issue.	 The	 hypervisor	 may	 have	 the	 capacity	 to
limit	 the	 over	 usage	 of	 a	 guest,	 but	 the	 administrator	 must	 consider	 about
restricting	the	large	number	of	visitors	on	a	single	host.	Few	guests	mean	you	are
not	saving	money	sufficiently.
            Numerous	guests	mean	you	risk	performance	issues.
With	 virtual	 servers,	 it	 becomes	 easy	 to	 clone,	 replicate,	 snapshot	 and	 stop
images.	 Although	 there	 are	 benefits	 of	 using	 virtual	 servers,	 but	 with	 a
probability	 of	 new	 risks.	 It	 can	 prompt	 enormous	 sprawl	 or	 proliferation	 of
server	 images	 that	 need	 to	 be	 stored	 somewhere.	 This	 can	 become	 difficult	 to
manage	and	represent	a	security	risk.
Counter-Measure	Strategies
Cloud	 computing	 faces	 the	 same	 difficulties	 as	 other	 networks	 and
infrastructures	that	use	the	internet,	there	are	numerous	ways	in	which	counter-
measures	 can	 avert	 the	 risks	 and	 threats	 that	 are	 manageable	 against	 cloud
security.
There	 are	 various	 counter-measures	 that	 can	 be	 executed	 in	 the	 cloud
infrastructure.	These	include:

             Access	management
             Centralized	directory
             Role-based	access	control
             Privileged	user	and	access	management
             User	access	certifications
             Identity	and	access	reporting
             Separation	of	duties
Other	 counter-measures	 are	 conventional	 in	 order	 to	 prevent	 the	 use	 of	 attacks
that	include	better	techniques	for	 transforming	sensitive	data	 over	public	cloud
deployments.	 More	 significantly	 cloud	 servers	 need	 improved	 data	 portability
and	 protection	 from	 external	 threats.	 This	 includes,	 creating	 an	 identity	 and
access	 management	 guidanceEncryption	 should	 be	 increasingly	 unique	 and
secure	 to	 protect	 files	 and	 other	 user	 data.	 Better	 encryptions	 permit	 for	 better
methods	in	storage,	provisions	for	security,	acquisitions	of	data	and	information
from	service	providers	and	vendors	that	support	in	regulations,	dimensions	and
opportunities	in		cloud.
Cloud	 environments	 are	 of	 high	 availability	 in	 nature	 with	 redundancy,	 rapid
elasticity,	 and	 auto-scaling.	 This	 architectural	 plan	 makes	 the	 maintenance,
patching,	 and	 isolation	 of	 hosts	 in	 case	 of	 a	 conceivable	 security	 breach	 much
easier	 because	 they	 can	 be	 removed	 from	 production	 pools.	 It	 also	 allows	 for
scanning,	 updating,	 and	 making	 configuration	 changes	 without	 impacting	 the
customer	and	users	of	a	system	or	application,	consequently	reducing	this	risk	to
availability.
Security	Controls
In	 order	 to	 protect	 a	 sound	 security	 policy	 and	 overall	 governance,	 the	 cloud
security	 professional	 must	 concentrate	 on	 some	 different	 area,	 as	 discussed	 in
this	section.
Physical	and	Environmental	Protection	
The	word	physical	and	environmental	security	refers	to	measures	taken	to	ensure
the	 safety	 and	 security	 of	 an	 infrastructure	 against	 natural	 disasters,
environmental	 effects,	 human	 attacks.	 While	 the	 access	 and	 technologies	 used
with	a	cloud	infrastructure	offer	a	single	set	of	services	to	customers,	covered	it
is	all	is	a	classic	data	center	model.	While	in	most	cases	on	a	much	larger	scale.
Because	a	cloud	is	a	system	that	is	accessible	over	broad	networking,	such	as	the
public	Internet,	physical	protection	should	also	extend	to	those	systems	that	are
used	to	access	the	cloud.
The	 physical	 assets	 in	 the	 concrete	 data	 center	 include	 servers,	 physical	 racks,
power	distribution	units,	cooling	units,	as	well	as	real	physical	facilities	and	the
auxiliary	systems	located	on	the	premises,	for	example,	power	conduits,	battery
backups,	 fuel	tanks,	generators.	Outside	the	Data	center	property	there	are	still
further	physical	devices	and	infrastructure	that	are	essential	to	the	cloud	security
professional.	These	include	the	power	and	network	conduits	that	the	data	center
depends	on,	as	well	as	the	endpoints	of	access	for	the	users	and	customers,	for
example,	workstation,	laptops,	mobile	devices.
Examples	of	relevant	controls	based	upon	one	or	more	regulations:

           Procedures	 and	 policies	 recognized	 for	 maintaining	 the	 safe	 and
           secure	 working	 environments:	 includes	 offices,	 facilities,	 rooms	 and
           secure	areas
           Restricted	 physical	 access	 of	 users	 and	 support	 personnel	 to
           information	assets	and	functions.
           Physical	 security	 perimeters	 such	 as	 fences,	 guards,	 barriers,	 walls
           and	so	on.
Protecting	Data	Center	Facilities
Data	 centers	 are	 essential	 to	 have	 a	 redundant,	 multi-layered	 way	 to	 deal	 with
using	 access	 control.	 Controls	 are	 requisite	 to	 be	 at	 the	 facilities	 level,	 the
computer	 floor	 level,	 and	 at	 the	 data	 center/facility	 staff	 level	 to	 guard	 against
risk.
System	and	Communication	Protection
Cloud	computer	run	on	physical	systems	which	use	services	need	protection.	A
number	of	these	services	are

            Hypervisor
            Volume	management
          Storage	controller
          IP	address	management
          Identity	service
          VM	image	service
          Management	databases
Other	considerations	for	system	and	communication	protections	are:

            Detecting	and	logging	of	security	events
            Responsibilities	 of	 protecting	 the	 Cloud:	 Cloud	 provider	 is
            responsible	for	underlying	software	and	hardware	regardless	of	cloud
            service	 model.	 Including	 knowing	 where	 the	 responsibility	 	 among
            cloud	service	provider	and	cloud	customer.
            Automation	of	configuration
As	with	any	application,	the	protection	of	data	is	a	major	concern,	and	different
techniques	are	required	for	various	conditions	of	data:
Data	at	rest:	The	major	protection	point	for	data	at	rest	is	the	through	the	use	of
encryption	techniques.
Data	in	transit/motion:	With	data	in	transit,	the	primary	methods	of	protection
are	 network	 isolation	 and	 the	 use	 of	 encrypted	 transport	 mechanisms	 such	 as
TLS
Data	in	use:	Data	in	use	in	protected	through	secure	API	calls	and	web	services
by	 means	 of	 the	 use	 of	 encryption,	 dedicated	 network	 pathways,	 or	 digital
signatures.
Virtualization	Systems	Protection
Virtualization	 forms	 the	 foundation	 of	 any	 cloud	 infrastructure	 and	 allows	 a
considerable	 lot	 of	 the	 feature	 that	 make	 cloud	 environment	 an	 interesting	 and
popular	technological	platform.	Given	the	essential	role	that	virtualization	plays,
the	components	 and	systems	that	make	up	the	 virtualized	infrastructure	are	the
most	obvious	and	attractive	focuses	for	attackers.
Virtualization	systems	protection	considers:

          Protecting	the	management	plane
          Isolation	of	the	management	network	from	other	networks
          Proper	 network	 design	 as	 well	 as	 properly	 operating	 components.
          such	as,	firewalls
          Use	of	trust	zones
The	 management	 plane,	 with	 full	 organize	 over	 the	 environment	 and	 exposed
APIs	 for	 allowing	 administrative	 tasks,	 is	 the	 most	 noticeable	 and	 essential
aspect	 to	 completely	 protect.	 It	 is	 comprised	 of	 a	 series	 of	 APIs,	 exposed
functions	calls	and	services,	as	well	as	web	portals	or	other	client	access	to	allow
its	use.
Maintaining	cloud	features	such	as	resiliency	and	auto-scaling,	the	main	function
of	 virtualization	 environment	 and	 infrastructure	 is	 to	 support	 and	 maintain
multitenancy.	 Allowing	 for	 multitenancy	 is	 a	 management	 task	 versus	 a
technological	 task.	 From	 a	 virtualization	 standpoint,	 virtual	 machines	 are	 only
host	 there	 is	 no	 dependency	 on	 what	 type	 of	 customer	 they	 contain.	 where	 the
significance	 of	 controls	 becomes	 an	 integral	 factor	 with	 multitenancy	 is	 the
requirements	 to	 keep	 tenants	 separate	 and	 protected	 from	 each	 other.	 This
includes	both	keeping	system	interaction	and	security	isolated	between	tenants,
but	also	resources	and	usage	to	guarantee	that	all	tenants	have	what	their	specific
systems	and	applications	need	to	meet	contractual	and	SLA	requirements.	While
logging	 and	 auditing	 are	 certainly	 important	 to	 security,	 these	 are	 reactionary
mechanisms	 and	 do	 not	 prevent	 an	 actual	 vulnerability	 from	 being	 exploited
initially.	Many	of	the	same	approaches	and	strategies	that	are	used	at	the	system
level	 in	 a	 traditional	 data	 center	 also	 are	 adapted	 for	 a	 virtualization
infrastructure	in	a	cloud	environment.	A	prime	example	is	the	establishment	of
trust	 zones,	 in	 the	 same	 manner	 a	 network	 separation	 between	 servers	 and
systems	would	be	implemented	as	a	defensive	layering	strategy.
Trust	 zones	 can	 be	 established	 and	 segmented	 using	 many	 different	 strategies.
The	 most	 common	 method	 involves	 separating	 out	 the	 different	 tiers	 of	 the
system	 architecture	 such	 as	 applications,	 data	 zones	 of	 the	 infrastructure.	 Trust
zones	 allows	 each	 zone	 to	 have	 its	 own	 protection	 and	 monitoring	 using	 tools
and	strategies	that	are	relevant	and	specific	to	its	actual	needs	and	functions.	It
allows	the	application	and	data	zones	to	be	isolated	from	external	network	access
and	traffic.
Management	 of	 Identification,	 Authentication	 and	 Authorization	 in	 Cloud
Infrastructure
Identity	 and	Access	Management	 innovation	can	be	utilized	to	capture,	record,
initiate,	 and	 manage	 user	 identities	 and	 their	 access	 permissions.	 All	 users	 are
authorized,	authenticated,	and	evaluated	according	to	policies	and	roles.
Cloud	 identity	 management	 is	 enhanced	 for	 integration	 across	 devices,
applications,	operating	systems,	and	resources.	This	is	basic	as	Cloud	migration
will	open	access	to	endpoints	external	of	enterprise	control	and	across	locations.
Cloud	identity	management	can	manage	user	access	to	WiFi	networks,	facilitates
authentication,	connect	Cloud	servers.
Authentication:
Authentication	 is	 the	 process	 for	 confirming	 the	 identity	 of	 the	 user.	 The
ordinary	 authentication	 process	 enables	 the	 system	 to	 identify	 the	 user
(username),	and	then	validate	their	identity	through	user-provided	evidence	such
as	password.	There	are	stronger	techniques	of	authenticating	the	user,	one-time
password,	 including	 x.509	 certificates,	 device	 fingerprinting.	 These	 can	 be
mutual	to	provide	a	stronger	combination	of	authentication	factors	.
Federated	identity	enables	a	user	to	access	an	application	in	one	domain,	such	as
Software	as	a	Service	(SaaS)	application,	using	the	authentication	that	occurred
in	another	domain,	such	as	corporate	Identity	Management	(IdM)	system.
Authorization:
Authorization	is	a	permission	or	privileges	assigned	to	a	user.	These	privileges
determine	either	the	user	is	allowed	to	perform	an	action	or	not.	These	privileges
are	usually	categorized	as	Roles.	These	roles	are	associated	to	the	user	defining
the	level	of	authorization.	Authorization	policy	manages	and	controls	the	access
of	 users	 regardless	 of	 location	 and	 other	 parameters.	 Authorization	 policy
evaluates	the	user	identity	(in	some	cases,	 additional	 attributes	are	required)	to
govern	and	restrict	the	user	under	its	authorization	level.
Audit	Mechanisms
The	 capacity	 for	 an	 enterprise	 to	 follow	 what	 applications	 users	 are	 accessing
(and	 when)	 is	 a	 concern	 from	 both,	 a	 security	 and	 regulatory	 viewpoint.
However,	this	has	become	a	serious	challenge	since	users	and	applications	are	no
longer	staying	within	the	enterprise	and	working	instead	within	cloud.	Multiple
failed	 authentication	 attempts	 of	 users	 accessing	 the	 resource	 will	 feature
potential	security	and	fraud	related	activities.	Account	lock-out	control	somehow
prevents	 multiple	 failed	 authentication	 request	 and	 brute	 forcing.	 	 Regulated
industries	 require	 audit	 trails	 to	 demonstrate	 that	 only	 authorized	 users	 have
accessed	 or	 attempted	 to	 access	 certain	 confidential	 systems.	 Federation
solutions	provide	the	central	gateway	for	users	accessing	cloud	apps,	computers
or	 mobile	 device.	 This	 central	 point	 of	 access	 also	 provides	 a	 central	 point	 of
reporting	and	auditing.
Plan	Disaster	Recovery	and	Business	Continuity	Management
Understanding	of	the	Cloud	Environment
It	 is	 major	 to	 understand	 the	 Cloud	 environment	 before	 developing	 a	 detailed
plan	 of	 business	 continuity	 and	 disaster	 recovery.	 Firstly,	 understand	 the
scenarios	of	Cloud	environment.

       1.	 On-premise	Cloud	as	BC/DR	Plan
   Organizations	 often	 identify	 and	 select	 new	 cloud	 vendors,	 in	 this	 scenario.
   Therefore,	 they	 must	 increase	 a	 firm	 understanding	 of	 the	 functional	 and
   resource	 abilities	 necessary	 for	 an	 effective	 recovery	 in	 the	 incident	 of	 a
   disaster.
   After	a	new	 cloud	provider	has	been	designated,	 a	suspicious	review	of	the
   Service	 Level	 Agreement	 (SLA)	 is	 required	 to	 ensure	 that	 all	 services,
   functionality	and	business	requirements	are	sufficiently	provided	for,	and	any
   assumptions	validated	.
   Consider	 the	 alteration	 of	 workloads	 on	 physical	 machines	 into	 virtual
   machines	and	how	rapidly	resources	can	be	made	accessible	when	needed

        2.	 Cloud	User,	Primary	BC/DR	Cloud	Provider
   The	enterprise	infrastructure	is	now	found	in	cloud,	in	this	scenario. 	The	risk
   	of	disaster	of	any	quantity	of	the	infrastructure,	for	example,	regional	failure,
   is	 mitigated.	 The	 business	 continuity	 strategy	 	 concentrations	 on	 service
   provisioning,	restoration	 	 or	 failover	 to	 another	 quantity	 of	 the	 same	 cloud
   provider	infrastructure.
   Whereas	 in	 this	 scenario,	 the	 concentration	 is	 located	 heavily	 on	 resources
   and	 abilities	 of	 the	 current	 cloud	 provider,	 one	 must	 carefully	 estimate	 the
   provider’s	 abilities,	 as	 the	 BC/DR	 strategy	 may	 need	 new	 resources	 and
   functionality,	 for	 example,	 load-balancing	 performance	 	 and	 bandwidth
   obtainability	among	the	redundant	facilities	of	the	cloud	provider.

        3.	 Cloud	User,	Alternative	BC/DR	Cloud	Provider
   This	scenario	is	similar	to	scenario	2	,	but	in	this	case,	service	restoration	is
   provided	 by	 a	 separate	 cloud	 provider.	 Therefore,	 the	 risk	 of	 whole	 cloud
   provider	failure	is	mitigated.
   In	 a	 situation	 when	 an	 organization	 selects	 a	 second	 cloud	 provider	 for
   service	 restoration,	 the	 speed	 of	 the	 transfer	 to	 the	 alternate	 cloud	 provider
   must	 be	 heavily	 evaluated.	 It	 is	 also	 possible	 that	 business	 users	 will	 feel
   the	influence	,	as	primary	and	secondary	cloud	provider	functionalities	may
   vary	greatly.	Consequently,	it	is	worthwhile	to	include	the	business	users	as
   soon	as	conceivable,	to	assess	the	residual	risks		to	their	business.
Understanding	of	the	Business	Requirements
There	are	common	concerns	and	business	requirements	particular	to	BC/DR	and
cloud,	including	legal	and	regulatory	considerations,	supply	chain	dependencies,
loss	of	governance,	and	location	risks,	when	developing	a	cloud-based	strategy
for	 BC/DR.	 Each	 of	 these	 concerns	 should	 be	 addressed	 when	 developing	 a
complete	strategy.	BC/DR	plan	should	be	included	in	following	items:

            Location	 and	 contact	 data	 of	 the	 business	 workforce,	 and	 business
            partners	as	well	as	third	party	providers
            Important	 assets	 that	 must	 to	 be	 protected	 and	 may	 must	 to	 be
            restored
            Recent	location	of	these	assets
            Network	connectivity	among	the	assets	and	sites	of	their	processing
            Data	and	functionality	repetition
            Failover	ability
            Security	and	access	concerns
Three	 big	 concepts	 to	 determine	 the	 business	 requirement	 of	 BC/DR,	 whether
effected	with	a	Cloud	hosting	model	or	traditional	data	center	model:
Recovery	 Point	 Objective	 (RPO):	 It	 is	 the	 amount	 of	 data	 that	 a	 company
would	require	to	maintain	and	recover	in	order	to	function	at	a	level	suitable	to
management.
Recovery	 Time	 Objective	 (RTO):	 The	 period	 of	 time	 within	 which
applications,	systems,	or	functions	must	be	recovered	in	the	event	of	a	disaster	to
the	point	where	management’s	objectives	for	BC/DR	are	happened.
Recovery	 Service	 Level	 (RSL):	Measures	 the	 percentage	 of	 the	 total,	 typical
production	service	level	that	needs	to	be	restored	to	meet	BCDR	purposes	in	the
instance	of	a	failure.
These	three	measures	are	all	important	in	making	a	decision	as	to	what	needs	to
be	 covered	 under	 the	 BCDR	 strategy,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 method	 to	 take	 when
considering	possible	BCDR	solutions.
RTO	 and	 RPO	 are	 the	 two	 important	 measures	 which	 are	 the	 main	 objectives
that	must	be	achieved	anytime	assessing	a	great	optimal	in	a	given	operating	and
capital	cost.
Understanding	of	the	Risks
With	 any	 BCDR	 plan,	 there	 are	 two	 sets	 of	 risks,	 those	 that	 require	 the
implementation	 of	 the	 plan	 in	 the	 first	 place,	 and	 those	 that	 are	 realized	 as	 a
result	of	the	plan	itself.
Many	risks	could	need	the	implementation	of	the	BC/DR	plan,	regardless	of	the
specific	 result	 the	 company	 has	 selected	 to	 take.	 These	 risks	 include	 the
following:

           Terrorists	attacks,	acts	of	war
           Natural	 disasters	 (earthquakes,	 hurricanes,	 floods,	 tornadoes,	 and	 so
           on)
           Equipment	failures
           Data	center	or	service	provider	failures	or	neglect
           Utility	disruptions	and	failures

Disaster	Recovery/Business	Continuity	strategy
It	is	time	to	create	the	BC/DR	plan,	the	implementation	steps	and	processes	for
it,	and	the	partial	testing	and	validation	plan.	The	continual	process	of	the	BCDR
strategy.
Define	Scope:
This	allows	security	to	clearly	define	the	roles	and	areas	of	concern	during	the
planning	 and	 design	 phase	 and	 to	 guarantee	 that	 proper	 risk	 assessments	 are
conducted	and	recognized	by	management	along	the	approach.
Gather	Requirements:
The	purposes	of	critical	systems	and	the	time	necessary	to	create	operations	in
the	incident	of	a	BC/DR	situation,	requires	the	analysis	and	application	of	threats
and	vulnerabilities	that	pose	a	risk	to	the	data	and	systems.	Laws,	policies,	public
relations,	Regulations	will	all	play	a	role	in	this	purpose	for	possible	solutions.
Analyze:
This	step	contains	a	thorough	analysis	of	the	current	production	hosting	location
for	the	application	or	system,	a	purpose	of	components	that	need	to	be	replicated
for	a	BCDR	situation,	and	the	areas	of	risk	related	with	that.	With	moving	to	a
new	 environment,	 new	 risks	 are	 certain	 due	 to	 changes	 in	 configurations	 and
support	 models,	 as	 well	 as	 new	 hosting	 staff	 who	 do	 not	 have	 a	 history	 or
understanding	with	the	application	or	system.	A	main	concern	with	moving	to	a
secondary	host	provider	for	BC/DR	reasons	is	whether	they	can	handle	the	load
and	 potentials	 for	 the	 system	 or	 application	 like	 the	 main	 production	 hosting
arrangement	does.
Assess	Risk:
In	IT	system,	regardless	of	hosting	circumstances	or	providers,	risk	assessments
are	 an	 ongoing	 and	 continual	 process	 to	 ensure	 security	 compliance	 and
regulatory	requirements.	List	of	the	main	risks	that	are	assessed:

            Load	capacity	at	the	BC/DR	site
            Legal	and	contractual	issues
            Migration	of	services
Design:
The	 design	 stage	 is	 where	 the	 real	 technical	 evaluation	 of	 BC/DR	 solutions	 is
considered	 and	 matched	 to	 the	 company’s	 requirements	 and	 policies.	 In	 many
features,	the	requirements	are	the	similar	as	what	obtaining	a	primary	production
hosting	arrangement	would	 entail.	Both	the	technical	and	support	requirements
need	 to	 be	 firmly	 recognised	 and	 articulated	 in	 SLAs,	 contracts,	 and	 policies.
This	contains	identifying	the	owner	and	the	hosting	environments	recognize	their
requirements	 and	 what	 preparations	 are	 necessary.	 Other	 completely	 important
parts	of	the	plan	are	how	the	testing	of	the	plan	will	be	conducted	and	how	the
restoration	 of	 services	 back	 to	 the	 steady	 manufacture	 state	 will	 be	 controlled
once	the	appropriate	time	arrives.
Creation/Implementation	of	the	Plan
The	real	production	applications	and	hosting	may	need	to	be	modified	to	provide
abilities	to	allow	the	BC/DR	plan	to	work.	This	can	contain	system	configuration
modifications	 to	 bring	 the	 two	 hosting	 environment,	 or	 providing	 data
replication	 and	 configuration	 replication	 services	 to	 the	 BC/DR	 host	 for
continual	 updating	 and	 maintaining	 regularity.	 From	 this	 point	 forward,	 the
BC/DR	planning	and	strategy	must	be	integrated	as	crucial	component	of	current
management	 of	 IT	 services	 and	 all	 change	 and	 configuration	 management
activities.
A	 formal	 approval	 test	 	 will	 convey	 the	 BC/DR	 into	 production	 mode.	 This
requires	integration	with	all	consistent	IT	service	processes.	Once	in	production
mode,	controls		should	be	in	place	to	guarantee	that	it	will	keep	working.
The	 BC/DR	 plan	 must	 be	 tested	 at	 planned	 intervals	 or	 upon	 important
organizational	or	environmental	changes.	An	untested	failover	is	improbable	to
end	well.	Ideally,	a	full-scale	exercise		will	understand	a	full	switch	over	to	the
DR	 platform.	 At	 the	 same	 period,	 this	 test	 must	 not	 pose	 a	 threat	 	 to	 the
production	user	population.	Risks	that	can	manifest	should	be	virtual	and	reacted
to	in	the	most	realistic	ways	conceivable.




               Figure	3-1:	Mind	Map	of	Cloud	Platform	and	Infrastructure	Security
Practice	Questions:

    1.	 What	are	the	components	of	cloud	infrastructure?

     a)			Compute
     b)		Network	and	communication
     c)			Virtualization
     d)		All	of	the	above
    2.	 Which	of	the	following	statement	that	are	designed	to	support	protect
        security	and	availability	of	customer	data?

     a)			Data	center
     b)			Storage
     c)			Management	plane
     d)		None	of	the	above
    3.	 Which	of	the	following	options,	provides	the	best	way	for	customers
        and	users	to	access	their	applications,	systems,	and	software	tools?

     a)			Virtualization
     b)			Management	plane
     c)		Network	and	communication
     d)		None	of	the	above
    4.	 What	is	the	acronym	of	SDN?

     a)			Secure-Defined	Networking
     b)			Software-designed	Networking
     c)			Software-Defined	Networking
     d)						None	of	the	above

    5.	 How	many	types	of	hypervisors	are	there	within	virtualization?

     a)			Two
     b)			Three
     c)			Four
     d)			Five
    6.	 What	 are	 the	 various	 counter-measures	 that	 can	 be	 executed	 in	 the
        cloud	infrastructure?
 a)		Separation	of	duties
 b)		Identity	and	access	reportin	g
 c)			Access	management
 d)		All	of	the	above
7.	 Which	of	the	following	options,	is	protected	through	secure	API	calls
    and	 web	 services	 by	 means	 of	 the	 use	 of	 encryption,	 dedicated
    network	pathways,	or	digital	signatures?

 a)		Data	at	rest
 b)		Data	in	use
 c)		Data	in	transit/motion
 d)		None	of	the	above
8.	 Which	 of	 the	 following	 virtualization	 systems	 protection
    consideration?

 a)		Isolation	of	the	management	network	from	other	network
 b)		Protecting	the	management	plane
 c)		Use	of	trust	zones
 d)		All	of	the	above
9.	 Which	of	the	following	can	be	utilized	to	capture,	record,	initiate,	and
    manage	user	identities	and	their	access	permissions?

 a)			Audit	mechanisms
 b)		Identity	and	access	management
 c)		Both	of	them
 d)		None	of	the	above
    10.	Which	of	the	following	process	for	confirming	the	identity	of	the
   user?

 a)			Authentication
 b)			Identity	management
 c)			Auditing
 d)		None	of	the	above
    11.	What	is	federated	Identity?

 a)	 	The	capacity	 for	an	enterprise	 to	 follow	what	 applications	users	 are
 accessing	 (and	when)	 is	 a	concern	from	both	 a	security	 and	regulatory
viewpoint.
b)	 	It	is	 enables	a	user	to	 access	an	application	in	one	domain,	 such	as
software	 as	 a	 Service	 (SaaS)	 application,	 using	 the	 authentication	 that
occurred	 in	 another	 domain,	 such	 as	 corporate	 Identity	 Management
(IdM)	system.
c)	 	It	is	enhanced	for	integration	across	devices,	applications,	operating
systems,	and	resources	.
d)		None	of	the	above
   12.	What	is	the	acronym	of	RSL?

a)		Recovery	Service	Level
b)		Recovery	System	level
c)		Redundancy	Service	level
d)		None	of	the	above
   13.	What	is	RPO?

a)	 	The	period	of	time	within	which	applications,	systems,	or	functions
must	 be	 recovered	 in	 the	 event	 of	 a	 disaster	 to	 the	 point	 where
management’s	objectives	for	BC/DR	are	happened.
b)		It	is	the	amount	of	data	that	a	company	would	require	to	maintain	and
recover	in	order	to	function	at	a	level	suitable	to	management.
c)		Measures	the	percentage	of	the	total,	typical	production	service	level
that	 needs	 to	 be	 restored	 to	 meet	 BCDR	 purposes	 in	 the	 instance	 of	 a
failure.
d)		None	of	the	above
  14.	Which	 of	 the	 following	 statement	 that	 period	 of	 time	 within
 which	 applications,	 systems,	 or	 functions	 must	 be	 recovered	 in	 the
 event	 of	 a	 disaster	 to	 the	 point	 where	 management’s	 objectives	 for
 BC/DR	are	happened?

a)			RPO
b)			RTO
c)			RSL
d)		None	of	the	above
   15.	What	are	the	Audit	Mechanisms?

a)	 	It	is	enhanced	for	integration	across	devices,	applications,	operating
systems,	and	resources.
b)	 	 It	 enables	 a	 user	 to	 access	 an	 application	 in	 one	 domain,	 such	 as
software	 as	 a	 Service	 (SaaS)	 application,	 using	 the	 authentication	 that
occurred	 in	 another	 domain,	 such	 as	 corporate	 Identity	 Management
(IdM)	system.
c)	 	The	capacity	for	an	enterprise	to	follow	what	applications	 users	are
accessing	(and	when)	is	a	concern	from	both	 a	security	 and	regulatory
viewpoint.
d)		All	of	the	above
Chapter	04:	Cloud	Application	Security
The	 objective	 of	 the	 Cloud	 Application	 Security	 is	 to	 provide	 you	 better
understanding	 and	 	 knowledge	 related	 to	 secure	 application	 development	 and
deployment	 over	 cloud.	 Throughout	 an	 exploration	 of	 the	 Software
Development	 Life	 cycle	 (SDLC)	 ,	 the	 user	 will	 gain	 an	 understanding	 of
utilizing	 secure	 software	 and	 understand	 the	 controls	 necessary	 for	 developing
secure	cloud	computing	and	program	interfaces.
You	will	gain	knowledge	in	Identity	and	Access	Management	(IAM)	solutions
for	 the	 cloud	 application	 architecture	 to	 employ	 a	 layer	 of	 security	 to	 identify
and	manage	the	access	to	the	application.	You	will	also	learn	how	to	make	sure
data	 and	 application	 integrity,	 availability,	 and	 confidentiality	 through	 cloud
software	validation	and	assurance.
Application	Security
Before	we	are	going	into	cloud	software	assurance	and	validation,	it	is	essential
for	 a	 user	 to	 understand	 some	 basics	 about	 how	 a	 cloud	 application	 operates,
along	with	some	common	pitfalls	of	getting	into	cloud	development	or	migrating
to	 a	 cloud	 environment	 from	 a	 traditional	 data	 center.	 The	 cloud	 security
professional	 requires	 an	 excellent	 understanding	 of	 the	 common	 vulnerabilities
facing	cloud	applications	to	properly	advise	on	and	implement	security	policies
and	best	practices	throughout	the	software	development	Life	cycle.
Cloud	Development	Basics
A	 major	 difference	 between	 cloud	 systems	 and	 their	 operations	 versus	 a
traditional	 data	 center	 is	 that	 cloud	 systems	 are	 heavily	 reliant	 on	 Application
Programming	Interfaces	 (APIs)	 for	 access	 and	 functions.	 APIs	 can	 be	 broken
into	 many	 formats,	 but	 the	 most	 considerables	 are	 Representational	 State
Transfer	(REST)	and	Simple	Object	Access	Protocol	(SOAP)	.
It	 is	 essential	 for	 developers	 to	 understand	 that	 in	 many	 cloud	 environments,
access	is	acquired	through	the	means	of	an	Application	Programming	Interface
(API).	 These	 APIs	 will	 consume	 tokens	 rather	 than	 traditional	 usernames	 and
passwords.
Representational	 State	 Transfer	 (REST)	 :	 REST	 is	 a	 software	 architecture
style	 consisting	 of	 guidelines	 and	 best	 practices	 for	 creating	 scalable	 web
services.
Simple	 Object	 Access	 Protocol	 (SOAP):	 A	 protocol	 specification	 for
exchanging	 structured	 information	 in	 the	 implementation	 of	 web	 services	 in
computer	networks.
A	high-level	comparison	of	these	two	APIs	are:

                    REST                                          SOAP

                                                     Service	Oriented	Architecture
     Representational	State	Transfer
                                                               Protocol

                                                  Use	the	SOAP	envelope	and	then
       Uses	Simple	HTTP	Protocol                  HTTP	(SMTP/FTP)	to	transfer	the
                                                              data.

     Supports	data	format	like	XML,
                                                       Support	only	XML	format
               JSON,	etc.

                                                  Slower	performance	and	scalability
  Scalability	and	Performance	are	good
                                                   can	be	complicated	and	not	uses
             and	uses	caching
                                                               caching

                                                   Used	where	REST	is	not	possible,
                Used	widely                         SOAP	provides	Web	Services
                                                               feature
                                     Table	4-1:	Two	APIs

 Note:	 A	 SOAP	 message	 is	 an	 ordinary	 XML	 document	 containing	 the
 Envelope	element	that	identifies	the	XML	document	as	a	SOAP	message
 Web	 Services:	 Web	 services	 are	 web	 application	 components	 that	 make
 themselves	available	over	the	internet	and	use	a	standardized	XML	messaging
 system.	XML	is	used	to	encode	all	communications	to	a	web	service.
Common	Pitfalls
The	 ability	 to	 communicate,	 identify,	 and	 plan	 for	 potential	 cloud-based
application	 challenges	 proves	 an	 invaluable	 skill	 for	 project	 teams	 and
developers.	 Failure	 to	 do	 so	 can	 result	 in	 failed	 projects,	 additional	 costs,	 and
duplication	of	efforts	as	well	as	loss	of	efficiencies	and	executive	support.	While
several	 projects	 and	 cloud	 journeys	 might	 have	 an	 element	 of	 unique	 or	 non-
standard	 approaches,	 the	 pitfalls	 described	 in	 this	 section	 should	 always	 be
understood	and	followed.
                               Figure	4-1:	Common	Pitfalls

On-Premise	Does	Not	Always	Transfer
Functionality	 and	 current	 performance	 might	 not	 be	 transferable.	 Applications
and	 current	 configurations	 might	 be	 hard	 to	 replicate	 on	 or	 through	 cloud
services.	The	rationale	for	this	is	two-fold.

           They	 were	 not	 developed	 with	 cloud-based	 services	 in	 mind.	 The
           continued	 evolution	 and	 expansion	 of	 cloud-based	 service	 offerings
           look	 to	 enhance	 technologies	 and	 development,	 not	 always
           maintaining	 support	 for	 more	 historical	 development	 and	 systems.
           Where	 cloud-based	 development	 has	 occurred,	 this	 may	 need	 to	 be
           tested	against	on-premise	or	legacy-based	systems.
           Not	 all	 applications	 can	 be	 “forklifted”	 to	 the	 cloud.	 Forklifting	 an
           application	 is	 the	 technique	 of	 migrating	 an	 entire	 application,	 the
           way	it	runs	in	a	traditional	infrastructure	with	minimal	code	changes.
           Usually,	 these	 applications	 are	 self-contained	 and	 have	 few
           dependencies;	 however,	 transferring	 or	 utilizing	 cloud-based
           environments	 may	 introduce	 additional	 change	 requirements	 and
           additional	interdependencies.

Not	All	Apps	are	“Cloud-Ready”
Where	big	data	and	high-level	security	controls	are	applied,	cloud	development
and	 testing	 can	 become	 more	 challenging.	 This	 is	 because	 it	 is	 usually
compounded	 by	 the	 requirement	 for	 such	 systems	 to	 be	 developed,	 tested,	 and
assessed	in	traditional	environments	or	on-premise	to	a	level	where	integrity	and
confidentiality	have	been	assured	and	verified.	Numerous	large	size	client-based
applications	 come	 with	 different	 security	 and	 regulatory	 restrictions	 or	 rely	 on
legacy	 coding	 projects,	 several	 of	 which	 may	 have	 been	 developed	 using
Common	 Business-Oriented	 Language	 (COBOL)	 ,	 as	 well	 as	 other	 more
historical	 development	 languages.	 These	 reasons,	 along	 with	 whatever	 control
frameworks	might	have	to	be	observed	and	adhered	to,	can	cause	more	than	one
application	to	fail	at	being	cloud-ready.
 Note:	 COBOL	 is	 a	 high-level	 programming	 language	 used	 for	 business
 applications.	 It	 was	 the	 first	 popular	 language	 designed	 to	 be	 an	 operating
 system	agnostic	and	is	still	used	in	several	business	and	financial	applications
 today.
Lack	of	Training	and	Awareness
New	development	approaches	and	techniques	need	training	and	a	willingness	to
utilize	 new	 service.	 Typically,	 developers	 have	 been	 habitual	 of	 working	 with
SQL	 Server,	 Microsoft	 .NET	 or	 Java	 and	 other	 types	 of	 the	 traditional
development	platform.	When	cloud-based	platform(s)	is	required	or	requested	by
any	organization,	this	may	introduce	challenges	(particularly	if	it	is	a	platform	or
system	with	which	developers	are	unfamiliar).
Documentation	and	Guidelines
Best	practice	needs	developers	to	follow	appropriate	processes,	methodologies,
documentation,	guidelines,	and	life	cycles	to	reduce	opportunities	for	heightened
or	unnecessary	risk	to	be	introduced.
Given	 the	 rapid	 implementation	 of	 evolving	 cloud	 services,	 it	 has	 created	 a
disconnection	between	 some	 developers	and	providers	on	how	to	make	use	of,
integrate,	 or	 meet	 vendor	 requirements	 for	 development.	 Whereas	 various
providers	 are	 continuing	 to	 improve	 levels	 of	 available	 documentation,	 the
highly	 update	 guidance	 could	 not	 always	 be	 available,	 particularly	 for	 new
releases	and	updates.
For	 these	 reasons,	 the	 cloud	 service	 provider	 needs	 to	 understand	 the	 basic
concept	of	SDLC	and	what	it	can	do	for	the	organization.	Essentially,	SDLC	is	a
sequence	of	phases,	or	steps,	that	provide	a	model	for	the	development	and	life
cycle	management	of	a	software	or	an	application.	The	methodology	within	the
SDLC	process	can	vary	across	organizations	and	industries,	but	standards	such
as	ISO/IEC	12207	represent	processes	that	develop	a	life	cycle	for	software	or
application	 and	 provide	 a	 mode	 for	 the	 acquisition,	 development,	 and
configuration	of	software	systems.
The	goal	of	an	SDLC	process	is	to	help	produce	a	product	that	is	effective,	cost-
efficient,	 and	 of	 high	 quality.	 Usually,	 SDLC	 methodology	 contains	 the
following	stages:

            Planning
            Analysis
            Design
            Implementation
            Maintenance
 Note	that	ISO/IEC/IEEE	12207	Systems	and	software	engineering	–	Software
 life	 cycle	 processes	 are	 an	 international	 standard	 for	 software	 life	 cycle
 processes.
Complexities	and	Integration
Integrating	the	cloud-based	applications	with	the	existing	environment	can	be	an
essential	 part	 of	 the	 development	 process.	 When	 operational	 and	 developer
resources	 do	 not	 have	 open	 or	 unrestricted	 access	 to	 supporting	 services	 and
components,	 integration	 can	 be	 hard	 to	 implement,	 mainly	 where	 cloud
providers	manage	applications,	infrastructure,	and	integration	platforms.
From	a	troubleshooting	point	of	view,	it	can	prove	difficult	to	collect	and	track
transaction	and	events	across	underlying	or	interdependent	components.
In	 order	 to	 reduce	 these	 complexities,	 where	 possible,	 the	 cloud	 provider	 API
has	to	be	used.
Overarching	Challenges
The	 developer	 should	 always	 remember	 two	 primary	 risks	 associated	 with
applications	that	run	in	the	cloud	environment.	These	two	risks	are	Third-party
administrator	and	multi-tenancy.
It	 is	 also	 important	 that	 developers	 understand	 the	 security	 requirements	 based
on	 the	 Services	 model	 (IaaS,	 PaaS,	 SaaS)	 and	 the	 deployment	 model
(community,	hybrid,	public,	private)	that	the	application	will	run	in
These	two	models	will	help	in	determining	what	security	will	be	offered	by	the
provider	 and	 what	 your	 enterprises	 or	 organizations	 are	 responsible	 for
implementing	and	maintaining.
It	 is	 essential	 to	 find	 out	 who	 is	 responsible	 for	 security	 control	 across	 the
deployment	 and	 services	 model.	 Consider	 creating	 an	 example	 responsibility
matrix.
                                                       IaaS          PaaS        SaaS
 Security	 Governance,	 Risk	 and	 Compliance ER                              ER           ER
 (GRC)

 Data	Security                                                ER              ER           ER

 Application	Security                                         ER              ER           SR

 Platform	Security                                            ER              SR           CPR

 Infrastructure	Security                                      SR              CPR          CPR

 Physical	Security                                            CPR             CPR          CPR
             Figure	4-2:	Example	security	responsibility	matrix	for	Cloud	service	models

ER	=	Enterprise	Responsibility
SR	=	Shared	Responsibility
CPR	=	Cloud	Provider	Responsibility
The	 developer	 should	 know	 that	 the	 metrics	 will	 always	 be	 needed	 and	 cloud-
based	 application	 could	 have	 a	 higher	 dependency	 on	 metrics	 than	 internal
applications	to	supply	visibility	into	who	is	accessing	the	application	and	actions
they	are	performing.	This	could	need	substantial	development	time	to	integrate
said	functionality	and	could	eliminate	a	“forklift”	approach.
 Note:	Forklift	 works	 exactly	 as	 its	 name	 implies,	 you	 pick	 up	 your	 existing
 environment	 and	 drop	 it	 into	 AWS	 Cloud.	 In	 this	 approach,	 elasticity	 and
 scalability	 of	 the	 cloud	 may	 not	 entirely	 be	 utilized.	 This	 option	 runs	 AWS
 Cloud	like	a	virtual	colocation	environment.
Common	Vulnerabilities
The	 applications	 run	 in	 cloud	 have	 to	 conform	 to	 best	 practice	 guidelines	 and
guidance	 for	 the	 assessment	 and	 on-going	 management	 of	 vulnerabilities.	 The
implementation	of	an	application	risk-management	program	addresses	not	only
vulnerabilities	but	also	risks	associated	with	the	applications.
The	 most	 common	 software	 vulnerabilities	 are	 found	 in	 the	 Open	 Web
Application	Security	Project	(OWASP)	Top	10.	There	are	OWASP	10	entries	for
2017	along	with	the	description	of	each	entry.
Injections
Injection	 flaws	 are	 very	 prevalent,	 especially	 in	 the	 legacy	 code.	 Injection
vulnerabilities	 are	 typically	 found	 in	 expression	 languages,	 LDAP,	 NoSQL
queries,	 OS	 commands,	 ORM	 queries,	 SQL,	 SMTP	 headers,	 XPath,	 and	 XML
parsers.
Injection	 flaws	 are	 to	 be	 recognized	 when	 examining	 the	 code.	 Fuzzers	 and
scanners	can	assist	attackers	to	search	injection	flaws	.
Broken	Authentication
Broken	 Authentication	 prevalence	 is	 widespread	 due	 to	 the	 design	 and
implementation	of	most	identity	and	access	controls.	Session	management	is	the
base	 of	 authentication	 and	 access	 controls	 and	 is	 existing	 in	 all	 stateful
applications.
Attackers	can	detect	broken	authentication	using	manual	means	and	exploit	them
to	use	automated	tools	with	dictionary	attacks	and	password	lists.
Sensitive	Data	Exposure
Over	 the	 past	 years,	 this	 vulnerability	 has	 been	 the	 most	 common	 impactful
attack.	 Usually,	 the	 flaw	 is	 just	 not	 encrypting	 sensitive	 data.	 When	 crypto	 is
utilized,	 weak	 key	 generation	 and	 management,	 and	 weak	 algorithm,	 protocol,
and	 cipher	 usage	 are	 familiar,	 particularly	 for	 weak	 password	 hashing	 storage
techniques.	 For	 data	 in	 transit,	 server-side	 vulnerability	 is	 easy	 to	 detect	 but
difficult	for	data	at	rest.
XML	External	Entities	(XXE)
By	default,	various	XML	processors	allow	specification	of	an	external	entity,	a
URI	that	is	evaluated	and	dereferenced	during	XML	processing.
SAST	tools	can	find	out	this	issue	by	inspecting	configuration	and	dependencies.
DAST	 tools	 need	 extra	 manual	 steps	 to	 detect	 and	 exploit	 this	 issue.	 Manual
testers	 require	 to	 be	 trained	 for	 how	 to	 examine	 for	 XXE,	 commonly	 as	 it	 not
tested	as	of	2017.
Broken	Access	Control
This	 vulnerability	 is	 common	 due	 to	 the	 absence	 of	 automated	 detection,	 and
lack	of	useful	functional	testing	by	application	developers.
Access	control	detection	is	not	usually	amenable	to	automated	static	or	dynamic
testing.	 Manual	 testing	 is	 the	 secure	 way	 to	 detect	 weak	 or	 missing	 access
control,	including	a	controller,	direct	object	references,	HTTP	method	like	GET,
POST,	etc.
Security	Misconfiguration
This	 can	 occur	 at	 any	 level	 of	 an	 application	 stack,	 including	 the	 application
server,	database,	custom	code,	frameworks,	network	services,	platform,	and	pre-
installed	 virtual	 machines,	 containers,	 or	 storage	 and	 web	 server.	 Automated
scanners	 are	 useful	 for	 detecting	 misconfigurations,	 use	 of	 configurations	 or
default	accounts,	legacy	options,	unnecessary	services,	etc.
Cross-Site	Scripting	(XSS)
In	 the	 OWASP	 Top	 10	 vulnerabilities,	 XSS	 is	 the	 second	 most	 prevalent	 issue
and	is	found	in	around	two-thirds	of	all	applications	.
Automated	tools	can	search	some	XSS	vulnerabilities	automatically,	particularly
in	developed	technologies	such	as	ASP.NET,	JSP	or	J2EE,	and	PHP.
Insecure	Deserialization
This	 vulnerability	 occurs	 when	 untrusted	 data	 is	 used	 to	 abuse	 the	 logic	 of	 an
application.	 It	 inflicts	 a	 denial	 of	 service	 (DoS)	 attack,	 and	 also	 executes
arbitrary	code	upon	it	being	deserialized.
Using	Components	with	Known	Vulnerabilities
Components,	 such	 as	 frameworks,	 libraries,	 and	 other	 software	 modules,	 run
with	 the	 same	 privileges	 as	 the	 application.	 If	 a	 vulnerable	 component	 is
exploited,	 such	 as	 an	 attack	 can	 facilitate	 severe	 data	 loss	 or	 server	 takeover.
APIs	 and	 Applications	 using	 components	 with	 known	 vulnerabilities	 could
determine	 application	 defence	 and	 enable	 a	 range	 of	 possible	 attacks	 and
impacts.
Insufficient	Logging	and	Monitoring
One	strategy	for	determining	if	you	have	sufficient	monitoring	is	to	inspect	the
logs	 following	 penetration	 testing.	 The	 testers'	 actions	 have	 to	 be	 recorded
sufficiently	to	understand	what	damages	they	might	have	inflicted.
Cloud	Software	Assurance	and	Validation
As	with	any	software	development	or	implementation,	those	operating	within	a
cloud	environment	should	undergo	testing,	auditing,	and	validation	to	make	sure
that	security	requirements	are	to	be	appropriately	employed	and	verified.
Cloud-based	Functional	Testing
Functional	testing	is	a	focused	and	specific	test	against	a	particular	component	or
function	of	an	application	or	system,	as	compared	to	regression	or	full	testing	,
which	is	holistic	and	consists	of	the	entire	application	with	its	full	functionality.
Software	 and	 Application	 development	 within	 a	 cloud	 environment	 has	 all	 the
usual	considerations	that	are	part	of	any	project	or	even	additional	considerations
that	 are	 commensurated	 with	 the	 realities	 of	 cloud	 technologies.	 As	 part	 of
security	 and	 testing,	 it	 is	 essential	 to	 consider	 every	 legal	 and	 regulatory
requirement	 for	 the	 system	 when	 moved	 to	 	 cloud.	 The	 particular	 jurisdiction
where	the	cloud	is	hosted	and	the	authorities	to	which	it	is	subjected	should	meet
the	 similar	 requirements	 at	 minimum	 for	 the	 application.	 The	 cloud	 security
professional	 needs	 to	 analyze	 the	 data	 being	 used	 and	 the	 application	 security
needed	 around	 it,	 ensures	 that	 the	 cloud	 provider	 selected	 or	 being	 considered
can	meet	those	requirements	.
Also,	Functional	testing	software	examines	all	the	functions	and	features	of	the
software	 and	 its	 interaction	 with	 hardware.	 For	 conducting	 functional	 testing,
testers	 can	 use	 such	 tools	 as	 Sauce	 Labs,	 Rapise,	 and	 TimeShiftX	 .	 These
cloud-based	software	testing	tools	use	the	following	techniques:

            Acceptance	testing
            Integration	testing
            System	testing
 Note:	 Regression	 testing	 is	 the	 process	 of	 testing	 changes	 in	 computer
 programs	 to	 ensure	 that	 the	 previous	 programming	 technique	 still	 applicable
 with	the	new	changes.
 Also	 note	 that	 Holistic	 is	 an	 approach	 to	 IT	 management	 that	 is	 concerned
 with	viewing	and	treating	a	complex	computer	system	as	a	single	entity.
Cloud	Secure	Software	Development	Life	Cycle
The	SDLC	process	is	a	set	of	stages	or	phases	that	drive	a	software	development
project	from	conception	and	requirement	gathering	through	the	phases	of	SDLC.
The	 SDLC	 phases	 is	 requirement,	 designing,	 development,	 testing,	 and
maintenance	.	Though	the	SDLC	process	is	standardized	and	well	known	for	all
software	 development	 projects,	 adapting	 it	 for	 security	 within	 a	 cloud
environment	is	an	essential	responsibility	of	the	Cloud	Security	Professional	.
SDLC	has	following	the	core	stages.
                                  Figure	4-3:	SDLC	Proces	s

The	focus	in	this	instance	is	adapting	an	organization’s	perspective	and	approach
to	 the	 realities	 of	 a	 cloud	 environment,	 where	 many	 of	 the	 standard	 security
controls	 and	 system	 architectures	 are	 not	 applicable	 or	 feasible.	 Both	 security
and	 cloud	 components	 must	 be	 included	 in	 the	 SDLC	 process	 from	 the	 onset,
and	 retrofitting	 them	 later	 in	 the	 process	 after	 coding	 has	 begun	 (or	 has	 been
completed)	should	not	be	attempted.
Compared	 to	 a	 traditional	 SDLC	 process,	 the	 cloud	 SDLC	 process,	 much	 like
most	aspects	of	cloud	computing	in	general,	operates	in	a	much	faster	way.	This
can	 often	 place	 considerable	 stress	 on	 established	 SDLC	 processes	 within	 an
organization	 along	 with	 attempts	 to	 adhere	 to	 established	 timelines	 and
development	steps.
Security	Testing
Some	 of	 the	 types	 of	 application	 security	 testing	 are	 followed	 within	 a	 Cloud
environment,	 and	 for	 the	 most	 part,	 they	 have	 an	 essential	 intersection	 with
testing	in	a	traditional	data	center	from	a	methodological	perspective.
Static	Application	Security	Testing	(SAST)
Static	Application	Security	Testing	(SAST)	is	considered	to	be	white-box	test	,
where	 the	 application	 test	 performs	 an	 analysis	 of	 the	 application	 byte	 code,
source	code,	and	binaries	without	executing	the	application	code.	SAST	is	used
to	 determine	 coding	 errors	 that	 are	 indicative	 of	 security	 weaknesses.	 SAST	 is
typically	used	as	a	test	method	while	the	tool	is	under	development.
SAST	 can	 find	 buffer	 overflows,	 cross-site	 scripting	 (XSS)	 errors,	 SQL
injection,	unhandled	error	conditions,	and	potential	backdoors,	etc.
By	 default,	 SAST	 typically	 delivers	 more	 comprehensive	 results	 than	 those
found	using	DAST.
Dynamic	Application	Security	Testing	(DAST)
Dynamic	Application	Security	Testing	(DAST)	is	considered	a	black-box	test	,
where	 the	 tool	 should	 find	 specific	 execution	 paths	 in	 the	 application	 being
analyzed.	 Unlike	 SAST,	 which	 analyses	 code	 “offline”	 (when	 the	 code	 is	 not
running),	DAST	is	used	against	applications	in	their	running	state.	DAST	is	also
considered	 useful	 when	 testing	 exposed	 HTML	 and	 HTTP	 interfaces	 of	 web
applications.
It	 is	 essential	 to	 understand	 that	 SAST	 and	 DAST	 play	 different	 roles	 and	 that
one	is	not	better	than	the	other	in	any	way.	Static	and	dynamic	application	tests
work	together	to	improve	the	reliability	of	secure	applications	being	created	and
used	by	organizations	.
Pen	Testing
Pen	testing	is	also	known	as	black	box	testing.	It	runs	in	a	similar	manner	and
with	 the	 similar	 toolsets	 as	 an	 attacker	 could	 attempt	 to	 use	 against	 an
application.	 This	 security	 testing	 type	 is	 designed	 to	 actively	 attempt	 to	 attack
and	 compromise	 ongoing	 (running)	 systems	 in	 real-world	 scenarios.	 The
objective	 is	 to	 discover	 weaknesses	 and	 vulnerabilities	 using	 the	 similar
approach	a	malicious	user	would	employ	against	a	system.
Use	Verified	Secure	Software
A	 significant	 aspect	 of	 the	 selection	 of	 programming	 languages,	 application
environments,	development	methodologies,	and	software	development	platforms
is	understanding	the	key	components	in	a	cloud	environment	that	will	promote
and	 enforce	 security.	 Application	 code	 is	 developed	 on	 these	 frameworks	 and
protocols,	the	decision	to	use	toolsets	and	software	packages	that	do	not	meet	the
security	 requirements	 in	 a	 Cloud	 environment	 will	 ultimately	 have	 a	 harmful
impact	 on	 any	 software	 that	 is	 developed	 or	 implemented	 by	 an	 organization
once	it	reaches	its	development	stage.
Approved	API
Application	 Programming	 Interfaces	 (API)	 is	 a	 massive	 part	 of	 Cloud
application	 development	 because	 they	 allow	 other	 applications	 to	 utilize	 web
services	from	the	application,	thereby	expanding	its	capabilities.
Additionally,	they	provide	for	automation	and	integration	with	third-party	tools,
again	aimed	at	increasing	the	functionality	of	the	application.	However,	this	does
not	come	without	risk.	There	are	both	providers	and	consumers	of	web	services
provided	by	APIs,	and	each	of	them	presents	special	considerations.
When	 utilizing	 APIs,	 the	 developer	 is	 reliant	 on	 the	 API	 developer	 to	 have
proper	security	controls	and	performs	testing	and	validation	to	make	sure	of	the
integrity	and	security	of	application.	However,	it	is	impossible	to	ascertain	this	in
advance.
One	 of	 the	 most	 crucial	 problems	 with	 using	 APIs	 is	 that	 not	 everyone	 who
developed	them	uses	the	same	level	of	scrutiny.	APIs	are	sometimes	coded	with
little	or	no	validation	or	security	testing.	Consumption	of	these	APIs	without	any
type	 of	 validation	 can	 lead	 to	 data	 leakage,	 poor	 authentication,	 and
authorization	 and	 application	 failure.	 Furthermore,	 manipulating	 an	 unsecured
API	 might	 at	 worst,	 lead	 to	 a	 data	 breach.	 Besides,	 when	 an	 application	 is
changed	or	updated,	the	API	might	expose	items	that	were	not	exposed	before.
One	 technique	 to	 overcome	 these	 issues	 is	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 processes	 are	 in
place	that	allows	for	constant	testing	and	review	of	APIs	.
Community	Knowledge
Software	that	has	been	openly	tested	and	reviewed	by	the	community	at	large	is
considered	 to	 be	 more	 secure	 by	 various	 security	 professionals	 as	 compared	 to
the	software	that	has	not	to	gone	through	such	a	process.	This	can	include	open
source	software.
By	moving	toward	leveraging	standards	such	as	 ISO	27034-1	,	companies	can
be	 confident	 that	 partners	 have	 the	 same	 understanding	 of	 application	 security.
This	will	increase	security	as	organizations,	regulatory	bodies,	and	the	IT	audit
community	 gain	 an	 understanding	 of	 the	 importance	 of	 embedding	 security
during	the	processes	required	to	create	and	utilize	security.
 Note:	ISO	27034-1	is	a	standard	which	specify	designing,	developing,	testing,
 implementing	 and	 maintaining	 security	 functions	 and	 controlling	 application
 systems.
Supply-Chain	Management
It	is	crucial	for	organizations	to	consider	the	implications	of	non-secure	software
beyond	 their	 corporate	 boundaries.	 The	 ease	 with	 which	 software	 components
with	 uncertain	 development	 processes	 can	 be	 combined	 to	 produce	 new
applications	has	built	a	complex	and	highly	dynamic	software	supply	chain	(API
management).
We	utilize	softwares	that	are	being	developed	by	a	third	party	or	accessed	with
or	through	third-party	libraries	to	enable	or	create	functionality,	without	having	a
clear	 understanding	 of	 the	 origins	 of	 the	 software.	 This	 typically	 leads	 to	 a
situation	where	there	is	complex	and	highly	dynamic	software	interaction	taking
place	 between	 and	 among	 more	 than	 one	 services	 and	 systems	 within	 any
organization	and	between	organizations	via	Cloud.
This	 supply	 chain	 provides	 agility	 in	 the	 rapid	 development	 of	 applications	 to
meet	 customer’s	 demand.	 Therefore,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 assess	 all	 codes	 and
services	for	accurate	and	secure	functioning,	no	matter	where	they	are	sourced.
Software	Development	Life-Cycle	(SDLC)	Process
The	SDLC	process	includes	several	steps	in	succession	that	form	the	framework
for	 proper	 requirements	 analysis,	 designing,	 development,	 testing,	 and
maintaining	of	software	development	projects.
Phases	&	Methodologies
Software	development	should	be	done	for	hosting	in	a	Cloud	environment	or	a
traditional	data	center,	the	phases	or	steps	for	the	SDLC	are	the	same	.
Requirement	Analysis
This	is	the	first	stage	in	the	SDLC	process.	It	includes	those	requirements	that	go
into	 determining	 the	 needs	 or	 conditions	 to	 meet	 for	 a	 new	 or	 altered	 software
product,	 taking	 into	 account	 the	 possibility	 of	 conflicting	 requirements	 of	 the
various	stakeholders,	such	as	users	or	beneficiaries.
Requirements	 analysis	 is	 significant	 to	 the	 success	 of	 a	 development	 project.
Requirements	 should	 be	 measurable,	 actionable,	 testable,	 related	 to	 identified
business	 needs	 or	 opportunities,	 and	 defined	 to	 a	 level	 of	 detail	 sufficient	 for
system	design.	Requirements	can	be	functional	and	non-functional.
Designing
This	phase	can	take	the	formal	requirements	and	specifications	and	change	them
into	 a	 structure	 and	 plan	 for	 the	 actual	 software	 coding,	 changing	 the
requirements	 into	 an	 actual	 plan	 that	 can	 be	 applied	 to	 the	 programming
language	 designated	 for	 the	 project.	 At	 this	 stage	 of	 the	 project,	 the	 formal
security	 threats	 and	 the	 requirements	 for	 risk	 lessening	 and	 minimization	 are
integrated	with	the	programming	designs.
Development
In	 this	 phase,	 the	 project	 plan	 is	 divided	 into	 pieces	 for	 coding,	 and	 then	 the
actual	 coding	 is	 performed.	 As	 the	 requirements	 are	 converted	 into	 actual
executable	programming	language,	testing	is	done	on	each	part	of	the	phases	to
make	sure	that	it	compiles.	This	phase	is	typically	the	most	significant	phase	of
the	SDLC	process.
Testing
In	 this	 phase	 testing	 is	 performing	 against	 the	 requirements	 to	 ensure	 that	 the
software	 product	 is	 solving	 the	 needs	 gathered	 during	 the	 requirements	 phase.
Throughout	 this	 phase	 integration	 testing,	 unit	 testing,	 system	 testing,	 and
acceptance	testing	are	all	conducted.
Maintenance
Once	the	software	has	been	successfully	tested	and	moved	into	production	use,
there	 will	 be	 continual	 updates	 for	 additional	 features,	 fixes	 bugs,	 and	 security
patches	for	the	lifetime	of	the	software.	This	is	an	iterative	and	on-going	process.
It	 involves	 going	 through	 the	 complete	 SDLC	 process	 each	 time,	 progressing
through	requirements,	design,	development,	and	testing.
Business	Requirements
It	 is	 a	 well-structured	 document	 of	 software	 requirement	 that	 defines	 the	 final
deliverable	 of	 the	 project.	 The	 purpose	 behind	 developing	 this	 document	 is	 to
drive	the	software	development	process	and	assist	the	project	management	team.
The	comprehensive	document	holds	the	requirement	of	business	and	operation.
While	 developing	 a	 new	 project,	 client	 mentions	 their	 objective	 and	 the
expectation	in	a	document	known	as	business	requirement.	The	document	helps
us	to	define	the	functional	requirement.	The	drive	of	a	business	requirement	to
functional	 requirement	 has	 more	 than	 one	 station	 which	 is	 known	 as	 a	 user
requirement.
Software	Configuration	Management	&	Versioning
Once	 the	 application	 has	 been	 implemented	 using	 the	 SDLC	 process,	 the
application	 moves	 in	 secure	 operations	 phase.	 Proper	 software	 configuration
management	and	versioning	are	essential	to	application	security.	Some	tools	can
be	 used	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 the	 software	 is	 configured	 according	 to	 specified
requirements.	Two	tools	that	can	be	used:
Chef
With	 Chef,	 you	 can	 automate	 how	 you	 develop,	 implement,	 and	 manage	 your
infrastructure.	 The	 Chef	 server	 stores	 your	 recipes	 along	 with	 other
configuration	data.	The	Chef	client	is	installed	on	each	server,	container,	virtual
machine,	or	networking	device	you	manage	(called	nodes).	The	client	sometimes
polls	 the	 Chef	 server	 for	 the	 latest	 policy	 and	 the	 state	 of	 your	 network.	 If
anything	on	the	node	is	outdated,	the	client	promptly	updates	it.
Puppet
According	 to	 puppet	 labs,	 “Puppet	 is	 a	 configuration	 management	 system
that	 allows	 you	 to	 define	 the	 state	 of	 your	 IT	 infrastructure	 and	 then
automatically	enforces	the	correct	state.”
The	objective	of	this	application	is	to	make	sure	that	configurations	are	updated
as	 required	 and	 if	 there	 is	 consistency	 in	 versioning.	 This	 phase	 calls	 for	 the
following	activities	to	take	place:

            Activity	monitoring
            Dynamic	analysis
            Layer-7	firewalls	(e.g.,	web	application	firewalls)
            Penetration	testing	and	Vulnerability	assessments

Apply	the	Secure	Software	Development	Life-Cycle
To	apply	the	Secure	SDLC	process,	an	understanding	of	Cloud-specific	risks	and
the	 application	 of	 threat	 modeling	 to	 assess	 those	 risks	 is	 required	 along	 with
specific	vulnerabilities	faced	by	an	application	.
Common	Vulnerabilities
There	are	some	vulnerabilities	in	the	SDLC	process,	but	some	are	defined	in	the
common	vulnerabilities	OWASP	Top	10	section,	and	some	are	defined	here:
SQL	Injection
This	 attack	 consists	 of	 injection	 or	 insertion	 of	 a	 SQL	 query	 through	 the	 input
data	 from	 the	 client	 to	 the	 application.	 An	 effective	 SQL	 injection	 exploit	 can
read	 sensitive	 data	 from	 the	 database,	 modify	 the	 data	 in	 the	 database	 such	 as
Insert,	Update	or	Delete,	execute	administration	operations	on	the	database	(such
as	 shutdown	 the	 DBMS),	 recover	 the	 content	 of	 a	 given	 file	 existing	 on	 the
Database	 Management	 System	 (DBMS)	 file	 system	 and	 somtimes	 issues
commands	 to	 the	 operating	 system.	 This	 attack	 is	 a	 type	 of	 injection	 attack,	 in
which	SQL	commands	are	injected	or	inserted	into	data-plane	input	to	affect	the
execution	of	predefined	SQL	commands.
Cross-Site	Request	Forgery	(CSRF)
This	attack	forces	a	logged-on	victim’s	browser	to	send	a	forged	HTTP	request,
including	 the	 victim’s	 session	 cookie	 and	 any	 other	 automatically	 included
authentication	information,	to	a	weak	web	application.	This	allows	the	attacker
to	force	the	victim’s	browser	to	generate	requests	that	the	vulnerable	application
determines	as	legitimate	requests	from	the	victim.
Direct	Object	Reference
This	 can	 occur	 when	 a	 developer	 exposes	 a	 reference	 to	 an	 internal
implementation	 object,	 such	 as	 a	 directory,	 file,	 or	 database	 key.	 Without	 an
access	 control	 check	 or	 other	 protection,	 attackers	 can	 manipulate	 these
references	to	access	unauthorized	data.
Buffer	Overflow
This	 error	 is	 characterized	 by	 the	 overwriting	 of	 memory	 fragments	 of	 the
process,	which	could	have	never	been	modified	intentionally	or	unintentionally.
Overwriting	values	of	the	Base	Pointer	(BP),	Instruction	Pointer	(IP)	and	other
registers	 causes	 exceptions,	 segmentation	 faults,	 and	 other	 errors	 to	 occur.
Usually	these	errors	end	execution	of	the	application	in	an	unexpected	way.	This
error	occurs	when	we	operate	on	buffers	of	“char	type.”
This	can	consist	of	overflowing	the	Heap	overflow	or	Stack	Overflow.
Cloud-Specific	Risks
Cloud	 Security	 Alliance’s	 (CSA)	 recommended	 the	 following	 risks	 in	 Cloud
computing.	 These	 risks	 can	 be	 very	 high	 and	 found	 in	 many	 Cloud-computing
environments	.
Data	Breaches
This	risk	is	one	of	the	significant	risks	associated	with	Cloud	computing.	A	data
breach	 is	 defined	 as	 the	 exposure	 of	 data	 like	 enterprise	 secrets,	 user
information,	etc.	It	is	the	most	critical	threat	as	it	contains	sensitive	content	and
it	can	cause	significant	downfalls	to	enterprises	along	with	the	whole	industry.
Solution
Data	 should	 always	 be	 encrypted.	 Typically	 when	 it	 is	 to	 be	 used	 by	 virtual
machines.	The	user	can	use	multi-factor	authentication	to	provide	more	security
features	to	confidential	data	stored	in	the	Cloud	as	well.
Data	Loss
The	Cloud	service	provider	must	have	a	proper	data	recovery	plan.	The	objective
is	 that	 there	 is	 a	 high	 chance	 of	 data	 loss	 on	 Cloud	 services	 due	 to	 following
reasons	like	Malicious	attack,	Natural	disaster	and	Data	removal	by	the	provider.
An	organization	can	lose	valuable	information	as	a	consequence	to	lost	data,	and
it	 could	 severely	 affect	 an	 organization.	 Hence,	 verifying	 the	 provider’s	 data
backup	policy	is	of	utmost	importance	as	it	is	related	to	access,	physical	storage,
and	physical	location	of	the	data	centers.
Account	Hijacking
This	risk	is	considered	the	highest	risk	in	the	IT	industry	due	to	an	open	access
to	Cloud	platform.	It	has	enhanced	credential	compromise	like	login	details	by
attackers	to	make	them	successful	in	accessing	sensitive	user	information	in	the
Cloud.	Additionally,	they	can	manipulate	the	information	using	the	hijacked	user
credentials.	Sometimes,	Hijackers	use	Cloud	for	stealing	credentials	by	injecting
cross-site	scripting	bug.
Insecure	APIs
In	 a	 Cloud	 environment,	 APIs	 is	 a	 source	 to	 customize	 the	 features	 of	 Cloud
services	 to	 improve	 the	 user	 experience.	 The	 developer	 creates	 their	 programs
and	 integrates	 those	 applications	 within	 a	 Cloud	 service	 for	 improved
performance.	 However,	 sometimes	 these	 APIs	 are	 used	 for	 accessibility,
authentication,	 and	 encryption	 purposes,	 and	 that	 is	 where	 the	 vulnerability	 is
created.	This	increases	security	risks.
Denial	of	Service	(DoS)
This	attack	is	a	type	of	cyber-attack	that	does	not	target	to	breach	the	sensitive
data.	 However,	 it	 carries	 long-term	 effects	 like	 making	 a	 website	 and	 servers
unavailable.	Moreover,	sometimes	it	turns	down	firewalls	to	perform	malicious
actions	.
Malicious	Insiders
CERN	 defines	 an	 insider	 threat	 as	 “A	 former	 or	 current	 employee,	 business
partner	or	contractor	who	has	or	had	authorized	access	to	an	organization’s
system,	network,	or	data	and	intentionally	exceeded	or	misused	that	access
in	 a	 manner	 that	 negatively	 affected	 the	 availability,	 confidentiality,	 or
integrity	of	the	organization’s	information	or	information	systems.”
Abuse	of	Cloud	Services
As	 Cloud	 leverages	 the	 extensive	 facility	 of	 services	 and	 storage,	 any
organization	whether	small	or	large,	host	a	massive	amount	of	data	in	the	Cloud.
However,	 this	 storage	 solution	 also	 allows	 hosting	 illegal	 software	 and	 other
digital	 contents.	 Therefore,	 it	 sometimes	 adversely	 affects	 the	 Cloud	 service
providers	 and	 their	 users.	 In	 many	 cases,	 such	 contents	 include	 pirated	 books,
music,	videos	or	software.
Insufficient	Due	Diligence
Apart	 from	 the	 technical	 security	 concern,	 security	 risk	 can	 come	 up	 due	 to
inefficient	Cloud	strategy.	This	means	that	when	an	organization	is	unclear	about
its	objectives,	policies,	and	resources,	it	causes	insufficient	due	diligence	which
creates	security	risk	for	the	organizations.
Shared	Technology	Issues
The	 Cloud	 security	 is	 a	 shared	 goal	 for	 the	 provider	 and	 the	 client.	 Here	 the
partnership	is	between	the	provider	and	the	client,	where	the	client	wants	to	take
preventive	 measures	 to	 protect	 data.	 In	 many	 cases,	 this	 shared	 technology	 is
omitted,	there	is	a	high	chance	of	comprising	security.
Quality	of	Service	(QoS)
The	QoS	layer	of	service-oriented	architecture	(SOA)	is	focused	on	monitoring
and	 managing	 both	 the	 IT	 systems	 levels	 and	 the	 business	 levels.	 On	 the	 IT
systems	 level,	 QoS	 is	 focused	 on	 the	 security	 and	 health	 of	 systems,	 services,
applications,	networking,	storage,	and	all	other	components	that	comprise	the	IT
infrastructure.	 On	 the	 business	 level,	 QoS	 is	 focused	 on	 the	 measuring	 and
monitoring	 of	 events,	 business	 processes,	 and	 key	 performance	 indicators
(KPIs).	QoS	is	also	concerned	with	the	monitoring	and	enforcement	of	business
policies	in	all	areas,	including	access,	security,	and	data.
Threat	Modelling
A	 threat	 model	 is	 a	 process	 that	 reviews	 the	 security	 of	 any	 web-based
application,	 identifies	 problem	 areas,	 and	 determines	 the	 risk	 associated	 with
each	area	.
Threat	modeling	is	commonly	used	tool	by	software	development	teams	as	they
integrate	security	into	their	development	life	cycle.
Threat	 modeling	 is	 performed	 once	 an	 application	 design	 is	 created.	 The
objective	of	threat	modeling	is	to	determine	any	vulnerabilities	in	the	application
and	 the	 potential	 ingress,	 egress,	 and	 actors	 involved	 before	 it	 is	 introduced	 to
production.	It	is	the	overall	attack	surface	that	is	amplified	by	the	Cloud,	which
the	threat	model	has	to	take	into	account.
The	Cloud	Service	Provider	(CSP)	always	have	to	remember	that	the	nature	of
threats	faced	by	a	system	changes	over	time	and	that	due	to	the	dynamic	nature
of	a	changing	threat	landscape,	constant	vigilance	and	monitoring	is	a	mandatory
for	overall	application	security	in	Cloud.
There	 are	 numerous	 threat	 modeling	 tools	 such	 as	 AS/NZS	 4360,	 CVSS,
DREAD,	STRIDE,	AND	Trike.	However,	OWSAP	 recommended	 the	STRIDE
Model	so	that	we	will	cover	only	the	STRIDE	model.
STRIDE	Thread	Model
STRIDE	 is	 an	 acronym	 of	 Spoofing,	 Tampering,	 Repudiation,	 Information,
Disclosure,	and	Elevation.	Microsoft	creates	this	model.
STRIDE	 is	 a	 system	 for	 classifying	 known	 threats	 according	 to	 the	 types	 of
exploit	that	are	used	or	motivation	of	the	attacker.	In	this	model,	the	following
six	threats	are	considered,	and	controls	are	used	to	address	the	threats:
 Threats                         Description
 Spoofing                        Attacker	assumes	the	identity	of	the	subject
 Tampering                       An	attacker	alters	Data	or	messages
 Repudiation                     Illegitimate	denial	of	an	event
 Information	disclosure          Information	is	obtained	without	authorization
                                 Attacker	overloads	system	to	deny	legitimate
 Denial	of	service
                                 access
                                 Attacker	gains	a	privilege	level	above	what	is
 Elevation	of	privilege
                                 permitted
                    Table	4-2:	Threats	and	Description	of	STRIDE	Threat	Model

Specifics	of	Cloud	Application	Architecture
There	 are	 numerous	 tools,	 and	 additional	 technologies	 available	 that	 promote
and	make	sure	the	highest	levels	of	security	within	Cloud	computing.	These	are
based	on	a	defense-in-depth	philosophy	and	provide	layered	security	to	expand
upon	 traditional	 host	 or	 application	 security	 controls	 to	 allow	 for	 different	 and
additional	types	of	security	measures	that	exceed	what	can	be	supported	by	the
application	itself	.
Supplemental	Security	Devices
These	devices	are	used	to	add	additional	components	and	layers	to	a	defense-in-
depth	 architecture	 .	 The	 objective	 for	 a	 defense-in-depth	 architecture	 is	 to
design	 using	 multiple	 overlapping	 and	 mutually	 reinforcing	 components	 and
controls	 that	 will	 allow	 for	 the	 establishment	 of	 a	 robust	 security	 architecture.
These	devices	include	the	following	components:
WAF
A	 Web	 Application	 Firewall	 (WAF)	 helps	 to	 secure	 a	 web	 application	 by
monitoring	 and	 filtering	 HTTP	 traffic	 between	 the	 Internet	 and	 a	 web
application.	It	widely	protects	web	applications	from	attacks	such	as	cross-site-
scripting	 (XSS),	 cross-site	 request	 forgery	 (CSRF),	 file	 inclusion,	 and	 SQL
injection,	among	others.	A	WAF	is	a	layer	7	protocol	in	the	OSI	model	and	is	not
designed	 to	 protect	 against	 all	 major	 types	 of	 attacks.	 This	 method	 of	 attack
mitigation	 is	 usually	 part	 of	 a	 suite	 of	 tools,	 which	 together	 create	 a	 holistic
defense	against	a	range	of	attack	vectors.
A	 Cloud-based	 WAF	 can	 be	 handy	 in	 the	 case	 of	 a	 denial-of-service	 (DoS)
attack;	several	cases	reported	where	a	Cloud-based	WAF	was	used	to	thwart	DoS
attacks	of	350Gbs	and	450Gbs	successfully.
DAM

           Database	Activity	Monitoring	(DAM)	is	a	layer-7	monitoring	device
           that	identifies	SQL	commands.
           DAM	is	network-based	(NDAM)	or	agent-based	(ADAM).
           A	 DAM	 is	 to	 be	 used	 to	 detect	 and	 stop	 malicious	 commands	 from
           executing	on	an	SQL	server.
           Also,	 Database	 activity	 monitoring	 (DAM)	 is	 the	 process	 of
           monitoring,	analysing	and	reporting	a	database's	activities.	Database
           activity	monitoring	tools	use	real-time	security	technology	to	monitor
           and	analyze	configured	activities	individually	and	without	relying	on
           the	Database	Management	System	(DBMS)	auditing	or	logs.

XML	Firewalls
“This	 is	 a	 specialized	 device	 used	 to	 protect	 applications	 exposed	 via	 XML
based	 interfaces	 like	 Representational	 state	 transfer	 (REST),	 Web	 Services
Description	Language	(WSDL)	,	and	scan	XML	traffic	coming	in	and	out	of	an
organization.”
Besides,	there	are	some	points	that	further	describe	to	XML	Firewalls.	

           An	XML	Firewall	processes	XML	requests	and	responses	over	HTTP
           or	HTTPS.
           An	 XML	 Firewall	 uses	 a	 single	 protocol	 and	 contains	 a	 processing
           policy	with	a	set	of	the	request,	response,	two-way	and	error	rules.
           An	XML	Firewall	provides	a	rigid	,	standards-based	digital	signature,
           signature	verification	capabilities	and	wire-speed.

API	Gateway

           An	API	gateway	is	a	device	that	filters	API	traffic;	it	can	be	installed
           as	a	proxy	or	as	a	specific	part	of	your	application's	stack	before	data
           is	processed.
           The	 API	 Gateway	 takes	 all	 the	 requests	 from	 the	 end-users,	 then
           routes	 them	 to	 the	 applicable	 microservice	 with	 request	 routing,
            protocol	translation,	and	composition.
            API	can	implement	access	control,	logging,	metrics,	rate	limiting,	and
            security	filtering.

Cryptography
When	 working	 with	 Cloud	 computing,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 understand	 they	 are
operating	 within	 and	 across	 trusted	 and	 untrusted	 networks.	 These	 can	 also	 be
referred	to	as	semi-hostile	and	hostile	environments	.	As	such,	data	held	within
and	communications	to	and	between	services	and	systems	operating	in	the	Cloud
must	be	encrypted.
Transport	Layer	Security	(TLS)
Transport	 Layer	 Security	 (TLS)	 is	 a	 protocol	 that	 makes	 sure	 privacy	 between
communicating	 applications	 and	 their	 users	 on	 the	 Internet.	 When	 a	 client	 and
server	 communicate,	 TLS	 makes	 sure	 that	 no	 third	 party	 may	 tamper	 or
eavesdrop	 any	 message.	 TLS	 is	 the	 successor	 to	 the	 Secure	 Sockets	 Layer
(SSL).
Secure	Socket	Layer	(SSL)
Secure	Socket	 Layer	(SSL)	 is	 the	 standard	security	technology	for	 establishing
an	encrypted	link	between	a	browser	and	a	web	server.	This	link	ensures	that	all
data	passed	between	the	web	server	and	browsers	remain	private	and	integral.
Virtual	Private	Network	(VPN)
A	 network	 that	 is	 constructed	 by	 using	 public	 wires	 (such	 as	 the	 internet)	 to
connect	 to	 a	 private	 network,	 such	 as	 a	 company’s	 internal	 network.	 Some
systems	 enable	 you	 to	 create	 networks	 using	 the	 Internet	 as	 the	 medium	 for
transporting	data.
All	 these	 technologies	 encrypt	 data	 to	 and	 from	 your	 data	 center	 and	 system
communications	within	a	Cloud	environment.
 Note:	Hostile	environments	is	a	particularly	relevant	application	of	pervasive
 computing.	 The	 technology	 can	 save	 lives	 by	 both	 eliminating	 the	 need	 for
 humans	to	work	in	these	environments	and	supporting	them	when	they	do.
 Eavesdropping	 is	 the	 unauthorized	 real-time	 interception	 of	 private
 communication,	such	as	a	phone	call,	instant	message,	and	videoconference	or
 fax	transmission.
Sandboxing
A	sandbox	separates	and	monitors	the	behaviour	of	only	the	intended	elements
while	having	proper	separation	from	the	remaining	elements	(i.e.,	the	ability	to
store	personal	information	in	one	sandbox,	with	corporate	information	in	another
sandbox).	Within	Cloud	computing,	sandboxing	is	widely	used	to	run	untrusted
or	untested	code	in	a	tightly	controlled	environment.	Many	vendors	have	begun
to	 offer	 Cloud-based	 sandbox	 environments	 that	 can	 be	 leveraged	 by
organizations	to	test	applications	thoroughly.
Most	 corporations	 use	 a	 sandbox	 environment	 to	 understand	 better	 how	 an
application	 is	 properly	 working	 and	 thoroughly	 test	 applications	 by	 executing
them	and	observing	the	file	behavior	for	indications	of	malicious	activity.
Application	Virtualization
A	 technology	 that	 creates	 a	 virtual	 environment	 for	 an	 application	 to	 run.	 This
virtualization	essentially	creates	an	encapsulation	from	the	underlying	operating
system.	 Application	 virtualization	 can	 be	 used	 to	 isolate	 or	 sandbox	 an
application	to	see	the	processes	it	performs.
There	are	many	examples	of	application	virtualization	available:

            Windows	XP	mode	in	Windows	7.
            “Wine”	 allows	 some	 Microsoft	 applications	 to	 run	 on	 a	 Linux
            platform.
The	primary	objective	of	application	virtualization	is	to	test	an	application	while
protecting	the	operating	system	and	other	applications	on	a	particular	system.
Identity	and	Access	Management	(IAM)	Solutions
Identity	and	Access	Management	(IAM)	includes	a	system,	process,	and	people
that	are	used	to	manage	access	to	organization	resources	by	making	sure	that	the
identity	of	an	entity	is	verified	and	then	granting	the	proper	level	of	access	based
on	the	protected	resource,	this	assured	identity,	and	other	contextual	information.
There	are	many	factors	and	elements	to	make	up	a	complete	IAM	solution.
Federated	Identity
A	Federated	Identity	refers	to	the	identity	of	a	person	in	a	single	system	that	is
linked	to	a	similar	person’s	identity	in	multiple	other	systems.
Federated	 identity	 provides	 the	 mechanisms,	 policies,	 and	 processes,	 which
manage	identity	and	trusted	access	to	systems	through	the	enterprises.
Federated	 identity	 is	 related	 to	 single	 sign-on	 (SSO),	 in	 which	 a	 user's	 single
authentication	 token,	 or	 ticket,	 is	 trusted	 across	 many	 Information	 Technology
systems	and	organizations.
The	 technology	 of	 federation	 is	 much	 similar	 of	 Kerberos	 within	 an	 Active
Directory	 domain,	 where	 a	 user	 logs	 on	 once	 to	 a	 domain	 controller	 is
eventually	granted	an	access	token	and	uses	that	token	to	gain	access	to	systems
for	which	the	user	has	authorization.	The	main	difference	is	that	while	Kerberos
works	 well	 in	 a	 single	 domain,	 federated	 identities	 allow	 for	 the	 generation	 of
tokens	 (authentication)	 in	 one	 domain	 and	 the	 consumption	 of	 these	 tokens
(authorization)	in	another	domain.
Generally,	there	are	two	types	of	federation
Web-of-trust	model	:	Each	member	of	the	federation	has	to	review	and	approve
each	other	member	for	inclusion	in	the	federation.
Third-party	 identifier:	 The	 member	 organizations	 outsource	 their
responsibilities	 to	 review	 and	 approve	 each	 other	 to	 some	 external	 party	 that
would	take	on	this	responsibility	on	behalf	of	all	the	members.
Federation	Standards
There	are	some	federation	standards	that	exit	but	some	are	widely	used.
Security	Assertion	Markup	Language	(SAML)
Security	Assertion	Markup	Language	(SAML)	is	XML	based	and	consists	of	a
framework	 for	 communicating	 authentication,	 authorization	 and	 attribute
information	through	organizations.	The	latest	version	of	SAML	is	SAML	2.0.
WS-Federation
An	identity	federation	specification	within	the	broader	WS-security	framework.
According	 to	 the	 WS-Federation	 Version	 1.2	 OASIS	 standard	 “This
specification	defines	mechanisms	to	allow	different	security	realms	to	federate,
such	 that	 authorized	 access	 to	 resources	 managed	 in	 one	 realm	 can	 be
provided	to	security	principals	whose	identities	are	managed	in	other	realms.
While	 the	 final	 access	 control	 decision	 is	 enforced	 strictly	 by	 the	 realm	 that
controls	the	resource,	federation	provides	mechanisms	that	enable	the	decision
to	 be	 based	 on	 the	 declaration	 (or	 brokering)	 of	 identity,	 attribute,
authentication,	 and	 authorization	 assertions	 between	 realms.	 The	 choice	 of
mechanisms,	 in	 turn,	 is	 dependent	 upon	 trust	 relationships	 between	 the
realms.”
OAuth
OAuth	is	typically	used	in	authorization	with	mobile	apps,	the	OAuth	framework
provides	third-party	applications	limited	access	to	HTTP	services.
OpenID	Connect
This	 is	 an	 interoperable	 authentication	 protocol	 based	 on	 the	 OAuth	 2
specification.	 It	 allows	 developers	 to	 authenticate	 their	 users	 through
applications	and	websites	without	having	to	manage	usernames	and	passwords.
Identity	Providers	(IP)
IP	 is	 the	 entity	 that	 provisions	 and	 authenticates	 identity	 assertions	 such	 as
validating	 users,	 provisioning	 user	 IDs	 and	 passwords,	 managing	 both,	 de-
provisioning	them,	etc.
The	IP	holds	all	of	the	identities	and	generates	a	token	for	known	users.
In	 Cloud	 computing,	 it	 is	 desirable	 that	 the	 organization	 itself	 continues	 to
maintain	all	identities	and	act	as	the	identity	provider.
Single	Sign-On	(SSO)
This	is	widely	used	for	facilitating	inter-organizational	and	inter-security	domain
access	to	resources	leveraging	federated	identity	management.
SSO	 should	 not	 be	 confused	 with	 reduced	 sign-on	 (RSO).	 Generally,	 RSO
operates	through	some	form	of	credential	synchronization.	Implementation	of	an
RSO	solution	introduces	security	issues	which	are	not	experienced	by	SSO,	by
default	 SSO	 eliminates	 usernames,	 passwords,	 and	 other	 sensitive	 data	 from
traversing	the	network.	As	the	foundation	of	federation	relies	on	the	existence	of
an	 identity	 provider	 (IP),	 reduced	 sign-on	 (RSO)	 has	 no	 place	 in	 a	 federated
identity	system.
Multi-factor	Authentication	(MFA)
MFA	 is	 a	 security	 system	 that	 requires	 one	 or	 more	 methods	 of	 authentication
from	 independent	 categories	 of	 credentials	 to	 verify	 the	 user’s	 identity	 for	 a
login	 or	 other	 transaction.	 To	 be	 a	 multi-factor	 system,	 users	 must	 be	 able	 to
provide	two	or	more	independent	credentials:	what	they	know	(e.g.,	password),
what	 they	 have	 (e.g.,	 display	 token	 with	 random	 numbers	 displayed)	 and	 what
they	 are	 (e.g.,	 biometrics).	 The	 objective	 of	 MFA	 is	 to	 add	 an	 extra	 level	 of
protection	to	verify	the	legitimacy	of	a	transaction	.
One-time	 passwords	 also	 fall	 under	 the	 banner	 of	 multi-factor	 authentication.
The	 use	 of	 one-time	 passwords	 is	 strongly	 encouraged	 during	 provision	 and
communication	of	first-login	passwords	to	users.
Step-up	authentication	is	an	additional	procedure	or	factor	that	validates	a	user’s
identity,	 usually	 prompted	 by	 high-risk	 transactions	 or	 violations	 according	 to
policy	rules.




                      Figure	4-4:	Mind	Map	of	Cloud	Application	Security
Practice	Questions

    1.	 Which	API	is	used	the	envelope?

     a)			REST
     b)			SOAP
     c)			Both
     d)		None	of	these
    2.	 Which	API	provides	a	web	services	feature?

     a)			REST
     b)			SOAP
     c)			Both
     d)		None	of	these
    3.	 Which	security	testing	type	is	considered	as	white-box	testing?

     a)			SAST
     b)			DAST
     c)			Pen	Testing
     d)		None	of	the	above
    4.	 Which	security	testing	type	is	considered	as	black-box	testing?

     a)			SAST
     b)			DAST
     c)			Pen	Testing
     d)		None	of	the	above
    5.	 Which	security	testing	type	works	in	a	running	application?

     a)			SAST
     b)			DAST
     c)			Pen	Testing
     d)		None	of	the	above
    6.	 Which	of	the	following	is	not	a	part	of	an	OWASP	Top	ten	list?

     a)		Weak	password	requirements
     b)			Injection	attack
 c)			Broken	Authentication
 d)		Sensitive	Data	Exposure
7.	 How	many	types	of	federations	are	there?

 a)			Two
 b)			Three
 c)			Four
 d)			Five
8.	 Which	of	the	following	is	not	a	stage	of	SDLC	process?

 a)			Designing
 b)			Development
 c)			Reject
 d)			Testing
9.	 Which	of	the	following	is	not	a	part	of	the	STRIDE	model?

 a)			Spoofing
 b)		External	Pen	testing
 c)			Repudiation
 d)			Information
    10.	Database	activity	monitoring	can	be:

 a)		Network	base	or	agent-based
 b)		Server-based	or	client-based
 c)		Used	in	place	of	data	masking
 d)		Used	in	the	place	of	encryption
    11.	Which	layer	in	the	OSI	Model	that	WAF	use?

 a)			Layer	2
 b)			Layer	4
 c)			Layer	6
 d)			Layer	7
    12.	Which	device	filters	API	traffic?

 a)			WAF
 b)			DAM
c)			XML	Firewalls
d)			API	Gateway
Chapter	05:	Operations
The	operations	chapter	is	focused	on	how	to	plan,	design,	operate,	run,	manage,
and	 monitor	 both	 the	 physical	 and	 logical	 components	 of	 a	 Cloud	 data	 center.
These	 components	 are	 categorized	 in	 layers	 to	 be	 easy	 to	 manage	 and
troubleshoot.	We	focus	on	the	main	components	of	each	layer,	including	network
devices,	servers,	and	storage	 systems	along	with	what	makes	them	unique	 to	a
Cloud	data	center	compared	to	a	traditional	data	center.	We	will	also	examine	the
risk	 assessment	 process	 for	 a	 system,	 how	 it	 relates	 to	 Cloud	 systems,	 and	 the
collection	 of	 forensic	 evidence,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 unique	 challenges	 and
considerations	that	a	cloud	environment	comprises.
Data	Center	Design
Data	 center’s	 design	 and	 architecture	 have	 long	 formed	 an	 integral	 part	 of	 the
information	 technology	 services	 for	 service	 providers.	 Over	 time	 these	 have
often	 evolved	 and	 grown	 in	 line	 with	 Cloud	 computing	 developments	 and
enhanced	 capabilities.	 Data	 center	 continues	 to	 be	 refined,	 enhanced,	 and
improved	 globally;	 therefore,	 they	 remain	 dependent	 on	 the	 similar	 essential
components	to	support	their	activities.
Implementing	 a	 secure	 design	 when	 developing	 a	 Cloud	 data	 center,	 involves
numerous	considerations.	Before	creating	any	design	decision,	work	with	senior
management	 and	 other	 primary	 stakeholders	 to	 identify	 all	 compliance
requirements	for	the	Cloud	data	center.	If	you	are	developing	a	Cloud	data	center
for	public	Cloud	services,	you	will	need	to	provide	a	higher	level	of	security	to
your	customers.
Logical	Design
The	 logical	 design	 area	 contains	 the	 most	 profound	 differences	 between	 a
traditional	 data	 center	 and	 a	 Cloud	 data	 center.	 Various	 main	 components	 of
Cloud	computing	will	drive	key	data	center	design	decision,	both	with	the	design
of	the	actual	center	along	with	the	location	of	it.
Tenant	Partitioning
As	 enterprises	 transition	 from	 traditionally	 dedicated	 server	 deployments	 to
virtualized	 environments	 that	 leverage	 Cloud	 services,	 the	 Cloud	 computing
networks	 that	 they	 are	 constructing	 need	 to	 provide	 security	 and	 segregate
sensitive	 data	 and	 applications.	 In	 some	 cases,	 multi-tenant	 networks	 are	 a
solution	.
Briefly,	Multi-tenant	networks	are	data	center	networks	that	are	logically	divided
into	 smaller	 isolated	 networks.	 They	 share	 the	 physical	 networking	 gear	 but
operate	on	their	network	without	visibility	into	other	logical	networks.
By	 default,	 in	 a	 Cloud	 deployment,	 multi-tenant	 needs	 a	 logical	 design	 that
partitions	 and	 segregates	 customer’s	 data.	 Failure	 to	 do	 so	 can	 result	 in	 an
unauthorized	access,	view,	or	modification	of	tenant	data.
Access	Control
From	 a	 logical	 standpoint,	 some	 areas	 of	 access	 control	 are	 significant	 to
consider	in	relation	to	the	data	center.	In	Cloud	computing,	you	have	the	actual
virtual	machines	to	consider	but	also	the	management	plane	and	hypervisor	tiers.
This	sets	a	Cloud	data	center	apart	from	a	traditional	data	center	because	you	are
not	only	planning	on	accessing	physical	machines,	but	you	also	have	to	consider
the	 layers	 that	 have	 supervisory	 and	 administrative	 control	 over	 other	 systems.
Planning	for	early	states	to	keep	various	layers	separated	allows	the	hypervisor
and	 management	 plane	 layer	 to	 be	 completely	 shielded	 from	 systems	 and
customer	access,	will	promote	stronger	security	control.	Also	planning	for	secure
authentication	 and	 authorization	 controls,	 including	 strong	 verification
requirements	and	multifactor	authentication	to	be	implemented	at	the	very	least
for	administrative	access	will	ensure	stronger	security.	As	well	as,	secure	access
control	designs,	planning	for	robust	logging,	monitoring,	and	auditing	for	access
control	systems	and	mechanism	from	the	initial	phase	of	design	is	essential	from
a	security	perspective.
Physical	Design
Data	 centers	 are	 the	 build-up	 of	 a	 standard	 set	 of	 equipment	 and	 components,
same	 as	 servers	 and	 system,	 but	 all	 are	 different	 based	 on	 their	 requirements,
purposes,	 and	 objectives,	 as	 set	 forth	 by	 the	 organizations	 constructing	 and
maintaining	 the	 data	 centers.	 Many	 data	 center	 will	 look	 and	 function	 very
similar	to	others,	but	each	is	unique	with	its	problems	and	concerns.
Location
Location	 is	 the	 initial	 physical	 consideration	 of	 a	 data	 center,	 and	 it	 applies	 to
various	issues.	The	location	of	the	data	center	will	impact	compliance	decision
and	 could	 further	 complicate	 the	 organization’s	 ability	 to	 meet	 legal	 and
regulatory	requirements	because	the	geographic	location	of	a	data	center	impacts
its	 jurisdiction.	 Before	 selecting	 a	 location	 for	 the	 data	 center,	 an	 organization
should	 have	 a	 clear	 understanding	 of	 requirements	 at	 the	 national,	 state	 or
province	and	local	levels.	Contingency,	failover,	and	redundancy	involving	other
data	centers	in	different	locations	are	essential	to	understand	.
The	 physical	 design	 of	 a	 data	 center	 also	 drives	 various	 design	 requirements
based	 on	 the	 realities	 of	 threats	 posed	 from	 the	 physical	 requirement.	 Various
locations	have	the	threat	or	possibility	of	a	natural	disaster,	which	will	directly
impact	 many	 of	 the	 physical	 designs	 and	 protection	 requirements	 of	 the	 data
center	 in	 different	 ways.	 The	 possibility	 of	 each	 natural	 disaster	 will	 influence
the	 data	 center	 design	 along	 with	 the	 importance	 of	 business	 continuity	 and
disaster	 recovery	 planning	 and	 testing.	 Various	 technologies	 can	 evolve	 to
mitigate	 threats	 from	 natural	 disasters,	 such	 as	 dikes,	 reinforced	 walls,	 and
vibration	control	.
Data	 centers	 need	 massive	 environmental	 and	 utility	 resources	 as	 well.	 These
requirements	include	access	to	electrical	grids	that	can	handle	the	demands	of	a
data	center,	access	to	water	supplies,	physical	access	for	personnel,	and	access	to
telecommunication	networks	and	the	bandwidth	that	a	data	center	needs.
Data	 center	 physical	 security	 is	 also	 a	 significant	 concern.	 Data	 centers	 should
follow	 best	 practices	 for	 physical	 security	 and	 access.	 This	 means	 that	 border
security	 such	 as	 fences,	 gates,	 walls,	 and	 so	 on,	 are	 all	 deployed	 in	 a	 layered
approach	 along	 with	 monitoring	 capabilities.	 The	 location	 of	 a	 data	 center	 can
significantly	impact	the	types	and	layering	of	physical	security	available.
Buy/Build
The	organization	can	build	a	data	center,	buy	or	rent	some	space	in	a	data	center.
Regardless	of	the	decision	made	by	the	organization,	there	are	certain	standards
and	 concerns	that	must	be	considered	and	addressed	through	 planning,	such	as
data	 center	 tier	 certification,	 physical	 security	 level,	 and	 usage	 profile.	 As	 a
Cloud	Security	Professional	(CSP),	you	and	the	organization	architect	both	play
an	essential	role	in	ensuring	these	concerns	are	identified	and	addressed	as	part
of	the	decision	process.
If	you	build	the	data	center,	the	organization	will	have	the	most	control	over	the
design	 and	 security	 of	 it.	 However,	 there	 is	 a	 significant	 investment	 that	 is
necessary	to	build	a	robust	data	center.
Buying	or	renting	space	in	a	data	center	may	be	a	cheaper	alternative.	With	this
option,	there	may	be	limitations	to	design	impacts.	The	renting	organization	will
include	all	security	requirements	in	the	RFP	and	contract.
When	using	a	shared	data	center,	physical	separation	of	servers	and	equipment
will	be	included	in	the	design.
There	are	various	standards	available	to	select.	Some	of	them	are	as	follows:

            Building	Industry	Consulting	Service	International	Inc.	(BICSI)	:
            The	 ANSI/BICSI	 002-2014	 standard	 covers	 cabling	 design	 and
            installation.
            International	 Data	 Center	 Authority	 (IDCA)	 :	 The	 Infinity
            Paradigm	 covers	 data	 center	 location,	 facility	 structure,	 and
            infrastructure	and	applications.
            National	Fire	Protection	Association	(NFPA):	The	NFPA	75	and	76
            standards	 specify	 how	 hot	 or	 cold	 aisle	 containment	 is	 to	 be	 carried
            out,	 NFPA	 standard	 70	 needs	 the	 implementation	 of	 an	 emergency
            power	off	button	to	secure	first	responders	in	the	data	center	in	case
            of	emergency.
 Note:
 Dike:	A	dike,	in	geological	usage,	is	a	sheet	of	rock	that	is	formed	in	a	fracture
 in	a	pre-existing	rock	body.
 RFP:	A	request	for	proposal	(RFP)	is	a	document	that	solicits	proposal,	often
 made	 through	 a	 bidding	 process,	 by	 an	 agency	 or	 company	 interested	 in
 procurement	of	a	commodity,	service,	or	asset,	to	potential	suppliers	to	submit
 business	proposals.
 The	 Infinity	 Paradigm	 :	 The	 only	 all-in-one	 open	 standard	 framework	 for
 Data	centers,	Cloud,	Big	Data,	IoT,	IT,	Facilities,	and	Infrastructure.
Environmental	Design
The	 environmental	 design	 must	 account	 for	 adequate	 heating,	 ventilation,	 air
conditioning,	 power	 with	 sufficient	 conditioning,	 and	 backup.	 Network
connectivity	 must	 arise	 from	 many	 vendors	 and	 include	 many	 paths	 into	 the
facility.
Heating,	Ventilation	&	Air-conditioning	(HVAC)
Heating,	ventilation,	and	air	conditioning	(HVAC)	refers	to	the	different	systems
used	 for	 moving	 air	 between	 indoor	 and	 outdoor	 areas,	 as	 well	 as	 heating	 and
cooling	 both	 residential	 and	 commercial	 buildings.	 They	 are	 the	 systems	 that
keep	you	warm	and	cozy	in	the	winter	and	feeling	cool	and	fresh	in	the	summer.
They	also	are	the	systems	that	filter	and	clean	indoor	air	to	keep	you	healthy	and
maintain	humidity	levels	at	optimal	comfort	levels.
Its	 objective	 is	 to	 provide	 thermal	 comfort	 and	 acceptable	 indoor	 air	 quality
(IAQ).	HVAC	system	design	is	a	study	of	mechanical	engineering,	based	on	the
principles	of	thermodynamics,	fluid	mechanics	and	heat	transfer.
In	 case	 of	 a	 Data	 center	 design,	 HVAC	 units	 are	 turned	 on	 and	 off	 based	 on
return	air	temperature.	The	American	Society	of	Heating,	Refrigeration,	and
Air	 Conditioning	 Engineers	 (ASHRAE)	 recommends	 the	 Temperature	 and
Humidity	Guidelines	that	are	specified	in	the	table	that	will	produce	lower	inlets
temperature.
 Temperature	Type             Temperature	Range
 Low-end	temperature          18°C	(64.4°F)
 High-end	temperature         27°C	(80.6°F)
 Low-end	moisture             40%	relative	humidity	and	5.5°C	(41.9°F)	dew	point
 High-end	moisture            60%	relative	humidity	and	15°C	(59°F)	dew	point
                                 Table	5-1:	Temperature	Table

The	 Cloud	 Security	 Professional	 (CSP)	 should	 be	 aware	 that	 the	 lower	 the
temperature	 in	 the	 data	 center,	 the	 higher	 the	 cooling	 would	 cost	 per	 month.
Generally,	the	air	conditioning	system	moves	the	heat	generated	by	equipment	in
the	data	center	outside,	allowing	the	data	center	to	maintain	a	stable	temperature
range	 for	 the	 operating	 equipment.	 The	 power	 requirements	 for	 cooling	 off	 a
data	center	will	be	reliant	on	the	amount	of	heat	being	removed	along	with	the
temperature	difference	between	the	inside	of	the	data	center	and	the	outside	air.
HVAC	Design	Consideration
Industry	guidance	ought	to	be	followed	to	provide	sufficient	HVAC	to	secure	the
server	equipment.	Include	the	following	considerations	in	your	design:

            Backup	power	supplies	must	be	provided	to	run	the	HVAC	system	for
            the	time	required	for	the	system	to	stay	up.
            Consideration	has	to	be	given	to	energy	efficient	systems.
            The	local	weather	condition	will	affect	HVAC	design	requirements.
            The	 HVAC	 system	 must	 provide	 air	 management	 that	 separates	 the
            cool	air	from	the	heat	exhaustion	of	the	servers.
            The	HVAC	system	has	to	filter	contaminants	and	dust.
            Redundant	HVAC	systems	should	be	a	part	of	the	overall	design.

Multi-Vendor	Pathway	Connectivity	(MVPC)
Continuous	service	or	access	is	essential	to	the	daily	operation	and	productivity
of	 your	 business.	 With	 downtime	 translating	 directly	 to	 loss	 of	 income,	 data
centers	need	to	be	designed	for	redundant,	fail-safe	reliability	and	availability.
The	 performance	 of	 the	 infrastructure	 also	 defines	 reliability	 of	 a	 data	 center.
Cabling	and	connectivity	backed	by	a	reliable	vendor	with	guaranteed	error-free
performance	to	help	avoid	poor	transmission	in	the	data	center	.
There	 must	 be	 redundant	 connectivity	 from	 numerous	 providers	 into	 the	 data
center.	 This	 will	 guide	 to	 prevent	 a	 single	 point	 of	 failure	 for	 network
connectivity.	 The	 redundant	 path	 has	 to	 provide	 the	 minimum	 expected
connection	speed	for	data	center	operations.
 Note:
 Thermal	Comfort	:	It	is	the	condition	of	mind	that	expresses	satisfaction	with
 the	 thermal	 environment	 and	 is	 assessed	 by	 subjective	 evaluation
 (ANSI/ASHRAE	Standard	55).
 Indoor	 Air	 Quality	 (IAQ)	 :	 IAQ	 is	 the	 air	 quality	 inside	 and	 around	 the
 overall	buildings	and	structures.
 Mechanical	 Engineering:	A	 discipline	 that	 applies	 engineering,	 engineering
 mathematics,	 physics,	 and	 materials	 science	 principles	 to	 analyse,	 design,
 manufacture,	and	maintain	mechanical	systems.
 Thermodynamics:	A	branch	of	physics	that	deals	with	heat,	temperature,	and
 their	relation	to	energy	and	work.
 Fluid	Mechanics:	A	branch	of	physics	concerned	with	the	mechanics	of	fluids
 that	is	liquids,	gases,	and	plasmas	and	the	forces	on	them.
 Heat	 Transfer	 :	 A	 discipline	 of	 thermal	 engineering	 that	 concerns	 the
 generation,	 use,	 conversion,	 and	 exchange	 of	 thermal	 energy	 (heat)	 between
 physical	systems.
 ASHRAE	 :	 The	 American	 Society	 of	 Heating,	 Refrigerating	 and	 Air-
 Conditioning	 Engineers	 was	 founded	 in	 1894,	 it	 has	 a	 huge	 number	 of
 members	worldwide.	ASHRAE	is	a	global	professional	association	seeking	to
 advance	 heating,	 ventilation,	 air	 conditioning	 and	 refrigeration	 (HVAC&R)
 systems	design	and	construction.

Physical	Infrastructure	for	Cloud	Environment
The	 physical	 infrastructure	 for	 a	 Cloud	 resolver	 around	 the	 significant
components	 of	 networks,	 servers,	 and	 storage.	 All	 these	 components	 must	 go
through	careful	planning	to	work	together	with	the	significant	aspects	of	a	Cloud
compared	 to	 a	 traditional	 data	 center,	 done	 so	 with	 an	 eye	 towards	 security
models	and	Cloud	considerations.
Secure	Configuration	of	Hardware	Specific	Requirements
A	Cloud	data	center	will	have	specific	requirements	that	are	unique	to	the	Cloud
environment,	 the	 appropriate	 securing	 of	 hardware	 and	 systems	 is	 the	 same	 as
the	 traditional	 data	 center.	 Hardware	 and	 systems,	 much	 like	 applications	 and
software,	 can	 carry	 a	 massive	 amount	 of	 configuration	 possibilities	 and
requirements,	due	to	the	enormous	amount	of	possible	combinations	of	operating
systems	 and	 hardware,	 along	 with	 the	 specific	 operating	 systems	 that	 run	 on
appliance	and	hypervisor	systems	.
BIOS	Settings
As	 with	 any	 physical	 hardware,	 virtualization	 hosts	 and	 trusted	 platform
modules	 (TPMs)	 have	 BIOS	 settings	 that	 govern	 specific	 hardware
configurations	 and	 security	 technologies	 to	 prevent	 access	 to	 them	 for
manipulation.
Incorrect	 BIOS	 settings	 may	 reduce	 performance,	 so	 follow	 the	 vendor
recommended	guidance	for	the	configuration	of	BIOS	settings.
For	Example:
If	you	are	using	VMware	Distributed	Power	Management	(DPM)	technology,
then	you	will	need	to	turn	off	any	power	management	settings	in	the	host	BIOS,
as	 they	 may	 interface	 with	 the	 proper	 operation	 of	 DPM.	 It	 is	 essential	 to
understand	 that	 the	 requirements	 for	 secure	 host	 configuration	 based	 on	 the
vendor's	platforms	are	being	utilized	in	the	organization.
Storage	Controller
The	following	must	be	considered	when	configuring	storage	controllers.

            Switch	 off	 all	 unnecessary	 services,	 such	 as	 web	 interfaces	 and
            management	services	that	will	not	be	required	or	used.
            Validate	the	controllers	that	can	meet	the	estimated	traffic	load	based
            on	vendor	specifications	and	testing	(1	GB,	10	GB,	16	GB,	40	GB).
            Deploy	a	redundant	failover	configuration	such	as	a	NIC	team.
            You	may	also	need	to	deploy	a	multi-path	solution.
            Change	 default	 administrative	 passwords	 for	 configuration	 and
            management	access	to	the	controller.
Note	that	Vendor	specifies	different	settings.
Network	Controller
The	 two	 networking	 models	 that	 have	 to	 be	 considered	 are	 Traditional	 and
Converged.
Traditional	Networking	Model
This	 model	 is	 a	 layered	 approach	 with	 physical	 switches	 at	 the	 top	 layer	 and
logical	separation	at	the	hypervisor	level.	This	model	allows	the	use	of	network
security	 tools.	 Maybe	 some	 limitations	 on	 the	 visibility	 of	 network	 segments
between	virtual	machines	(VM).
Converged	Networking	Model
This	model	is	optimized	for	Cloud	deployments	and	utilizes	standard	perimeter
protection	 measures.	 The	 underlying	 storage	 and	 IP	 networks	 are	 converged	 to
maximize	the	benefits	for	a	Cloud	workload.	This	method	facilitates	the	use	of
virtualized	 security	 equipment	 for	 network	 protection.	 It	 is	 essential	 to
understand	 that	 a	 converged	 network	 model	 is	 a	 super	 network	 because	 it	 can
carry	a	combination	data,	voice,	and	video	traffic	across	a	single	network	that	is
optimized	for	performance.
 Note:
 Trusted	Platform	Module	(TPM):	TPM	is	a	computer	chip	(microcontroller)
 that	can	securely	store	artefacts	used	to	authenticate	the	platform	(your	PC	or
 laptop).	These	artefacts	can	include	certificates,	encryption	keys,	or	passwords.
 VMware's	 Distributed	 Power	 Management	 (DPM)	 :	 DPM	 is	 one	 feature
 that	demonstrates	the	potential	of	VMotion	--	not	just	visually	but	in	hard	cash.
 DPM,	 which	 is	 a	 piece	 of	 VMware's	 Distributed	 Resource	 Scheduler	 (DRS),
 and	 DRS	 do	 not	 get	 the	 exposure	 that	 they	 deserve.	 If	 every	 organization
 understood	 how	 well	 DRS	 and	 DPM	 minimize	 power	 consumption,	 these
 virtualization	 management	 tools	 would	 be	 considered	 mandatory	 for	 server
 infrastructure.
 NIC	 Team	 :	 In	 Windows	 Server,	 NIC	 teaming	 is	 a	 mechanism	 that	 allows
 multiple	 physical	 NICs	 to	 be	 bound	 together	 into	 a	 single	 logical	 NIC.	 That
 logical	NIC	has	the	capabilities	of	all	the	underlying	physical	hardware.
Virtualization	Management	Tools	for	the	Host
Securely	 configuring	 the	 virtualization	 management	 toolset	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most
critical	 phases	 when	 developing	 a	 Cloud	 environment.	 Compromising	 on	 the
management	 tools	 may	 allow	 an	 attacker	 with	 unlimited	 access	 to	 the	 virtual
machine,	 the	 host,	 and	 the	 organization	 network.	 Hence,	 you	 need	 to	 securely
install	and	configure	the	management	tools	and	then	sufficiently	monitor	them.
All	the	management	should	take	place	on	an	isolated	management	network.
The	virtualization	platform	will	determine	what	management	tools	are	needed	to
be	installed	on	the	host.	The	latest	management	tools	must	be	installed	on	each
host,	 and	 the	 configuration	 management	 plan	 has	 to	 include	 rules	 on	 updating
these	tools.	Updating	these	tools	may	need	server	downtime,	therefore,	sufficient
server	 resources	 have	 to	 be	 deployed	 to	 allow	 for	 the	 movement	 of	 virtual
machines	 when	 updating	 the	 virtualization	 platform.	 You	 have	 to	 perform
external	vulnerability	testing	of	the	tools	as	well.
Follow	 the	 vendor	 security	 guidance	 when	 configuring	 and	 deploying	 these
tools.	 Access	to	these	management	tools	has	to	be	role-based.	You	should	also
audit	and	log	the	management	tools	.
It	 is	 essential	 to	 understand	 what	 management	 tools	 are	 available	 by	 vendor
platform,	along	with	how	to	securely	install	and	configure	them	in	a	proper	way
based	on	the	configuration	of	the	systems	involved.
Best	Practices
Regardless	of	the	toolset	used	to	manage	the	host,	make	sure	that	the	following
best	 practices	 are	 used	 to	 protect	 the	 tools	 and	 that	 only	 authorized	 users	 are
given	access	when	necessary	to	perform	their	jobs.

            Access	Control:	Secures	the	tool(s)	and	tightly	controls	and	monitors
            to	their	access.
            Auditing/Monitoring:	 Monitors	 and	 tracks	 the	 use	 of	 the	 tool(s)
            throughout	 the	 organization	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 appropriate	 usage	 is
            taking	place.
            Defense	in	Depth:	Implements	the	tool(s)	used	to	manage	the	host	as
            part	of	a	larger	architectural	design	that	mutually	reinforces	security
            at	 every	 level	 of	 the	 organization.	 The	 tool(s)	 should	 be	 seen	 as	 a
            tactical	 component	 of	 host	 management,	 one	 that	 is	 linked	 to	 an
            operational	component	such	as	procedures	and	a	strategic	component
            such	as	policies.
            Maintenance:	Updates	 and	 patches	 the	 tool(s)	 as	 required	 ensuring
            compliance	 with	 all	 the	 vendor	 recommendations	 and	 security
            reports.

Run	Physical	Infrastructure	for	Cloud	Environment
Running	 the	 physical	 infrastructure	 of	 a	 Cloud	 computing	 involves	 the	 access
control	systems,	secure	the	networking	configuration,	hardening	of	the	operating
system	through	baselines	and	compliance.
Configuration	of	Access	Control	for	Local	Access
You	 must	 have	 a	 plan	 to	 address	 access	 control	 to	 the	 Cloud-hosting
environment.
Physical	 access	 to	 servers	 has	 to	 be	 limited	 to	 users	 who	 need	 access	 for	 a
specific	 purpose.	 Personnel	 who	 administer	 physical	 hardware	 should	 not	 have
other	types	of	administrative	access.
Secure	KVM
Before	we	describe	how	to	secure	KVM,	we	should	firstly	define	what	KVM	is.
According	to	the	“Red	Hat	”:
“Kernel-based	        Virtual	      Machine	         (KVM)	       is	    an	     open
source	virtualization	technology	built	into	Linux®	.	Specifically,	KVM	lets	you
turn	Linux	into	a	hypervisor	that	allows	a	host	machine	to	run	various	machine;
isolated	virtual	environments	called	virtual	machines	(	VMs)	or	guests.	KVM	is
part	of	Linux.	If	you	have	any	latest	version	of	Linux	,	you	have	got	KVM	.”
The	VM-Series	for	KVM	allows	service	providers	and	organization	alike	to	add
next-generation	 firewall	 and	 advanced	 threat	 prevention	 capabilities	 to	 their
Cloud-based	initiatives	and	Linux-based	virtualization.	KVM	is	a	popular	open-
source	hypervisor	that	enables	service	providers	and	organizations	to	deploy	and
manage	 the	 VM-Series	 across	 a	 range	 of	 Linux	 operating	 systems	 including
Ubuntu	and	CentOS/RHEL	.
Now,	we	are	starting	to	describe	how	to	secure	KVM.
Access	 to	 host	 must	 be	 performed	 by	 secure	 KVM;	 for	 additional	 security,
access	 to	 KVM	 devices	 have	 to	 need	 a	 checkout	 process.	 A	 secure	 KVM	 will
prevent	 data	 leakage	 from	 the	 server	 to	 the	 connected	 computer,	 along	 with
preventing	 un-secure	 emanations	 .	 The	 Common	 Criteria	 (CC)	 provides
guidance	on	different	security	levels	and	a	list	of	KVM	products	that	meet	those
security	 levels.	 Multi-factor	 authentication	 has	 to	 be	 considered	 for	 remote
console	access.	All	access	should	be	logged	and	routine	audits	are	performed.
A	secure	KVM	will	meet	the	following	design	criteria:

           Fixed	Firmware:	It	 cannot	 be	 re-programmed,	 preventing	 attempts
           to	modify	the	logic	of	the	KVM.
           Housing	 Intrusion	 Detection:	 Causes	 the	 KVM	 to	 become
           inoperable	and	the	LED	s	to	flash	repeatedly	if	the	housing	has	been
           opened.
           Isolated	 Data	 Channels:	 Located	 in	 each	 KVM	 port	 and	 make	 it
           impossible	 for	 data	 to	 be	 transferred	 between	 connected	 computers
           via	KVM.
           Push-button	 Control:	 Need	 physical	 access	 to	 KVM	 when
           switching	between	connected	computers.
           Tamper	 warning	 labels	 on	 each	 side	 of	 the	 KVM:	This	 provides
           clear	visual	evidence	if	the	enclosure	has	been	compromised.
           Selective	USB	Access:	Only	authorized	human	interface	device	USB
            devices	 (such	 as	 keyboard	 and	 mice)	 to	 prevent	 unintentional	 and
            insecure	data	transfer.
            Safe	Buffer	Design:	Does	not	incorporate	with	a	memory	buffer,	and
            the	 keyboard	 buffer	 is	 automatically	 cleared	 after	 data	 transmission,
            preventing	 the	 transfer	 of	 keystrokes	 or	 other	 data	 when	 switching
            between	computers.
 Note:
 Linux:	A	family	of	free	and	open-source	software	operating	systems	based	on
 the	Linux	kernel,	developed	by	Linus	Torvalds.
 Virtual	Machine	(VM	 ):	 VM	 is	 an	 emulation	 of	 a	 computer	 system.	 VM	 is
 based	 on	 computer	 architecture	 and	 provides	 the	 functionality	 of	 a	 physical
 computer.	Their	implementations	may	involve	specialized	software,	hardware,
 or	a	mixture	of	both.
 VM-Series:	A	virtualized	form	of	a	factor	to	the	next-generation	firewall	that
 can	 be	 deployed	 in	 a	 range	 of	 public	 and	 private	 Cloud	 computing
 environments	 based	 on	 technologies	 from	 Amazon	 Web	 Services	 (AWS),
 Cisco,	Citrix,	Google,	KVM,	Microsoft,	OpenStack,	and	VMware.
 Ubuntu:	An	open	source	software	operating	system	that	runs	from	the	desktop
 to	the	Cloud,	to	all	your	internet-connected	things.
 CentOS:	Community	Enterprise	Operating	System	is	a	Linux	distribution	that
 provides	 a	 free,	 enterprise-class,	 community-supported	 computing	 platform
 functionally	compatible	with	its	upstream	source,	RHEL.
 RHEL:	Red	 Hat	 Enterprise	 Linux	 is	 a	 Linux	 distribution	 developed	 by	 Red
 Hat	and	targeted	towards	the	commercial	market.
 Common	Criteria	(CC):	An	international	set	of	guidelines	and	specifications
 developed	for	evaluating	information	security	products,	specifically	to	ensure
 they	meet	an	agreed-upon	security	standard	for	government	deployments.
 LED:	A	 light-emitting	 diode	 is	 a	 semiconductor	 light	 source	 that	 emits	 light
 when	current	flows	through	it.
Console-based	Access	Mechanisms
Console	based	access	to	virtual	machines	(VM)	is	significant.	Regardless	of	the
vendor	platform,	all	VM	management	software	provide	a	“manage	by	console	”
option.	The	use	of	these	consoles	to	access,	configure,	and	manage	VMs	provide
an	 administrator	 the	 opportunity	 to	 control	 almost	 every	 component	 of	 VMs
configuration	and	usage	easily.	Therefore,	a	bad	actor	or	hacker	can	achieve	the
same	level	of	access	and	control	by	using	these	consoles	if	they	are	not	properly
secured	and	managed.	The	use	of	access	controls	for	console	access	is	available
in	every	vendor	platform	and	have	to	be	implemented	and	regularly	audited	for
compliance	as	a	best	practice.
Securing	Network	Configuration
The	 network	 layer	 is	 significant	 for	 the	 entire	 system	 and	 data	 center	 security.
Four	main	technologies	are	used	for	its	security.




                                Figure	5-1:	Networking	Layers

VLANs
The	network	can	be	one	of	the	weakest	components	of	any	system.
The	virtual	machine	network	needs	as	much	protection	as	the	physical	network.
By	using	VLANs,	you	can	improve	networking	security	in	your	environment.	In
simple	 terms,	 a	 VLAN	 is	 a	 set	 of	 workstations	 within	 a	 LAN	 that	 can
communicate	with	each	other	as	though	they	were	on	a	single	isolated	LAN.	It	is
an	IEEE	standard	networking	scheme	with	specific	tagging	methods	that	allow
routing	of	packets	to	only	those	ports	that	are	part	of	the	VLAN.
When	properly	configured,	VLANs	provide	a	dependable	means	to	protect	a	set
of	machines	from	accidental	or	malicious	intrusions.	VLANs	let	you	segment	a
physical	network	so	that	two	machines	in	the	network	can	transmit	packets	back
and	forth	unless	they	are	part	of	the	same	VLAN.
Besides,	VLAN	communicates	with	each	other	as	though	they	were	on	a	single,
isolated	LAN	because	a	VLAN	does	the	following:

            Broadcasts	packets	sent	by	one	of	the	workstations	will	reach	all	the
            others	in	the	VLAN.
            Broadcasts	 sent	 by	 one	 of	 the	 workstations	 in	 the	 VLAN	 will	 not
            reach	any	workstations	that	are	not	in	the	VLAN.
            Broadcasts	sent	by	workstations	that	are	not	in	the	VLAN	will	never
            reach	workstations	that	are	in	the	VLAN.
            All	workstations	can	communicate	with	each	other	without	the	need
            to	go	through	a	gateway.

Purpose	of	VLANS
The	main	reason	for	splitting	a	network	into	LAN	is	to	reduce	congestion	on	a
large	LAN.	Initially,	LAN	was	very	flat;	all	the	workstations	were	connected	to	a
single	 piece	 of	 coaxial	 cable,	 or	 to	 sets	 of	 chained	 hubs.	 In	 a	 flat	 LAN,	 every
packet	that	any	device	puts	onto	the	wire	gets	sent	to	every	other	device	on	the
LAN.	As	the	number	of	workstations	on	the	typical	LAN	grew,	they	started	to
become	congested;	there	were	just	too	many	collisions	because	most	of	the	time
when	a	workstation	tried	to	send	a	packet	it	would	find	that	a	packet	sent	by	any
other	device	already	occupied	the	wire.
VLANs	can	help	reduce	network	traffic	by	forming	many	broadcast	domains,	to
splitting	 up	 a	 more	 extensive	 network	 into	 smaller	 independent	 segments	 with
some	broadcasts	being	sent	to	each	device	on	the	entire	network.
Transport	Layer	Security	(TLS)
Transport	Layer	Security	(TLS)	is	a	cryptographic	protocol	designed	to	provide
communication	 security	 to	 an	 entire	 network.	 It	 uses	 X.509	 certificates	 to
authenticate	 a	 connection	 and	 to	 replace	 a	 symmetric	 key.	 This	 key	 is	 used	 to
encrypt	 any	 data	 sent	 over	 the	 connection.	 The	 TLS	 protocol	 allows	 server	 or
client	applications	to	communicate	across	a	network	in	a	way	designed	to	ensure
confidentiality.	TLS	has	two	layers	that	are	defined	below.
TLS	Handshake	Protocol
Allows	 the	 client	 or	 server	 to	 authenticate	 each	 other	 and	 to	 communicate	 an
encryption	algorithm	and	cryptographic	keys	before	data	is	sent	or	received.
TLS	Record	Protocol
Provides	connection	security	and	makes	sure	that	the	connection	is	reliable	and
secure.	 Used	 to	 encapsulate	 higher-level	 protocols,	 between	 them	 TLS
handshake	protocol.
Dynamic	Host	Configuration	Protocol	(DHCP)
Dynamic	Host	Configuration	Protocol	(DHCP)	is	a	client	or	server	protocol	that
automatically	 provides	 an	 Internet	 Protocol	 (IP)	 host	 with	 its	 IP	 address	 and
other	 related	 configuration	 information	 such	 as	 the	 default	 gateway	 and	 subnet
mask.	RFCs	2131	and	2132	define	DHCP	as	an	Internet	Engineering	Task	Force
(IETF)	 standard	 based	 on	 Bootstrap	 Protocol	 (BOOTP),	 a	 protocol	 with	 which
DHCP	 shares	 various	 implementation	 details.	 DHCP	 allows	 hosts	 to	 obtain
needed	TCP/IP	configuration	information	from	a	DHCP	server.
The	 DHCP	 server	 considerably	 reduces	 configuration	 efforts	 because	 an
administrator	does	not	have	to	manually	assign	each	computer	with	IP	addresses
and	other	IP-related	settings.
DHCP	Advantages
DHCP	provides	the	following	advantages.

            Reliable	 IP	 Address	 Configuration:	 DHCP	 reduced	 configuration
            errors	 caused	 by	 manual	 IP	 address	 configuration,	 such	 as
            typographical	errors,	or	address	conflicts	caused	by	the	assigning	of
            an	IP	address	to	one	or	more	computer	at	the	same	time.
            Reduced	 Network	 Administration:	 DHCP	 includes	 the	 following
            benefits	to	reduce	network	administration:

                  Automated	and	centralized	TCP/IP	configuration.
                  The	capability	to	classify	TCP/IP	configurations	from	a	central
                  location.
                  The	capability	to	assign	a	complete	range	of	additional	TCP/IP
                  configuration	values	through	DHCP	options.
                  The	skilful	handling	of	IP	address	changes	for	clients	that	must
                  be	 updated	 frequently,	 such	 as	 those	 for	 portable	 devices	 that
                  move	to	different	locations	on	a	wireless	network.
                  The	 forwarding	 of	 initial	 DHCP	 messages	 by	 using	 a	 DHCP
                  relay	 agent,	 which	 removes	 the	 need	 for	 a	 DHCP	 server	 on
                  every	subnet.

DNS	SEC
Before	 understanding	 DNS	 SEC,	 you	 first	 need	 to	 know	 how	 the	 DNS	 system
works.
DNS	 is	 used	 to	 translate	 a	 domain	 name	 (like	 ipspecialist.net)	 into	 numeric
Internet	 address	 like	 (197.166.1.0).	 DNS	 is	 a	 hierarchical,	 distributed	 database
that	contains	a	mapping	of	DNS	domain	names	to	multiple	forms	of	data	such	as
the	Internet	Protocol	(IP)	addresses.	DNS	allows	you	to	use	friendly	names,	such
as	www.ipspecialist.net	,	to	efficiently	address	computers	and	other	resources	on
a	TCP/IP-based	network.
Now,	we	move	to	the	DNS	SEC.
DNSSEC	 is	 a	 suite	 of	 Internet	 Engineering	 Task	 Force	 (IETF)	 that	 adds
security	 to	 the	 Domain	 Name	 System	 (DNS)	 protocol	 by	 enabling	 DNS
responses	to	be	validated.	DNSSEC	provides	authenticated	denial-of-existence,
data	 integrity,	 and	 origin	 authority.	 With	 DNSSEC,	 the	 DNS	 protocol	 is	 much
less	susceptible	to	specific	types	of	attacks,	especially	DNS	spoofing	attacks.
If	 an	 authoritative	 DNS	 server	 supports	 it,	 a	 DNS	 zone	 can	 be	 secured	 with
DNSSEC	using	a	process	called	zone	signing.	To	signing	a	zone,	with	DNSSEC
adds	validation	to	support	a	zone	without	modifying	the	simple	mechanism	of	a
DNS	query	and	response.
Validation	 of	 DNS	 responses	 occurs	 via	 the	 use	 of	 the	 digital	 signature	 that	 is
included	 with	 DNS	 responses.	 These	 digital	 signatures	 are	 contained	 in	 new,
DNSSEC-related	resources	records	that	are	generated	and	added	to	them	during
the	zone	signing.
When	 a	 DNSSEC-aware	 forwarding	 or	 recursive	 DNS	 server	 receives	 a	 query
from	 a	 DNS	 client	 for	 a	 DNSSEC-signed	 zone,	 it	 will	 request	 that	 the
authoritative	DNS	server	also	send	DNS	records	and	then	attempt	to	validate	the
DNS	 response	 using	 these	 records.	 A	 forwarding	 or	 recursive	 DNS	 server
identifies	the	zone	supports	DNSSEC	if	it	has	a	DNSKEY,	also	known	as	a	trust
anchor,	or	that	zone.
Threats	to	the	DNS	Infrastructure
The	 following	 are	 the	 common	 ways	 in	 which	 attackers	 can	 threaten	 the	 DNS
infrastructure:

            Data	 modification	 :	 An	 attacker	 may	 attempt	 to	 spoof	 valid	 IP
            addresses	in	IP	packets	that	the	attacker	has	created.	This	gives	these
            packets	 the	 appearance	 of	 coming	 from	 a	 valid	 IP	 address	 in	 the
            network.	 In	 a	 valid	 IP	 address,	 the	 attacker	 can	 gain	 access	 to	 the
            network	and	destroy	data	or	perform	other	attacks.
            Denial-of-Service	 attack	 :	 When	 an	 attacker	 attempts	 to	 deny	 the
            availability	 of	 network	 services	 by	 flooding	 more	 than	 one	 DNS
            servers	in	the	network	with	queries.
            Footprinting	:	An	attacker	obtains	 the	process	by	 which	 DNS	zone
            data,	 including	 DNS	 domain	 names,	 computer	 names,	 and	 Internet
            Protocol	(IP)	addresses	for	sensitive	network	resources.
            Redirection	:	When	an	attacker	can	redirect	queries	for	DNS	names
            to	servers	that	are	under	the	control	of	the	attacker.
            Spoofing	 :	 When	 a	 DNS	 server	 accepts	 and	 uses	 inappropriate
            information	 from	 a	 host	 that	 has	 no	 rights	 to	 give	 the	 information.
            DNS	 spoofing	 is	 malicious	 cache	 poisoning	 where	 forged	 data	 is
            placed	in	the	cache	of	the	name	servers.

IP	SEC
IPsec	 is	 a	 transit	 encryption	 protocol	 used	 for	 VPN	 tunnels	 that	 can	 utilize
cryptographic	algorithms	such	as	AES	and	3DES.	
IPsec	is	a	framework	for	a	set	of	protocols	used	for	security	at	the	network	layer
that	is	convenient	for	implementing	virtual	private	networks	and	for	remote	user
access	via	private	networks.
However,	 remote	 users	 are	 treated	 as	 full	 members	 of	 the	 network.	 Nothing	 is
invisible	–	they	have	direct	access	to	the	underlying	infrastructure.	Therefore,	if
they	are	malicious,	they	can	start	digging	around	and	looking	for	vulnerabilities
in	seconds.
VPNs		provide	remote	access	to	their	networks.	It	is	potentially	the	highest	risk
factor	 for	 third-party	 data	 breaches	 because	 IPsec	 is	 readily	 exploitable	 by
hackers.
IPsec	provides	two	choices	of	security	service:

            Authentication	 Header	 (AH)	 :	 AH	 provides	 authentication	 of	 the
            sender	of	data,
            Encapsulating	 Security	 Payload	 (ESP)	 :	 ESP	 provides	 both
            authentication	of	the	sender	and	the	encryption	of	data	as	well.

OS	Hardening	via	Application	of	Baseline	(e.g.,	Windows,	Linux,	VMware)
Each	 operating	 system	 will	 be	 hardened	 to	 provide	 only	 essential	 ports,
protocols,	 and	 services	 to	 meet	 organizational	 needs	 and	 have	 in	 place	 for
supporting	 technical	 controls	 such	 as	 file	 integrity	 monitoring,	 antivirus,	 and
logging	as	part	of	their	baseline	operating,	building	standard,	or	template.
Operating	 systems	 and	 virtual	 machines	 are	 deployed	 using	 the	 minimum
amount	 of	 services	 and	 functionality	 required	 for	 them	 to	 run.	 Security
assessments	 and	 vulnerability	 scans	 are	 run	 against	 the	 internal	 and	 external
environment;	 these	 scans	 demonstrate	 whether	 only	 the	 minimum	 number	 of
ports	are	open.
Baseline	Configuration	by	Platform
There	 are	 numerous	 differences	 between	 Windows,	 Linux,	 and	 VMware
configurations.
Windows
Microsoft	provides	several	tools	to	measure	the	security	baseline	of	a	Windows
system.

            The	 use	 of	 a	 toolset	 such	 as	 the	 Windows	 Server	 Update	 Service
            (WSUS)	 makes	 it	 possible	 to	 perform	 patch	 management	 on	 a
            Windows	 host	 and	 monitor	 for	 compliance	 with	 a	 pre-configured
            baseline.
            The	Microsoft	Deployment	Toolkit	(MDT)	,	either	as	a	stand-alone
            toolset	 or	 integrated	 into	 the	 System	 Center	 Configuration
            Manager	 (SCCM)	 product,	 will	 allow	 you	 to	 create,	 manage,	 and
            deploy	 more	 than	 one	 Microsoft	 Windows	 Server	 OS	 baseline
            images.
            At	 least	 one	 of	 the	 Best	 Practice	 Analysers	(BPAs)	 that	 Microsoft
            provides	should	also	be	considered.

Linux
The	Linux	distribution	in	use	will	play	a	large	part	to	help	determine	when	the
baseline	deployment	will	appear.	The	security	features	of	each	Linux	distribution
have	 to	 be	 considered,	 and	 the	 one	 that	 best	 meets	 the	 organization’s	 security
needs,	 have	 to	 be	 used.	 However,	 you	 still	 have	 to	 be	 familiar	 with	 the
recommended	best	practices	for	Linux	baseline	security.
VMware
VMware	 vSphere	 has	 essential	 tools	 that	 allow	 the	 user	 to	 build	 custom
baselines	 for	 their	 particular	 deployments.	 These	 tools	 range	 from	 host	 and
storage	 profiles,	 which	 force	 configuration	 of	 an	 ESXi	host	 to	 mirror	 a	 set	 of
preconfigured	baseline	options,	to	the	VMware	Update	Manager	(VUM)	tool,
which	 allows	 for	 the	 updating	 of	 more	 than	 one	 ESXi	 hosts	 with	 the	 latest
VMware	security	patches	to	allow	updates	to	the	virtual	machines	running	on	the
host.	VUM	can	be	used	to	monitor	compliance	with	a	pre-configured	baseline.
 Note:
 Windows	Server	Update	Services	(WSUS)	:	 WSUS	is	a	computer	program
 developed	by	Microsoft	Corporation	that	enables	administrators	to	manage	the
 distribution	of	updates	and	bug	fixes	released	by	Microsoft	for	computers	that
 are	 using	 Microsoft	 products	 in	 an	 organizational	 environment.	 WSUS
 downloads	 these	 updates	 from	 the	 Microsoft	 Update	 website	 and	 then
 distributes	them	to	computers	on	a	network.	WSUS	is	an	integral	component
 of	Windows	Server.
 Microsoft	 Deployment	 Toolkit	 (MDT):	 MDT	 is	 a	 computer	 program	 that
 allows	network	deployment	of	Microsoft	Office	and	Microsoft	Windows.
 Microsoft	 System	 Centre	 Configuration	 Manager	 (SCCM)	 :	 Microsoft
 SCCM	is	a	systems	management	software	product	developed	by	Microsoft	for
 managing	large	groups	of	computers	running	Windows,	Linux,	and	UNIX,	etc.
 Microsoft	SCCM	is	also	known	as	ConfigMgr.
 Best	Practices	Analyzer	(BPA)	:	In	Windows	management,	best	practices	are
 guidelines	that	are	considered	the	ideal	way	to	configure	a	server	as	defined	by
 experts.	BPA	is	a	server	management	tool	that	is	available	in	Windows	Server
 2012	R2,	Windows	Server	2012,	and	Windows	Server	2008	R2.
 ESXi	:	VMware	ESXi	is	an	enterprise-class,	type-1	hypervisor	developed	by
 VMware	for	deploying	and	serving	virtual	computers.	As	a	type-1	hypervisor,
 ESXi	 is	 not	 a	 software	 application	 that	 is	 installed	 on	 an	 operating	 system;
 instead,	it	includes	and	integrates	essential	OS	components,	such	as	a	kernel.
 VMware	Update	Manager	(VUM):	VUM	is	a	software	for	automating	patch
 management.
Availability	of	Stand-Alone	Hosts
As	 a	 Cloud	 Security	 Professional	 (CSP),	 you	 can	 be	 called	 upon	 to	 help	 the
organization	 in	 a	 secure	 way	 to	 host	 a	 virtualized	 model.	 The	 organizational
needs	and	requirements	will	be	identified	and	documented	before	a	decision	can
be	finalized	as	to	which	hosting	environment(s)	are	the	best	to	deploy.
Generally,	the	organization	seeks	to;

             Create	secure,	isolated,	dedicated	hosting	of	specific	Cloud	resources;
             the	use	of	a	stand-alone	host	would	be	the	right	choice.
             Make	the	Cloud	resources	available	to	end	users,	so	they	appear	as	if
             they	are	independent	of	any	other	resources	and	are	isolated	;	either	a
             stand-alone	 host	 or	 a	 shared	 host	 configuration	 that	 offers	 multi-
             tenant	secured	hosting	capabilities	would	be	appropriate.
The	CSP	needs	to	understand	the	organizational	requirements	because	they	will
drive	 the	 choice	 of	 hosting	 model	 and	 the	 architecture	 for	 the	 Cloud	 security
framework.
Availability	 of	 Clustered	 Hosts	 (e.g.,	 Distributed	 Resource	 Acheduling
(DRS),	 Dynamic	 Optimization	 (DO),	 storage	 clusters,	 maintenance	 mode,
high	availability)
A	cluster	host	is	a	host	that	is	configured	to	control	over	the	role	of	another	host
server	within	a	cluster.	This	method	reduces	the	danger	inherent	in	a	single	point
of	failure	and	makes	more	efficient	use	of	network	resources.
Besides,	 a	 cluster	 host	 is	 a	 host	 machine	 that	 can	 support	 numerous	 guest
operating	 systems	 on	 another	 physical	 machine.	 Therefore,	 when	 a	 physical
machine	 goes	 down	 for	 maintenance	 or	 reboot,	 the	 cluster	 host	 has	 to	 be
configured	 in	 a	 way	 that	 would	 allow	 it	 to	 support	 all	 of	 the	 original	 server's
guest	operating	systems.	This	way	is	transparent	to	the	end	user,	and	it	reduces	a
possible	single	point	of	failure.
Distributed	Resource	Scheduler	(DRS)
DRS	is	like	a	load	balancing	utility	that	assigns	and	shifts	computing	workloads
to	available	hardware	resources	in	a	virtualized	environment.
DRS	 can	 be	 configured	 to	 recommend	 workload	 balancing	 or	 to	 move
workloads	 automatically.	 DRS	 users	 can	 improve	 resource	 allocation	 with
affinity	rules	and	anti-affinity	rules.	The	DRS	allows	administrators	to	prioritize
resources	according	to	application	importance.
The	 Distributed	 Power	 Management	 (DPM)	 feature	 of	 DRS	 can	 consolidate
workloads	 in	 off-peak	 (at	 a	 time	 when	 demand	 is	 less)	 hours	 to	 reduce	 energy
consumption	in	the	data	centre.	DRS	also	helps	in	scheduled	server	maintenance
by	balancing	VMs'	workloads	across	other	hosts.
Dynamic	Optimization	(DO)

            Dynamic	optimization	can	be	configured	on	host	clusters	that	support
            live	migration.
            Dynamic	optimization	can	be	configured	on	a	host	group;	to	migrate
            VM	 within	 host	 clusters	 with	 a	 particular	 aggressiveness	 and
            frequency.	Aggressiveness	determines	the	amount	of	load	imbalance
            that	 is	 needed	 to	 initiate	 a	 migration	 throughout	 dynamic
            optimization.
            Due	 to	 nature,	 VM	 is	 migrated	 every	 10	 minutes	 with	 medium
            aggressiveness.	 When	 configuring	 aggressiveness	 and	 frequency	 for
            dynamic	optimization,	an	administrator	should	consider	the	resource
            cost	of	additional	migrations	against	the	advantages	of	balancing	the
            load	between	hosts	in	a	host	cluster.	By	default,	a	host	group	inherits
            Dynamic	Optimization	settings	from	its	parent	host	group.
            If	you	set	up	dynamic	optimization	on	a	host	group	without	a	cluster,
            it	will	not	affect	the	migration	process.
           Dynamic	optimization	can	be	set	up	for	clusters	with	more	than	two
           nodes.	If	a	host	group	contains	host	clusters	or	stand-alone	hosts	that
           do	 not	 support	 live	 migration,	 dynamic	 optimization	 cannot	 be
           performed	 on	 those	 hosts.	 Any	 hosts	 that	 are	 in	 maintenance	 mode
           are	 also	 excluded	 from	 dynamic	 optimization.	 Besides,	 VMM	 only
           migrates	 highly	 available	 VMs	 that	 use	 shared	 storage.	 If	 a	 host
           cluster	contains	VMs	that	are	not	highly	available,	those	VMs	are	not
           migrated	throughout	Dynamic	Optimization.
           On-demand	 dynamic	 optimization	 is	 also	 available	 for	 specific	 host
           clusters	by	using	the	Optimize	Hosts	action	in	the	VMs	and	Services
           workspace.	 It	 can	 be	 performed	 without	 configuring	 dynamic
           optimization	on	host	groups.	After	dynamic	optimization	is	requested
           for	 a	 host	 cluster,	 VMM	 lists	 the	 VMs	 that	 will	 be	 migrated	 for	 the
           administrator's	approval.

Storage	clusters
Clustered	storage	is	the	use	of	more	than	two	storage	servers	that	work	jointly	to
increase	capacity,	performance,	or	reliability.	Clustering	distributes	workloads	to
each	 server,	 manages	 the	 transfer	 of	 workloads	 among	 servers,	 and	 provides
access	to	all	the	files	from	any	server	regardless	of	the	physical	location	of	the
file.
There	are	two	main	clustered	storage	architectures	available.
Tightly	Coupled
A	 tightly	 coupled	 cluster	 has	 a	 proprietary	 physical	 backplane	 into	 which
controller	 nodes	 connect.	 While	 this	 backplane	 fixes	 the	 maximum	 size	 of	 the
cluster,	 it	 provides	 a	 high-performance	 interconnect	 among	 servers	 for	 load-
balanced	performance	and	maximum	scalability	as	the	cluster	grows.	Additional
I/O	ports,	array	controllers,	and	capacity	can	connect	into	the	cluster	as	demand
dictates	.
Loosely	coupled
A	loosely	coupled	cluster	provides	cost-effective	building	blocks	that	can	begin
small	 and	 grow	 as	 applications	 demand.	 A	 loose	 cluster	 provides	 performance,
I/O,	 and	 storage	 capacity	 within	 the	 same	 node.	 Therefore,	 performance	 scales
with	capacity	and	vice	versa.	While	the	clusters	can	grow	quite	large	in	theory,
the	scalability	is	limited	by	the	performance	of	the	interconnect	and	the	resultant
trade-offs	in	communication	with	the	cluster	controllers.
Maintenance	mode
Maintenance	 mode	 is	 utilized	 when	 configuring	 or	 updating	 different
components	 of	 Cloud	 computing.	 While	 in	 the	 maintenance	 mode,	 customer
access	is	blocked	and	alteration	is	disabled,	although	logging	is	still	enabled.
When	you	place	a	host	in	maintenance	mode,	you	must	service	it,	for	instance,	to
install	 more	 memory.	 A	 host	 enters	 or	 leaves	 maintenance	 mode	 only	 as	 the
result	of	a	user	request.
VMs	that	are	running	on	a	host	entering	maintenance	mode	must	be	migrated	to
another	host	(either	manually	or	automatically	by	DRS)	or	shut	down.	The	host
is	in	a	state	of	Entering	Maintenance	Mode	until	all	running	VMs	are	powered
down	or	migrated	to	different	hosts.	You	cannot	power	on	VMs	or	migrate	VMs
to	a	host	entering	maintenance	mode.
When	no	more	running	VMs	are	on	the	host,	the	host’s	icon	changes	to	include
under	 maintenance	 mode	 and	 the	 host(s)	 Summary	 panel	 shows	 the	 new	 state.
While	in	maintenance	mode,	the	host	does	not	allow	you	to	deploy	or	power	on	a
VM.
High	availability
A	 High	 Availability	 (HA)	 cluster	 is	 many	 hosts	 that	 work	 like	 a	 single	 system
and	provide	continuous	updates.
Typically,	 HA	 clusters	 are	 used	 for	 backup,	 load	 balancing,	 and	 failover
purposes.	 To	 properly	 configure	 an	 HA	 cluster,	 the	 hosts	 in	 the	 cluster	 need	 to
have	 access	 to	 the	 similar	 shared	 storage.	 This	 permit	 virtual	 machines	 on	 an
existing	 host	 to	 fail	 over	 another	 host	 without	 any	 downtime	 in	 the	 event	 of	 a
failure.
HA	 clusters	 can	 range	 from	 two	 nodes	 to	 the	 number	 of	 nodes,	 but	 storage
administrator	needs	to	understand	the	number	of	virtual	machines	and	hosts	they
add	to	an	HA	cluster	because	too	many	can	complicate	load	balancing.
 Note:
 Affinity	Rule:	A	set	of	rules	that	establishes	a	relationship	between	more	than
 two	VMware	virtual	machines	(VMs)	and	hosts.
 Virtual	 Machine	 Manager	 (VMM)	 :	 VMM	 is	 part	 of	 the	 System	 Centre
 suite,	used	to	configure,	manage	and	transform	traditional	data	centers,	and	to
 help	 provide	 a	 unified	 management	 experience	 across	 on-premises,	 service
 provider,	and	the	Azure	Cloud.
 Backplane:	A	 backplane	 is	 a	 group	 of	 electrical	 connectors	 in	 parallel	 with
 each	other;	therefore,	each	pin	of	each	connector	is	linked	to	the	same	relative
 pin	 of	 all	 the	 other	 connectors,	 forming	 a	 computer	 bus.	 It	 is	 used	 as	 a
 backbone	 to	 connect	 numerous	 printed	 circuit	 boards	 to	 make	 up	 an	 entire
 computer	system.

Manage	Physical	Infrastructure	for	Cloud	Environment
Managing	the	physical	infrastructure	for	a	Cloud	environment	will	cover	various
essential	 components,	 ranging	 from	 remote	 access,	 OS	 baselines	 and	 patch
management,	 performance	 and	 hardware	 monitoring,	 backup	 and	 recovery,
network	security,	logging,	analysis,	and	overall	management	of	the	environment.
Configuring	Access	Controls	for	Remote	Access	(e.g.,	RDP,	Secure	Terminal
Access)
One	 of	 the	 most	 increasingly	 popular	 remote	 access	 techniques	 which	 permit
teleworkers	access	in	internal	business	applications	and	data	is	to	allow	them	to
log	 into	 virtual	 desktops.	 A	 Virtual	 Desktop	 Infrastructure	 (VDI)	 can	 be
operated	on-premises,	while	Cloud-based	VDI	has	a	large	number	of	advantages.
Cloud-based	 remote	 access	 through	 VDI	 is	 typically	 called	 Desktop	 as	 a
Service	(DaaS)	,	and	it	takes	away	the	upfront	cost,	buildout	and	management
complexities	from	internal	IT	staff	and	offloads	those	duties	to	a	Cloud	Services
Provider	 (CSP).	 A	 properly	 tuned	 DaaS	 could	 be	 the	 most	 efficient	 way	 to
provide	internal	computing	resources	to	remote	workers	around	the	world.
Some	other	techniques	to	provide	remote	access	are;

             Remote	Desktop	Protocol	(RDP)	permit	for	desktop	access	to	remote
             systems
             Access	through	a	secure	terminal
If	 you	 wish	 to	 use	 more	 locally	 deployed,	 software-based	 remote	 access
technologies	 like	 IPsec	or	 SSL	 VPN	 ,	 the	 Cloud	 can	 still	 help.	 Numerous	 IT
departments	have	discovered	that	moving	their	authentication	mechanisms	out	of
their	 private	 data	 centers	 and	 to	 Cloud-based	 remote	 access	 allows	 for	 easier
management	and	a	more	efficient	approach.
Typically,	Hybrid	Cloud	designs	left	the	authentication	component	in	the	private
side	 of	 the	 network.	 However,	 a	 number	 of	 organizations	 are	 more	 convenient
with	 the	 security	 and	 stability	 of	 public	 Cloud	 services,	 they	 have	 found	 that
moving	the	customer	management	and	authentication	to	the	Cloud	allows	for	a
more	centralized	management	experience	for	both	publicly	and	privately	hosted
company	resources.
 Note:
 Teleworkers	 :	 Telecommuting,	 also	 called	 telework,	 teleworking,	 working
 from	 home,	 mobile	 work,	 remote	 work,	 and	 flexible	 workplace,	 is	 a	 work
 arrangement	in	which
 employees	do	not	commute	or	travel	(such	as	by	bus	or	car)	to	a	central	place
 of	work,	such	as	an	office	building,	warehouse,	or	store.
 Virtual	 Desktop	 Infrastructure	 (VDI):	 VDI	 is	 a	 set	 of	 technologies	 that
 allow	 the	 corporations	 to	 host	 various	 desktop	 OS	 instances	 on	 a	 centralized
 server	farm	in	an	organizational	data	center.
 Desktop	as	a	Service	(DaaS)	:	DaaS	is	a	Cloud	computing	used	to	provide	a
 third-party	 host	 at	 the	 back	 end	 of	 a	 virtual	 desktop	 infrastructure	 (VDI)
 deployment.
OS	Baseline	Compliance	Monitoring	and	Remediation
While	 establishing	 an	 OS	 baseline	 compliance	 monitoring	 and	 remediation,	 it
determines	who	is	responsible	for	the	secure	configuration	of	the	underlying	OS
installed	 in	 the	 Cloud	 environment	 based	 on	 the	 deployment	 method	 and	 the
services	that	are	used.
Regardless	 of	 who	 is	 responsible,	 a	 secure	 baseline	 has	 to	 be	 established,	 all
deployments	and	updates	have	to	be	made	from	a	change-controlled	and	version-
controlled	master	image.
Perform	 automated	 and	 ad	 hoc	 vulnerabilities	 are	 scanning	 and	 monitoring
activities	 on	 the	 underlying	 infrastructure	 to	 validate	 compliance	 with	 all
baseline’s	 requirements.	 This	 will	 ensure	 that	 any	 regulatory-based	 compliance
issues	 and	 risks	 are	 discovered	 and	 documented.	 Resolved	 or	 remediate	 any
deviation	promptly.
Adequately	supporting	infrastructure	and	tools	have	to	be	in	place	to	allow	for
the	patching	and	maintenance	of	proper	infrastructure	without	any	impact	on	the
Cloud	 customer.	 Typically,	 patch	 management	 and	 other	 remediation	 activities
need	 entry	 into	 maintenance	 mode.	 Various	 virtualizations	 vendors	 offer	 OS
image	baselining	features	as	a	part	of	their	platforms.
The	 particular	 technology	 and	 activities	 that	 will	 be	 used	 to	 create,	 document,
manage	and	deploy,	OS	image	baselines	vary	by	vendor.	Follow	the	best	practice
guidance	and	recommendations	provided	by	the	vendor.
Patch	Management
According	to	the	NIST	SP	800-40	Revision	3	:
“Patch	management	is	the	process	for	identifying,	acquiring,	installing,	and
verifying	 patches	 for	 systems	 and	 products.	 Patches	 fix	 security	 and
functionality	issues	in	software	and	firmware.”
From	a	 security	standpoint,	patches	 are	most	 often	of	interest	 because	they	are
minimizing	 software	 flaw	 vulnerabilities;	 applying	 patches	 to	 reduce	 these
vulnerabilities	 adequately	 minimize	 the	 opportunities	 for	 exploitation.	 Patches
serve	 other	 purposes	 than	 just	 fixing	 software	 flaws;	 they	 can	 also	 add	 new
features	to	software	and	firmware,	including	security	capabilities.
New	 features	 can	 also	 be	 added	 through	 upgrades,	 which	 bring	 software	 or
firmware	 to	 a	 newer	 version	 in	 a	 much	 broader	 change	 than	 just	 applying	 a
patch.	 Upgrades	 may	 also	 fix	 security	 and	 functionality	 issues	 in	 previous
versions	 of	 software	 and	 firmware.	 Besides,	 vendor's	 typically	 prevent
supporting	 older	 versions	 of	 their	 products,	 which	 include	 no	 longer	 releasing
patches	to	address	new	vulnerabilities,	thus	making	older	unsupported	versions
less	 secure	 over	 time.	 Upgrades	 are	 then	 essential	 to	 get	 such	 products	 to	 a
supported	 version	 that	 is	 patched	 and	 that	 has	 continuous	 support	 for	 patching
newly	discovered	vulnerabilities.
Numerous	challenges	 complicate	patch	 management.	 Organizations	that	do	 not
overcome	 these	 challenges	 would	 be	 unable	 to	 patch	 systems	 efficiently	 and
effectively,	leading	to	compromises	that	were	easily	preventable.	Organizations
can	 reduce	 the	 time	 they	 spend	 dealing	 with	 patching	 and	 they	 can	 use	 those
resources	 for	addressing	other	 security	concerns.	Numerous	organizations	have
mainly	 operationalized	 their	 patch	 management,	 making	 it	 more	 of	 a	 core	 IT
function	than	a	part	of	security.	However,	it	is	still	essential	for	all	organizations
to	carefully	address	patch	management	in	the	context	of	security	because	patch
management	is	so	crucial	in	achieving	and	maintaining	sound	security.
Organizations	have	to	implement	the	following	recommendations	to	enhance	the
efficiency	and	effectiveness	of	their	enterprise	patch	management	technologies.

            Organizations	 have	 to	 deploy	 enterprise	 patch	 management	 tools
            using	a	phased	approach.
            Organizations	 have	 to	 minimize	 the	 risks	 associated	 with	 enterprise
            patch	management	tools	through	the	application	of	standard	security
            techniques	 that	 have	 to	 be	 used	 when	 deploying	 any	 business-wide
            application.
            Organizations	 have	 to	 balance	 their	 security	 requirements	 with	 their
            needs	for	usability	and	availability

Performance	Monitorin	g
Performance	 monitoring	 is	 essential	 for	 the	 secure	 and	 reliable	 operation	 in
Cloud	computing.	Data	on	the	performance	of	the	underlying	components	may
provide	 early	 indications	 of	 hardware	 failure.	 Typically,	 four	 components	 are
recommended	for	monitoring	in	Cloud	computing.
Network:	Excessive	dropped	packets
Disk:	When	a	disk	is	full,	it	causes	a	slow	read	and	writes	to	the	disks.
Memory:	 Excessive	 memory	 usage	 of	 full	 utilization	 of	 available	 memory
allocation.
CPU:	Excessive	CPU	utilization.
To	 follow	 the	 vendor-specific	 monitoring	 recommendation,	 guidelines,	 best
practice	and	thresholds	for	performance	are	needed.	While	each	vendor	will	have
specific	 thresholds	 and	 ranges	 for	 acceptable	 operation	 identified	 by	 area	 for
their	platforms	and	products,	generally,	for	each	of	the	four	subareas	identified,	a
lower	 value	 based	 on	 measurement	 over	 time	 will	 indicate	 enhanced
performance.
Hardware	Monitoring
In	 Cloud	 computing,	 regardless	 of	 how	 many	 virtualized	 infrastructures	 you
deploy,	 there	 is	 always	 physical	 infrastructure,	 simple	 is	 that	 it	 has	 to	 be
managed,	monitored,	and	maintained.
Increase	your	monitoring	of	the	four	main	components	discussed	in	the	previous
section	 to	 include	 the	 physical	 hosts	 and	 infrastructure	 that	 the	 virtualization
layer	rides	on	top	of.	The	same	monitoring	processes	apply,	as	have	already	been
discussed.	 The	 only	 difference	 to	 account	 	 is	 the	 need	 to	 add	 some	 additional
components	 that	 are	 given	 in	 the	 physical	 lane	 of	 these	 systems,	 such	 as	 CPU
temperature	and	fan	speed	within	the	Data	center	hosting	the	physical	hosts.
Several	 of	 the	 monitoring	 systems	 that	 will	 be	 deployed	 to	 address	 virtualized
infrastructure	 can	 be	 used	 to	 monitor	 the	 physical	 performance	 aspects	 of	 the
hosts	as	well.	These	systems	can	also	be	used	to	notify	on	thresholds,	established
for	performance	based	on	numerous	methods,	whether	it	is	activity-based,	task-
based,	 metric-based,	 or	 time-based.	 Each	 vendor	 will	 have	 its	 specific
procedures	and	tools	to	be	deployed	to	monitor	their	infrastructure	according	to
their	requirements	and	recommendations.
Make	 sure	 that,	 you	 need	 to	 understand	 the	 vendor	 recommendations	 and	 best
practices	pertinent	to	their	environments	and	they	are	implemented	and	followed
as	needed	to	make	sure	of	the	compliance	.
Redundant	System	Architecture
The	redundant	system	architecture	is	a	standard	practice	in	Cloud	computing.	It
is	used	to	accomplish	the	following:

             Permit	for	additional	hardware	items	to	be	incorporated	directly	into
             the	system	as	a	real-time	online	component
             Shares	the	load	of	the	running	system,	or	in	a	hot	standby	mode
             Permit	for	a	controlled	failover,	to	reduce	downtime
Work	with	the	vendor(s)	that	supply	the	data	center	infrastructure	to	completely
understand	 what	 the	 available	 resources	 are	 for	 designing	 and	 implementing
system	resiliency	through	redundancy.
Monitoring	Functions
Several	hardware	systems	provide	built-in	monitoring	functions	particular	to	the
hardware	 itself,	 separate	 from	 any	 centralized	 monitoring	 that	 the	 corporation
may	 involve	 in.	 Remember	 that	 which	 vendor-specific	 hardware	 system
monitoring	 capabilities	 are	 already	 bundled	 or	 included	 in	 the	 platforms	 then
they	are	asked	to	be	responsible	for.
The	use	of	any	vendor-supplied	monitoring	capabilities	to	their	complete	extent
is	essential	to	increase	system	reliability	and	performance.	Hardware	data	has	to
be	 collected	 along	 with	 the	 data	 from	 any	 external	 performance	 monitoring
undertaken.
Monitoring	hardware	may	provide	early	indications	of	hardware	failure	and	have
to	 be	treated	as	a	requirement	to	make	 sure	the	 availability	and	stability	 of	the
entire	systems	that	are	being	managed.
Few	 of	 virtualization	 platforms	 provide	 the	 capability	 to	 disable	 hardware	 and
migrate	live	data	from	the	failing	hardware	if	specific	thresholds	are	met.
You	must	have	work	with	other	security	professionals	in	the	organization	on	the
networking	and	administration	teams	to	thoroughly	understand	and	plan	for	the
appropriate	use	of	these	types	of	technology	options.
Backup	and	Restore	of	Host	Configuration
Configuration	 data	 for	 hosts	 in	 the	 Cloud	 computing	 have	 to	 be	 a	 part	 of	 a
backup	plan.
You	 have	 to	 perform	 the	 routine	 test	 and	 restore	 hosts	 as	 a	 part	 of	 the	 disaster
recovery	plan	to	validate	the	proper	functioning	of	the	backup	system.	Although,
this	 process	 is	 similar	 regardless	 of	 the	 vendor	 equipment	 that	 is	 to	 be	 used	 to
supply	hosts	to	the	corporation	and	vendor	software/hardware	that	is	to	be	used
to	create	and	manage	backups	across	the	organization	.
You	 need	 to	 understand	 the	 critical	 configuration	 information	 for	 all	 of	 the
infrastructure	that	you	manage.	Make	sure	that	this	information	is	being	backed
up	continuously	in	line	with	the	corporation’s	existing	backup	policies.	Besides,
make	 sure	 that	 this	 information	 is	 being	 integrated	 into,	 accounted	 within	 the
BCP	or	DRP	plans	for	the	organization.
The	highest	challenge	in	this	domain	is	understanding	the	extent	of	your	access
to	 the	 hosts	 and	 configuration	 management	 that	 they	 are	 allowed	 to	 do	 as	 a
result.	Typically,	this	way	framed	concerning	two	most	important	capabilities.

            Control:	The	ability	to	decide	who	 and	 what	is	allowed	 to	access	a
            customer	 data,	 programs	 and	 the	 ability	 to	 perform	 actions	 (such	 as
            erasing	data	or	disconnecting	a	network)	with	high	confidence,	both
            that	the	actions	have	been	taken	and	that	no	additional	actions	were
            taken	 that	 would	 subvert	 the	 customer’s	 intent	 (e.g.,	 a	 customer’s
            request	 to	 create	 a	 data	 object	 that	 should	 not	 be	 subverted	 by	 the
            silent	generation	of	copy).
            Visibility:	 The	 ability	 to	 monitor	 the	 status	 of	 customer	 data	 and
            programs	and	how	others	are	accessing	customer	data	and	programs.
However,	 the	 extent	 to	 which	 customers	 may	 require	 relinquishing	 control	 or
visibility	depends	on	many	factors,	including	physical	possession	and	the	ability
to	 configure	 protective	 access	 boundary	 mechanism	 around	 a	 customer(s)
computing	resource.	This	can	be	driven	by	choice	of	both	the	service	model	and
deployment	model.
Implementation	 of	 Network	 Security	 Controls	 (e.g.,	 firewalls,	 IDS,	 IPS,
honeypots,	vulnerability	assessments)
The	traditional	model	of	defense	in	depth,	which	needs	a	design	thought	process
that	 seeks	 to	 create	 mutually	 reinforcing	 layers	 of	 protective	 systems	 and
policies	to	manage	them,	has	to	be	considered	as	a	baseline.	Using	a	defense-in-
depth	 strategy	 to	 drive	 design	 for	 the	 security	 architecture	 of	 Cloud-based
systems	makes	it	essential	to	examine	each	layer’s	purpose	and	to	understand	the
impact	of	the	choices	that	are	to	be	made	as	the	model	is	assembled.
Firewalls
A	 firewall	 is	 a	 network	 security	 device	 or	 a	 system	 security	 software	 that
monitors	 the	 incoming	 and	 outgoing	 network	 traffic	 and	 filters	 it	 as	 per	 the
defined	set	of	rules	and	conditions	either	to	permit	or	deny	them	from	entering	or
leaving	 the	 device.	 Firewalls	 are	 joined	 into	 a	 wide	 assortment	 of	 arranged
gadgets	 to	 channel	 movement	 and	 lower	 the	 hazard	 that	 malevolent	 parcels
going	 over	 the	 general	 population	 web	 can	 cause	 to	 the	 security	 of	 a	 private
system.	 Firewalls	 may	 likewise	 be	 bought	 as	 individual	 programming
applications.	 While	 the	 two	 primary	 types	 of	 firewalls	 are	 host-based	 and
network-based	 firewalls.	 A	 host-based	 firewall	 is	 introduced	 in	 the	 light	 of
individual	servers	and	screens	approaching	and	friendly	flags.	A	network-based
firewall	 can	 be	 incorporated	 with	 the	 Cloud's	 foundation,	 or	 it	 can	 be	 a	 virtual
firewall	benefit.
Although	the	above	features	provide	isolation	in	some	sense,	the	following	are
the	few	reasons	a	dedicated	firewall	appliance	(either	in	hardware	or	software)	is
preferred	 to	 be	 deployed	 at	 the	 gateway	 of	 public	 internet	 in	 a	 production
environment:
 Risks               Protection	by	firewall
 Access	        by   Firewalls	 try	 to	 categorize	 the	 network	 into	 different
 untrusted           portions.	One	portion	is	considered	as	a	trusted	portion	of	the
 entities            internal	 LAN.	 Public	 internet	 and	 interfaces	 assigned	 as
                     outside	 interfaces	 are	 considered	 as	 an	 untrusted	 portion.
                     Similarly,	servers	accessed	by	untrusted	entities	are	placed	in
                     a	particular	segment	known	as	a	Demilitarized	Zone	(DMZ).
                     By	 allowing	 only	 specific	 access	 to	 these	 servers,	 like	 port
                     90	 of	 the	 web	 server,	 firewall	 hide	 the	 functionality	 of
                     network	 device,	 which	 makes	 it	 difficult	 for	 an	 attacker	 to
                     understand	the	physical	topology	of	the	network.
 Deep	 Packet        One	of	the	exciting	features	of	the	dedicated	firewall	is	their
 Inspection          ability	to	inspect	the	traffic	more	than	just	IP	and	port	level.
                     By	 using	 digital	 and	 certificates,	 Next	 Generation	 Firewalls
                     available	 today	 can	 inspect	 traffic	 up	 to	 layer	 7.	 A	 firewall
                     can	also	limit	the	number	of	established,	as	well	as	half-open
                     TCP/UDP	connections	to	mitigate	DDoS	attacks.
 Access	Control      By	 implementing	 local	 AAA	 or	 by	 using	 ACS/ISE	 servers,
                     the	firewall	can	permit	traffic	based	on	AAA	policy.
 Antivirus	 and      By	 integrating	 IPS/IDP	 modules	 with	 firewall,	 malicious
 protection          data	can	be	detected	and	filtered	at	the	edge	of	the	network	to
 from	 infected      protect	the	end-users.
 data
                           Table	5-2:	Firewall	Risk	Mitigation	Features

Types	of	Firewall
            Packet	filtering	firewall
            Circuit-Level	gateway	firewall
            Application-level	firewall
            Stateful	multilayer	inspection	firewall
            Transparent	firewall
            Next-generation	firewall	(NGFW)
            Personal	firewall

Intrusion	Detection	System	(IDS)/	Intrusion	Prevention	System	(IPS)
IDS	 analyze	 and	 monitor	 network	 traffic	 for	 signs	 which	 specify	 that	 the
attackers	 are	 using	 a	 known	 cyber	 threat	 to	 infiltrate	 or	 theft	 data	 from	 your
network.	IDS	systems	compare	 the	 existing	network	activity	to	 a	known	threat
database	 to	 detect	 many	 types	 of	 behaviors	 like	 malware,	 port	 scanners,	 and
security	policy	violations.
IPS	live	in	a	similar	domain	of	the	network	as	a	firewall,	between	the	external
and	 the	 internal	 network.	 IPS	 proactively	 deny	 network	 traffic	 based	 on	 a
security	profile	if	that	packet	represents	a	known	security	threat.
The	main	difference	between	them	is	that	IDS	is	a	monitoring	system,	while	IPS
is	a	control	system.
Typically,	IDS	and	IPS	create	confusion	as	both	modules	are	created	by	multiple
vendors	and	different	technologies	are	used	to	define	the	technical	concepts	are
also	 the	 same.	 Sometimes	 the	 same	 technology	 may	 be	 used	 for	 detection	 and
prevention	of	some	threat.
Just	like	other	products,	some	vendors	also	have	developed	many	solutions	for
implementing	IDS/IPS	for	the	security	of	the	network.
The	placement	of	the	sensor	within	a	network	differentiates	the	functionality	of
IPS	 over	 the	 IDS.	 When	 a	 sensor	 is	 placed	 in	 line	 with	 the	 network,	 i.e.,	 the
common	in/out	of	specific	network	segment	terminates	on	a	hardware	or	logical
interface	of	the	sensor	and	goes	out	from	second	hardware	or	logical	interface	of
the	sensor,	then	every	single	packet	will	be	analyzed	and	passed	through	sensor
only	if	it	does	not	contain	anything	malicious.	By	dropping	the	malicious	traffic,
the	trusted	network	or	a	segment	of	it	can	be	protected	from	known	threats	and
attacks.	 This	 is	 the	 basic	 working	 of	 the	 Intrusion	 Prevention	 System	 (IPS).
However,	 the	 inline	 installation	 and	 inspection	 of	 traffic	 may	 result	 in	 a	 minor
delay.	IPS	 may	also	become	 a	single	point	of	 failure	for	 the	whole	network.	If
'fail-open'	mode	is	used,	the	good	and	malicious	traffic	will	be	allowed	in	case	of
any	failure	within	the	IPS	sensor.	Similarly,	if	'fail-close'	mode	is	configured,	the
whole	IP	traffic	will	be	dropped	in	case	of	sensor's	failure.




                           Figure	5-2:	In-line	Deployment	of	IPS	Sensor

If	 a	 sensor	 is	 installed	 in	 the	 position	 as	 shown	 below,	 a	 copy	 of	 every	 packet
will	be	sent	to	the	sensor	to	analyze	any	malicious	activity.




                              Figure	5-3:	Sensor	Deployment	as	IDS

In	 other	 means,	 the	 sensor,	 running	 in	 promiscuous	 mode	 will	 perform	 the
detection	 and	 generate	an	 alert	if	required.	 As	 the	normal	flow	of	 traffic	 is	 not
disturbed,	 no	 end-to-end	 delay	 will	 be	 introduced	 by	 implementing	 IDS.	 The
only	downside	of	this	configuration	is	that	IDS	will	not	be	able	to	stop	malicious
packets	 from	 entering	 the	 network	 because	 IDS	 is	 not	 controlling	 the	 overall
path	of	traffic.
IDS	can	be	classified	into	two	main	types.

          Network-based	 intrusion	prevention	system	 (NIPS):	monitors	the
          whole	network	for	suspicious	traffic	by	analysing	protocol	activity.
          Host-based	 intrusion	 prevention	 system	 (HIPS):	 an	 installed
          software	package	that	monitors	one	host	only	for	suspicious	activity
          by	analysing	events	occurring	inside	that	host.
The	following	table	summarizes	and	compares	various	features	of	IDS	and	IPS.
 Feature              IPS                        IDS
    Positioning       In-line	with	the	network. Not	in-line	with	the	network.	It
                           Every	packet	goes         receives	a	copy	of	every
                                through	it.                    packet.
       Mode                    In-line/Tap                  Promiscuous
       Delay                Introduces	delay         Does	not	introduce	delay
                       because	every	packet	is     because	it	is	not	in-line	with
                            analyzed	before                 the	network.
                            forwarded	to	the
                               destination.
  Point	of	failure?       Yes.	If	the	sensor	is   No	impact	on	traffic	as	IDS	is
                         down,	it	may	drop	as      not	in-line	with	the	network.
                       well	as	malicious	traffic
                           from	entering	the
                       network,	depending	on
                        one	of	the	two	modes
                      configured	on	it,	namely
                        fail-open	or	fail-close.
    Ability	to           Yes.	By	dropping	the      IDS	cannot	directly	stop	an
    mitigate	an       malicious	traffic,	attacks    attack.	However,	it	assists
     attack?           can	be	readily	reduced some	in-line	device	like	IPS	to
                           on	the	network.	If     drop	specific	traffic	to	stop	an
                       deployed	in	TAP	mode,                    attack.
                      then	it	will	get	a	copy	of
                               each	packet
                       but	cannot	mitigate	the
                                  attack
   Can	do	packet       Yes.	Can	modify	the	IP     No.	As	IDS	receive	mirrored
   manipulation?         traffic	according	to	a   traffic,	so	it	can	only	perform
                          defined	set	of	rules.                the	inspection.
                              Table	5-3:	IDS/IPS	Compariso	n

Ways	to	Detect	an	Intrusion
When	 a	 sensor	 is	 analysing	 traffic	 for	 something	 strange,	 it	 uses	 multiple
techniques	base	on	the	rules	defined	in	the	IPS/IDS	sensor.	Following	tools	and
techniques	can	be	used	in	this	regard:

            Anomaly-based	IDS/IPS
            Policy-based	IDS/IPS
            Reputation-based	IDS/IPS
            Signature-based	IDS/IPS

Honeypots
A	honeypot	is	used	to	detect,	deflect,	or	in	a	similar	manner	counteract	attempts
at	unauthorized	use	of	information	systems.	In	general,	a	honeypot	consists	of	a
computer,	data,	or	a	network	site	that	appears	to	be	the	part	of	a	network	but	is
isolated	 and	 monitored	 which	 also	 seems	 to	 hold	 information	 or	 a	 resource	 of
value	 to	 attackers.	 The	 two	 types	 of	 honeypots	 are	 production	 honeypots	 and
research	honeypots.

            Production	 Honeypots:	 are	 simple	 to	 manage,	 detects	 only	 limited
            information,	and	are	utilized	primarily	by	organizations.
            Research	 Honeypots	 :	 are	 run	 to	 collect	 information	 about	 the
            motives	 and	 tactics	 of	 the	 black	 hat	 community	 targeting	 diverse
            networks.
Besides,	some	risks	are	associated	with	deploying	honeypots	in	the	organization.
You	must	make	sure	that	they	understand	the	legal	and	compliance	problems	that
may	be	associated	with	the	use	of	a	honeypot.	Honeypots	have	to	be	segmented
from	the	production	network	to	make	sure	that	any	potential	activity	generated
by	them	does	not	contain	the	ability	to	affect	any	other	system.
Vulnerability	assessments
A	 vulnerability	 assessment	 is	 a	 process	 of	 classifying,	 identifying,	 and
prioritizing	 vulnerabilities	 in	 applications,	 computer	 systems,	 networks
infrastructure	 and	 providing	 the	 corporations	 to	 assessing	 with	 the	 awareness,
essential	 knowledge	 and	 risk	 background	 to	 understand	 the	 threats	 to	 its
environment	and	react	appropriately.
This	 process	 is	 intended	 to	 detect	 threats	 and	 the	 risks	 they	 pose	 typically
involves	 the	 use	 of	 automated	 testing	 tools	 such	 as	 network	 security	 scanner,
whose	outcome	are	listed	in	the	vulnerability	assessment	report.
Corporations	of	any	size,	or	even	a	single	person	who	faces	a	large	number	of
attacks,	 can	 benefit	 from	 some	 vulnerability	 assessments	 but	 multinational
corporations	 and	 other	 types	 of	 corporations	 that	 are	 subjected	 to	 continue
attacks	will	benefit	most	from	the	vulnerability	assessment.
Because	security	vulnerabilities	can	allow	the	attackers	to	access	IT	systems	and
applications,	 it	 is	 essential	 for	 the	 corporations	 to	 identify	 and	 remediate
vulnerabilities	 before	 they	 can	 be	 exploited.	 A	 comprehensive	 vulnerability
assessment,	 as	 well	 as	 a	 management	 program,	 can	 assist	 corporations	 to
improve	the	security	of	their	entire	networks	and	IT	systems.
Types	of	Vulnerabilities	Assessments
Vulnerability	assessment	depends	on	discovering	different	forms	of	network	and
system	vulnerabilities	that	means	the	assessment	process	includes	using	multiple
forms	 of	 tools,	 scanners,	 and	 methodologies	 to	 identify	 vulnerabilities,	 threats
and	risks	as	well.
Some	of	the	vulnerability	assessment	scans	are:

            Application	Scans
            Database	scans
            Host-based	scans
            Network-based	scans
            Wireless	network	scans

Log	Capture	and	Analysis	(e.g.,	SIEM,	Log	Management)
Logging	the	events,	securing	the	logs	and	making	them	available	for	analysis	is
the	most	important	for	any	security	program	and	will	be	the	main	considerations
and	focus	of	the	Cloud	Security	Professional	(CSP).
Security	Information	and	Event	Management	(SIEM)
SIEM	 is	 a	 methodology	 to	 security	 management	 that	 join	 SIM	 (security
information	management),	and	SEM	(security	event	management)	functions	into
the	single	security	management	system.
The	basic	principles	of	every	SIEM	system	is	to	aggregate	significant	data	from
various	sources	that	can	identify	deviations	from	the	norm	and	take	appropriate
action.
For	example:
When	 a	 potential	 issue	 is	 detected,	 a	 SIEM	 might	 log	 additional	 information,
generate	 an	 alert	 and	 instruct	 other	 security	 controls	 to	 prevent	 an	 activity’s
progress.
Besides,	 A	 SIEM	 system	 can	 be	 set	 up	 locally	 or	 hosted	 in	 an	 external	 Cloud-
based	 environment.	 A	 SIEM	 system	 can	 support	 the	 initial	 detection	 of	 these
events.

             A	locally	hosted	SIEM	system	provides	easy	access	and	lesser	risk	of
             external	disclosure
             An	 external	 SIEM	 system	 may	 prevent	 tampering	 of	 data	 by	 an
             attacker
The	 use	 of	 SIEM	 systems	 is	 also	 beneficial	 as	 they	 map	 to	 and	 support	 the
implementation	 of	 the	 Critical	 Controls	 for	 Effective	 Cyber-Defense.	 The
Critical	Controls	for	Effective	Cyber-Defense	(the	Controls)	are	a	recommended
set	 of	 actions	 for	 cyber-defense	 that	 provide	 specific	 and	 actionable	 ways	 to
prevent	 most	 pervasive	 attacks.	 They	 were	 developed	 and	 are	 maintained	 by	 a
consortium	 of	 thousands	 of	 security	 professionals	 from	 across	 the	 public	 and
private	regions.	An	underlying	theme	of	the	control	is	the	support	for	large-scale,
and	standard-based	security	automation	for	the	management	of	cyber-defenses.
Log	Management
Log	management	is	the	collective	processes	and	policies	used	to	administer	and
facilitate	the	analysis,	archiving,	generation,	storage,	transmission,	and	eventual
disposal	 of	 the	 maximum	 number	 of	 log	 data	 generated	 within	 an	 information
system.
In	 a	 Cloud-computing	 environment,	 a	 log	 is	 automatically	 produced	 and	 time-
stamped	 documentation	 of	 significant	 events	 that	 are	 specified	 to	 the	 system.
Virtually	all	IT	systems	and	software	applications	generate	log	files.
Effective	 log	 management	 is	 most	 important	 to	 both	 security	 and	 compliance.
Analyzing,	 documenting	 and	 monitoring	 system	 events	 is	 an	 essential
component	of	security	intelligence	(SI)	.
 Note:
 The	 CIS	 Critical	 Security	 Controls	 for	 Effective	 Cyber	 Defense:	 The
 Centre	 for	 Internet	 Security	 (CIS)	 Critical	 Security	 Controls	 for	 Effective
 Cyber	 Defense	 is	 a	 publication	 of	 best	 practice	 guidelines	 for	 computer
 security.	 The	 publication	 was	 initially	 developed	 by	 the	 SANS	 Institute,	 and
 the	ownership	transferred	to	Centre	for	Internet	Security	(CIS).
 Security	intelligence	(SI)	:	SI	is	the	significant	information	used	for	securing
 corporations	 from	 internal	 and	 external	 threats	 along	 with	 the	 processes,
 policies,	and	tools	designed	to	gather	and	analyze	that	information.
Management	Plane
In	a	traditional	data	center,	many	operations	will	typically	impact	a	single	client
or	system,	as	most	data	centers	reside	on	physical	hardware	and	are	segregated
from	 other	 systems.	 There	 are	 exceptions	 to	 this	 rule	 for	 organization-level
services	 such	 as	 DNS,	 file	 servers,	 etc.	 However,	 careful	 coordination	 and
management	 are	 most	 important	 because	 various	 IT	 systems	 and	 different
consumers	 are	 directly	 affected	 by	 operational	 decisions.	 With	 large	 Cloud
environments,	careful	planning	and	management	is	essential	to	operating	an	IT
system.
Scheduling
Cloud	 computing	 manages	 a	 multiple	 form	 of	 virtualized	 resources,	 which
makes	 scheduling	 a	 significant	 component.	 In	 the	 Cloud	 environment,	 a
customer	 may	 utilize	 a	 large	 number	 of	 virtualized	 assets	 for	 every	 task.
Eventually,	manual	scheduling	is	not	a	sufficient	solution.	The	primary	objective
of	task	scheduling	is	to	slate	tasks	to	reduce	time	loss	and	enhance	performance.
In	general,	scheduling	is	a	decision-making	process	that	allows	resource	sharing
among	hundreds	of	activities	by	determining	their	execution	order	on	the	set	of
available	 resources.	 The	 emergence	 of	 distributed	 systems	 brought	 new
challenges	 on	 scheduling	 in	 computer	 systems,	 including	 grids,	 clusters,	 and
more	recently	Clouds.
Orchestration
The	orchestration	is	the	automatic	configuration,	coordination,	and	management
of	software	and	computer	systems.
Cloud	 orchestration	 is	 the	 use	 of	 programming	 technology	 to	 manage	 the
interconnections	 and	 interactions	 between	 workloads	 on	 public	 and	 private
Cloud	 infrastructure.	 It	 connects	 automated	 tasks	 into	 a	 cohesive	 workflow	 to
achieve	a	goal,	with	permissions	oversight	and	policy	enforcement.
Cloud	 orchestration	 is	 often	 used	 to	 deploy,	 provision,	 or	 start	 servers;	 acquire
and	assign	storage	capacity;	manage	networking;	develop	VMs;	and	authorize	to
particular	 software	 on	 Cloud	 services.	 This	 is	 achieved	 through	 three	 main,
interconnected	components	of	Cloud	orchestration	which	are:

            Resource	orchestration
             Service
             Workload
An	orchestration	platform	can	integrate	authorization	checks	for	compliance	and
security.
Cloud	 orchestration	 technology	 needs	 to	 work	 with	 heterogeneous	 systems,
potentially	 servicing	 a	 global	 Cloud	 deployment	 in	 different	 physical	 locations
and	with	different	Cloud	providers.	Several	hundreds	of	Cloud	orchestrator	users
can	run	public	Cloud	and	private	deployments.
Several	 hundreds	 of	 tools	 exist	 for	 automation	 of	 server	 configuration	 and
management,	including	Terraform,	Salt,	Puppet,	and	Ansible	.
Maintenance
When	 considering	 management-related	 activities	 and	 the	 need	 to	 control	 and
organize	them	to	ensure	accuracy	and	impact,	you	must	think	about	the	impact
of	change.	It	is	significant	to	schedule	system	repair	and	maintenance,	as	well	as
customer	notifications,	to	make	sure	that	they	do	not	disrupt	the	organization’s
systems.	 When	 scheduling	 maintenance,	 the	 Cloud	 provider	 will	 need	 to	 make
sure	that	sufficient	resources	are	available	to	meet	expected	demand,	and	Service
Level	 Agreement	 (SLA)	 needs.	 You	 have	 to	 ensure	 that	 proper	 change-
management	 procedures	 are	 implemented	 and	 followed	 for	 all	 IT	 systems	 and
scheduling	and	notifications	are	communicated	efficiently	to	all	parties	that	will
potentially	be	affected	by	the	work.	Consider	using	automated	system	tools	that
send	out	messages.
Usually,	a	host	system	is	placed	into	maintenance	mode	 before	 beginning	 any
work	 on	 it	 that	 will	 need	 system	 downtime,	 rebooting,	 and	 any	 disruption	 of
services.	 For	 the	 host	 to	 be	 placed	 into	 maintenance	 mode,	 the	 VMs	 currently
running	 on	 it	 should	 be	 powered	 off	 or	 moved	 to	 another	 host.	 The	 use	 of
automated	solutions	such	as	workflow	or	tasks	to	place	a	host	into	maintenance
mode	is	supported	by	all	virtualization	vendors	and	is	something	that	you	have
to	have	an	understanding	of.
Regardless	 of	 whether	 the	 decision	 to	 enter	 maintenance	 mode	 is	 manual	 or
automated,	ensure	all	appropriate	security	protections	and	safeguards	continue	to
apply	 to	 all	 hosts	 while	 in	 maintenance	 mode	 and	 to	 all	 VMs	 while	 they	 are
being	 moved	 and	 managed	 on	 alternate	 hosts	 as	 a	 result	 of	 maintenance	 mode
activities	being	performed	on	their	primary	host.
Build	Logical	Infrastructure	for	Cloud	Environment
While	 the	 physical	 infrastructure	 of	 a	 Cloud	 environment	 is	 taken	 into	 an
account	 on	 precise	 and	 specific	 hardware	 and	 other	 physical	 assets,	 the	 logical
infrastructure	 is	 much	 more	 summarised	 and	 is	 instead	 focused	 on	 the	 actual
organizational	 requirements	 of	 the	 consumer.	 It	 eliminates	 the	 specifics	 of
platforms	and	software,	and	instead	focuses	on	the	aspects	that	are	more	relevant
to	the	consumers,	such	as	locations,	processes,	regulations,	and	roles.
Secure	Configuration	of	Virtual	Hardware	Specific	Requirements
When	 configuring	 virtual	 hardware,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 understand	 the
requirements	 of	 the	 underlying	 host	 systems.	 In	 various	 instances,	 specific
configurations	and	settings	will	need	to	be	employed	on	the	VMs	to	compare	the
capability	 and	 requirements	 of	 the	 physical	 hosts.	 These	 requirements	 will	 be
identified	by	the	virtual	host	vendor,	and	they	will	need	to	be	compared	by	those
building	and	configuring	the	images	of	virtual	devices.	These	settings	enable	for
the	 appropriate	 allocation	 and	 management	 of	 the	 CPU	 and	 memory	 resources
from	the	host	systems	to	the	VMs	running	with	them.
From	the	storage	perspective,	various	steps	have	to	be	taken	for	proper	security
configuration.	 Immediately	 after	 the	 installation,	 any	 default	 authorizations
supplied	 by	 the	 vendor	 have	 to	 be	 changed	 immediately.	 These	 default
authorizations	are	very	useful	for	the	potential	attacker	and	are	typically	one	of
the	first	targets	utilized	to	comprise	a	system.	All	needless	APIs	and	interfaces
have	to	be	disabled	to	prevent	any	potential	comprise,	along	with	saving	the	on
system	resource	overhead.	Testing	has	to	be	conducted	to	make	sure	that	storage
controllers	 and	 the	 system	 can	 manage	 the	 normal	 loads	 as	 well	 as	 meet	 the
requirements	 for	 high	 availability	 and	 redundancy.	 As	 with	 any	 component	 of
configuration	and	system,	vendor	recommendations	for	best	practices	guidelines
always	have	to	be	adapted	and	consulted	to	the	specific	requirements.
Within	a	Cloud	environment	there	are	two	main	network	models,	with	the	proper
model	 that	 is	 dependent	 on	 the	 specific	 requirements	 and	 configurations	 of	 the
Cloud	 environment.	 Usually,	 the	 networking	 model	 has	 physical	 switches
combined	 with	 virtual	 networks	 at	 the	 hypervisor	 level.	 The	 converged
networking	model	with	the	storage	and	data/IP	networks	into	a	single	virtualized
design	 is	 intended	 for	 use	 with	 Cloud	 environments.	 Traditionally,	 networking
model	 can	 utilize	 conventional	 security	 networking	 tools,	 while	 the	 converged
networking	model	will	utilize	entire	virtualized	tools.	Therefore,	by	default	of	a
traditional	 networking	 model	 and	 the	 combination	 of	 physical	 and	 virtualized
system,	 typically,	 there	 can	 be	 a	 disconnection	 among	 the	 two	 as	 it	 relates
visibility	 with	 the	 virtualized	 networks	 completely.	 The	 converged	 networking
models,	 being	 designed	 and	 optimized	 for	 Cloud	 usage,	 often	 maintains	 good
visibility	and	performance	under	Cloud	operated	loads.
Installation	of	Guest	O/S	Virtualization	Toolsets
Because	 the	 virtualized	 environment	 can	 run	 multiple	 forms	 of	 Operating
Systems	 (OS)	 within	 it	 that’s	 why	 it	 is	 essential	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 the	 proper
toolsets	 are	 installed	 and	 available	 for	 it.	 Each	 OS	 vendor	 will	 have	 their
virtualization	tools	and	Cloud	services	sets	that	always	have	to	be	used	to	make
sure	 optimal	 compatibility	 and	 accurate	 performance	 of	 the	 OS	 within	 the
environment.	 Typically,	 these	 can	 be	 augmented	 with	 a	 third	 party	 and	 other
toolsets,	 but	 following	 the	 recommended	 best	 practices	 and	 configuration
guidelines	provided	by	the	vendor	will	make	sure	optimal	performance,	security,
and	visibility	into	the	guest	OSs	.
Run	Logical	Infrastructure	for	Cloud	Environment
There	are	numerous	considerations	for	the	management	and	operation	of	a	Cloud
infrastructure.	A	secure	network	configuration	will	help	in	isolating	customer’s
data	 and	 assist	 in	preventing	 or	reducing	denial-of-service	 attacks.	 Various	key
methods	 are	 mostly	 used	 to	 implement	 network	 security	 controls	 in	 a	 Cloud
environment,	 including	 converged	 appliances,	 physical	 devices,	 and	 virtual
appliances.
You	 must	 be	 aware	 with	 best	 practices	 guidelines	 for	 secure	 network	 design,
such	 as	 defense	 in	 depth,	 along	 with	 the	 design	 considerations	 specific	 to	 the
network	 topologies	 you	 may	 be	 handling,	 such	 as	 a	 single	 tenant,	 and	 multi-
tenant	hosting	systems	as	well.	Besides,	you	will	have	to	be	aware	of	the	vendor-
specific	 recommendations	 and	 needs	 of	 the	 hosting	 platforms	 that	 they	 can
support.
Secure	Network	Configuration
The	section	is	just	a	high-level	summary	of	the	compatibility	and	functionality	of
the	 technology	 being	 described.	 Please	 refer	 to	 the	 “Running	 a	 Physical
Infrastructure	 for	 Cloud	Environments	 ”	 section	 of	 this	 domain	 for	 specific
details	as	required	when	studying	this	section.
VLAN’s
VLANs	 allow	 for	 the	 logical	 isolation	 of	 hosts	 on	 a	 network.	 In	 a	 Cloud-
computing	environment,	VLANs	can	be	used	to	isolate	the	customer	networks,
management	 network,	 and	 the	 storage	 network.	 VLANs	 can	 also	 be	 utilized	 to
separate	customer	data.
TLS
Transport	 Layer	 Security	 (TLS)	 allows	 for	 the	 encryption	 of	 data	 in	 transition
among	hosts.	Deployment	of	TLS	for	internal	networks	will	prevent	the	sniffing
of	traffic	by	a	malicious	user.	A	TLS	VPN	is	one	of	the	significant	procedures	to
allow	for	remote	access	to	the	Cloud	environment.
DHCP
DHCP	 is	 most	 important	 for	 orchestration	 and	 automation	 within	 a	 Cloud-
computing	environment.	Security	professionals	are	well	understood	of	the	adage
that	you	should	never	use	DHCP	within	a	server	and	data	centre,	instead,	have	IP
addresses	configured	and	set	statically.	This	way	has	passed	mostly,	though,	in
favor	 of	 using	 DHCP	 with	 reservation.	 With	 DHCP,	 IP	 address	 is	 not	 always
issued	dynamically	from	a	pool.	Within	a	Cloud-computing	environment,	DHCP
is	used	to	centralize	the	assigning	of	IP	addresses	and	statically	maintain	them,
node	 names,	 hostname,	 IP,	 MAC	 address	 are	 set	 and	 not	 changed,	 they	 are
always	assigned	to	the	same	virtual	machine.	This	enables	for	the	highest	speed
and	flexibility	with	automation	and	eliminates	the	requirements	for	configuration
such	 as	 network	 settings	 at	 the	 host	 level,	 which	 are	 instead	 centrally
administrated	and	maintained.
DNS
DNS	 servers	 have	 to	 be	 locked	 down	 and	 provide	 the	 required	 services	 and	 to
use	Domain	Name	System	Security	Extensions	(DNSSEC)	when	it	is	possible.
DNSSEC	 is	 a	 set	 of	 DNS	 extensions	 that	 provide	 authentication,	 integrity,	 and
authenticated	 denial-of-existence	 for	 DNS	 data.	 Zone	 transfers	 have	 to	 be
disabled.	 If	 an	 attacker	 comprises	 DNS,	 they	 may	 be	 able	 to	 reroute	 data	 or
hijack.
IPSEC
IPsec	VPN	is	one	core	procedure	to	access	in	the	Cloud-computing	environment
remotely.	If	an	IPsec	VPN	is	utilized,	IP	whitelisting,	will	only	allow	authorized
IP	 addresses,	 which	 is	 considered	 as	 a	 best	 practice	 for	 access.	 Multi-factor
authentication	can	also	be	used	to	improve	security.
OS	 Hardening	 via	 Application	 of	 a	 Baseline	 (e.g.,	 Windows,	 Linux,
VMware)
A	baseline	is	a	preconfigured	group	of	settings,	to	secure,	or	harden	;	a	machine
which	 is	 a	 common	 practice.	 The	 baseline	 has	 to	 be	 configured	 to	 enable	 the
minimum	 services	 and	 software	 to	 be	 implemented	 onto	 the	 system	 that	 is
required	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 the	 system	 can	 perform	 as	 needed.	 A	 baseline
configuration	 has	 to	 be	 established	 for	 each	 Operating	 System	 (OS)	 and	 the
virtualization	 platform	 in	 use.	 The	 baseline	 has	 to	 be	 designed	 to	 meet	 the
customer	requirement.	There	are	various	sources	for	recommended	baselines.	By
establishing	a	baseline	and	continuously	monitoring	for	compliance,	the	provider
can	identify	any	deviations	from	the	baseline.
Capturing	a	Baseline
The	Cloud	Security	Professional	(CSP)	should	consider	the	items	outlined	next
as	the	bare	minimum	requirements	for	establishing	a	functional	baseline	to	use	in
the	enterprise.	There	may	be	other	procedures	as	well	that	would	be	involved	in
multiple	ways,	based	on	specific	policy	or	regulatory	requirements	pertinent	to	a
particular	 organization.	 There	 are	 various	 sources	 of	 guidance	 on	 the
methodology	for	building	a	baseline	that	the	CSP	can	recommend	to	if	required.

            A	fresh	installation	of	the	target	OS	needs	to	be	performed.	It	may	be
            physical	or	virtual.
            All	essential	configuration	of	the	host	OS	has	to	be	accomplished	as
            per	the	requirements	of	the	baseline	creation.
            All	 essential	 security	 patches	 have	 to	 be	 downloaded	 and	 installed
            from	the	proper	vendor	repository.
            All	unnecessary	services	have	to	prevent	and	set	to	disabled	to	make
            sure	that	they	do	not	run.
            All	unnecessary	software	has	to	be	deleted	from	the	system.
            An	image	of	the	OS	baseline	has	to	be	captured	and	stored	for	future
            deployment.	This	image	has	to	be	placed	under	change	management
            control	where	appropriate	access	controls	are	applied.
            Complete	 documentation	 has	 to	 be	 created,	 captured,	 and	 stored	 for
            the	baseline	being	created.
            The	 baseline	 OS	 image	 also	 has	 to	 be	 placed	 under	 the
            Configuration	 Management	 (CM)	 system	 and	 cataloged	 as	 a
            Configuration	Item	(CI)	.
            The	baseline	OS	image	has	to	be	updated	on	a	documented	schedule
            for	 security	 patches	 and	 any	 additional	 essential	 configuration
            updates	as	required.
            The	OS	baseline	has	to	be	audited	to	make	sure	that	all	essential	items
            have	been	appropriately	configured.

Availability	of	the	Guest	OS
A	 guest	 OS	 is	 a	 software	 installed	 on	 either	 a	 partitioned	 disk	 or	 a	 Virtual
Machine	 (VM)	 that	 describes	 an	 operating	 system	 which	 is	 different	 from	 the
host	operating	system.
Main	 advantages	 of	 a	 Cloud-computing	 environment	 are	 the	 redundancy.
Redundant	system	hardware	can	be	used	to	assist	in	averting	system	outages	due
to	hardware	failure.	Generators	and	backup	power	supplies	can	be	used	to	make
sure	 that	 the	 hosts	 contain	 power,	 even	 if	 the	 electricity	 is	 shut	 down	 for	 a
period.	 Besides,	 technologies	 such	 as	 high	 availability	 and	 fault	 tolerance	 are
essential	to	consider	as	well.	High	availability	has	to	be	used	where	the	objective
is	to	reduce	the	effect	of	system	downtime.	Fault	tolerance	has	to	be	used	where
the	 objective	 is	 to	 remove	 the	 system	 downtime	 as	 a	 threat	 to	 system’s
availability	altogether.
High	Availability
In	 the	 Cloud-computing	 environment,	 different	 customers	 will	 have	 different
availability	 requirements.	 These	 can	 include	 components	 such	 as	 automatic
migration	and	live	recovery	if	the	underlying	host	goes	down.
Cloud	 vendors	 will	 have	 their	 particular	 toolsets	 available	 to	 provide	 for	 high
availability	 on	 their	 platform.	 It	 is	 essential	 to	 understand	 the	 vendor’s
requirement	and	capability	within	the	high	availability	domain	and	to	make	sure
these	are	documented	appropriately	as	a	part	of	the	BCP	or	DRP	process	within
the	organization	.
Fault	Tolerance
Network	 components,	 storage	 arrays,	 and	 servers	 with	 built-in	 fault	 tolerance
capabilities	have	to	be	utilized.	Besides,	if	there	is	a	fault	tolerance	solution	that
a	 vendor	 makes	 available	 through	 software	 deployment	 that	 is	 appropriately
scaled	 for	 the	 level	 of	 fault	 tolerance	 essential	 by	 the	 guest	 OS,	 consider	 it	 as
well.
 Note:
 Disaster	 Recovery	 Plan	 (DRP)	 :	 A	 documented	 structured	 approach	 with
 instructions	for	responding	to	unintended	incidents.
 Business	Continuity	Plan	(BCP)	:	A	document	that	consists	of	the	essential
 information	an	organization	needs	to	continue	operating	during	an	unintended
 event.
 Configuration	 management	(CM)	 :	 A	 governance	 and	 systems	 engineering
 process	 for	 ensuring	 consistency	 between	 logical	 and	 physical	 assets	 in	 an
 operational	environment.
 Configuration	Item	(CI)	:	A	component	of	a	system	that	can	be	recognized	as
 a	self-contained	component	for	purposes	of	identification	and	change	control.
Manage	Logical	Infrastructure	for	Cloud	Environment
In	the	Cloud-computing	environment,	the	logical	design	has	to	include	measures
to	 limit	 remote	 access	 to	 only	 those	 individuals	 who	 has	 authorized	 access,
provide	 the	 capability	 to	 monitor	 the	 Cloud	 infrastructure,	 and	 allow	 for	 the
remediation	 of	 systems	 in	 the	 Cloud-computing	 environment,	 along	 with	 the
restoring	and	backup	of	a	guest	OS.
Access	Control	for	Remote	Access
When	 support	 is	 globally	 distributed	 data	 centers,	 secure	 Cloud-computing
environments	 and	 organizations,	 have	 to	 provide	 remote	 access	 to	 third	 party
personnel	 and	 employees	 with	 whom	 they	 have	 contracted.	 This	 includes	 field
technicians,	help-desk	support	and	IT	personnel,	etc.
A	 Cloud	 Remote	 Access	 solution	 has	 to	 be	 capable	 of	 providing	 secure	 access
wherever	is	required	and	extranet	capabilities	for	authorized	remote	users.	The
service	has	to	utilize	TLS/SSL	as	a	secure	transport	mechanism	and	require	no
software	clients	to	be	implemented	on	mobile	and	remote	users’	Internet-enabled
devices.
The	 most	 prominent	 advantage	 of	 the	 Cloud-computing	 environment	 is	 the
reduction	 of	 the	 attack	 surface;	 there	 are	 no	 open	 ports.	 There	 are	 other
prominent	advantages	of	a	remote	access	solution	that	can	include:

            Accountability	 of	 the	 one	 who	 gains	 access	 to	 the	 data	 center
            remotely	with	a	tamper-proof	audit	trail.
            Constantly	 monitoring	 to	 view	 privileged	 activities	 as	 they	 are
            happening	 or	 as	 a	 recorded	 playback	 for	 forensic	 analysis.	 Sessions
            can	 be	 remotely	 terminated	 or	 intervened	 when	 required	 for	 more
            efficient	and	secure	IT	compliance	and	cybersecurity	operations.
            Secure	 access	 without	 exposing	 the	 privileged	 credential	 to	 the
            customer,	reducing	the	risk	of	keylogging	or	credential	exploitation.
            Secure	 isolation	 among	 the	 remote	 user’s	 desktop	 and	 the	 target
            system	they	are	connecting	to	so	that	any	potential	malware	does	not
            spread	to	the	target	systems.
            Session	control	over	who	can	access,	enforcement	of	workflows	such
            as	 automatic	 termination	 when	 idle,	 managerial	 approval,	 session
            duration	limitation,	and	ticketing	integration.

Remote	Desktop	Protocol	(RDP)
RDP	 is	 a	 secure	 network	 communications	 protocol	 designed	 for	 remote
management,	along	with	the	remote	access	to	applications,	virtual	desktops,	and
an	RDP	terminal	server.
Besides,	RDP	enables	network	administrators	to	analyze	and	solve	those	issues
which	 individual	 subscribers	 encounter	 remotely.	 RDP	 is	 offered	 for	 many
versions	 of	 the	 Windows	 OS.	 RDP	 is	 also	 offered	 in	 mac	 OS	 version	 and	 it	 is
offering	freeware	licensing	as	well.
 Note:
 Extranet	 :	 A	 private	 network	 that	 uses	 Internet	 technology	 and	 the	 public
 telecommunication	 system	 to	 securely	 share	 part	 of	 an	 organization's
 information	 or	 operations	 with	 customers,	 partners,	 suppliers,	 vendors,	 and
 other	 businesses.	 It’s	 a	 part	 of	 an	 organization’s	 intranet	 that	 is	 extended	 to
 users	outside	the	organizations.
OS	Baseline	Compliance	Monitoring	and	Remediation
Tools	have	to	be	placed	to	monitor	the	OS	baselines	of	the	system	in	the	Cloud-
computing	 environment.	 When	 changes	 are	 detected,	 there	 has	 to	 be	 a	 process
for	root	cause	determination	and	remediation.
It	 is	 essential	 to	 understand	 the	 toolsets	 available	 for	 use	 based	 on	 the	 vendor
platform(s)	that	is	to	be	managed.	Both	VMware	and	Microsoft	have	their	own
built-in	 OS	 baseline	 compliance	 monitoring	 and	 remediation	 solution,	 as	 has
been	 described	 earlier	 in	 the	 “manage	 physical	 infrastructure	 for	 Cloud
environment”	 section.	 Microsoft	 has	 WSUS,	 VMware	 has	 host	 and	 storage
profiles	 and	 VUM.	 There	 are	 APIs	 available	 for	 use	 that	 user	 may	 take	 into
account,	depending	on	a	variety	of	circumstances	.
Regardless	of	product	implementation,	the	primary	objective	is	to	make	sure	that
the	 real-time	 or	 near	 real-time	 monitoring	 of	 OS	 configuration	 and	 baseline
compliance	 is	 taken	 into	 account	 within	 the	 Cloud-computing	 environment.
Besides,	the	monitoring	data	must	be	centrally	managed	and	stored	for	audit	and
change-management	purposes.
Any	 changes	 made	 under	 remediation	 has	 to	 be	 thoroughly	 documented	 and
submitted	to	a	change-management	 process	 for	 approval.	Once	 approved,	 the
changes	 being	 implemented	 must	 be	 managed	 through	 a	 release-	 and
deployment-management	 process	 that	 is	 tied	 directly	 into	 configuration	 and
availability	management	processes	to	make	sure	that	all	changes	are	managed
through	an	entire	life	cycle	within	the	organization.
 Note:
 Change-Management	 Process	 :	 A	 process	 of	 determining	 attainability,
 implementing,	planning,	requesting,	and	evaluating	of	changes	to	a	system.	Its
 primary	objective	is	to	support	the	processing	and	traceability	of	changes	to	an
 interconnected	set	of	factors.
 Release-	and	Deployment-Management	Process:	A	process	that	is	intended
 to	 manage	 the	 development,	 testing,	 deployment,	 and	 support	 of	 software
 releases.
 Availability	 Management	 Process:	 Its	 objective	 is	 to	 define,	 analyze,	 plan,
 measure	and	improve	all	components	of	the	availability	of	IT	services.
Patch	Management
In	 a	 logical	 infrastructure,	 Patch	 management	 adopts	 the	 procedure	 that	 is
essential	to	the	physical	infrastructure	in	the	Cloud-computing	environment.
Patch	 management	 is	 a	 part	 of	 systems	 management	 that	 includes	 acquiring,
testing,	 and	 installing	 numerous	 patches	 (code	 changes)	 to	 an	 administered
computer	 system.	 Patch	 management	 tasks	 involve	 maintaining	 existing
knowledge	of	available	patches,	deciding	which	patches	are	suitable	for	specific
systems,	make	sure	that	patches	are	installed	appropriately,	testing	systems	after
installation,	 and	 documenting	 every	 associated	 procedure,	 such	 as	 particular
configurations	 were	 needed.	 There	 are	 many	 products	 available	 to	 automate
patch	management	tasks:

            Gibraltar's	Everguard
            Patch	link	Update
            Ringmaster’s	Automated	Patch	Management
Besides,	Patches	are	often	ineffective,	and	can	often	cause	more	problems	than
they	fix.	Patch	management	can	be	viewed	as	a	part	of	change	management.
Patch	management	experts	Mark	Allen	,	CTO	of	Gibraltar	Software	suggests:
“System	 administrators	 perform	 easy	 steps	 to	 reduce	 problems,	 such	 as
performing	 backups	 and	 testing	 patches	 on	 non-critical	 systems	 before
installations	.”
Performance	Monitoring	(e.g.,	Network,	Disk,	Memory,	CPU)
Lori	MacVittie	,	principal	analyst	at	Rishidot	Research	LLC,	said	that	“Cloud
application	monitoring	tools	can	be	effective,	but	they	sometimes	are	not	as
full-featured	as	longer	established	performance	monitoring	solutions	.”
Besides,	 performance-monitoring	 tools	 have	 evolved.	 Traditionally,	 they	 were
designed	to	inspect	numerous	autonomous	components,	such	as	Network,	Disk,
Memory,	 and	 CPU.	 The	 growth	 of	 virtualization	 has	 blurred	 the	 dividing	 lines
among	these	devices.
Therefore,	 vendors	 have	 developed	 new	 tools	 designed	 specifically	 to	 evaluate
the	 performance	 of	 customer-based	 Cloud	 computing	 applications.	 Some	 of
Cloud	performance-monitoring	tools	are:

           BMC's	 End	 User	 Experience	 Management	 tool:	 Monitors	 use
           activity	at	the	group	level	or	even	individual	and	distinguishes	among
           broad	and	targeted	slowdowns.
           Cloudkick	 Inc	 :	 Gives	 customers	 elasticity;	 as	 new	 servers	 come
           online,	 new	 monitoring	 functions	 become	 available.	 Cloud	 admins
           can	customize	alerts	and	send	them	through	SMS	or	email.
           LoadStorm	:	A	real-time	Cloud-monitoring	tool	that	provides	graphs
           with	 performance	 metrics	 updated	 in	 one-minute	 intervals.	 Between
           the	 data	 highlighted	 are	 average	 response	 time,	 error	 rate,	 and
           requests	 per	 second,	 throughput	 in	 KB	 per	 second,	 peak	 response
           time	and	a	number	of	concurrent	users.
           SevOne's:	 Cloud	 performance	 monitoring	 tool	 identifies	 changes	 in
           performance	 behaviour	 through	 automated	 baselining	 through	 many
           data	centre	components.	The	organization’s	traffic	analysis	functions
           also	support	differentiated	service	models.
           SOASTA's	 CloudTest:	 Software	 creates	 complex	 tests	 without	 the
           need	for	programming.	Tests	can	be	stopped	or	paused	when	an	issue
           is	arrived	and	restarted	once	it	has	been	resolved.
However,	 each	 of	 these	 Cloud	 tools	 come	 with	 some	 warnings.	 One	 issue	 is
presenting	 organizations	 with	 a	 unified	 view	 of	 their	 network,	 server	 and
application	performance	across	physical	and	virtual	infrastructures.	Performance
data	 should	 be	 funneled	 to	 a	 central	 location	 while	 still	 allowing	 users	 to	 drill
down	to	troubleshoot	individual	components.
Backup	and	Restore	of	Guest	OS	Configuration
As	a	Cloud	Security	Professional	(CSP),	it	is	your	responsibility	to	ensure	that
the	proper	backup	and	restoration	capabilities	for	hosts	along	with	the	guest	OSs
running	 on	 top	 of	 them	 are	 set	 up	 and	 maintained	 within	 the	 organization’s
Cloud-computing	 infrastructure.	 The	 choices	 available	 about	 built-in	 tools	 will
vary	by	vendor	platform	and	are	supported,	but	all	vendors	will	offer	few	forms
of	built-in	toolsets	for	backup	and	restoring	the	host	configurations	and	also	the
guest	OSs.	Typically,	this	is	achieved	with	a	combination	of	profiles,	along	with
cloning	or	templates,	besides	some	form	of	a	backup	solution.
Whether	or	not	the	third-party	tool	is	used	to	provide	the	backup	and	restoration
capability	 will	 have	 to	 be	 decided	 based	 on	 referencing	 the	 SLA(s)	 that	 the
customer	 has	 in	 place	 as	 well	 as	 the	 capabilities	 of	 the	 built-in	 tools	 that	 are
available.	In	addition,	the	need	to	reference	the	existing	BCP/DRP	solutions	in
place	and	ensure	coordination	with	the	plans	and	systems	is	of	vital	importance.
Some	of	the	tools	are	available	for	backup	the	guest,	OS	are:

            VMware	Consolidated	Backup	(VCB)
            vSphere

Implementation	of	Network	Security	Controls
The	 implementation	 of	 network	 security	 controls	 has	 been	 described	 widely
earlier	 in	 the	 section	 of	 “Manage	 Physical	 Infrastructure	 for	 Cloud
Environment.”	You	 must	 adopt	and	implement	best	practices	guidelines	about
all	security	controls	generally.	About	network-based	controls,	the	following	best
practice	guidelines	have	to	be	considered:

            Access	controls
            Defense	in	depth
            Deployment	of	virtual	security	infrastructure	specifically	designed	to
            secure	 and	 monitor	 virtual	 networks	 (i.e.,	 VMware’s	 vCNS	 or	 NSX
            products)
            Firewalls
            Honeypots/honey	nets
            IDS/IPS	system	deployments
            Secure	protocol	usage	(i.e.,	IPSec	and	TLS)
            Separation	of	traffic	flows	within	the	host	from	the	guests	through	the
            use	of	separate	virtual	switches	dedicated	to	specific	traffic
            VLANs
Zoning	and	masking	of	storage	traffic
Log	Capture	and	Analysis
Log	 data	 must	 be	 collected	 and	 analyzed	 for	 the	 hosts	 along	 with	 OS	 guest
running	on	top	of	the	hosts.	Multiple	forms	of	tools	that	allow	the	user	to	collect
and	consolidate	log	data.
Centralization	and	offsite	storage	of	log	data	can	reduce	tempering,	provide	the
proper	access	control,	and	monitoring	systems	are	also	considered.
It	 is	 your	 responsibility	 for	 understanding	 the	 requirements	 of	 the	 organization
about	log	capture	and	analysis,	also	to	make	sure	that	the	essential	toolsets	and
solutions	are	implemented	to	make	sure	that	information	can	be	managed	using
best	practices	guidelines	and	standards.
Management	Plane
You	 need	 to	 develop	 a	 particular	 management	 plane	 for	 the	 Cloud-computing
environment.	 You	 are	 eventually	 responsible	 for	 the	 security	 architecture	 and
resiliency	of	the	systems;	you	design,	implement	and	manage.
Make	 sure	 due	 diligence	 and	 due	 care	 are	 excised	 in	 the	 design	 and
implementation	 of	 all	 components	 of	 the	 organization	 Cloud	 security
architecture.
Besides,	 you	 are	 also	 responsible	 for	 keeping	 the	 record	 of	 changes	 in	 the
vendor’s	offering	 that	 could	 affect	 the	choices	being	made	or	considered	about
management	capabilities	and	approaches	for	the	Cloud.
It	 is	 constantly	 informed	 about	 issues	 and	 threats	 that	 could	 affect	 the	 secure
operation	 and	 management	 of	 Cloud	 computing	 infrastructure	 along	 with	 the
mitigation	techniques	and	vendors’	recommendations	about	mitigation	that	may
need	to	be	applied	or	implemented	within	the	Cloud-computing	infrastructure.
Note	 that	 due	 diligence	 is	 the	 process	 of	 systematically	 researching	 and
verifying	the	accuracy	of	a	statement.	Also,	note	that	due	care	considers	as	an
effort	 made	 by	 an	 ordinarily	 prudent	 or	 reasonable	 party	 to	 avoid	 harm	 to
another,	considering	the	circumstances.
Ensure	Compliance	with	Regulations	and	Controls	(e.g.,	ITIL,
ISO/IEC	20000-1)
One	 of	 the	 most	 essential	 components	 of	 operations	 is	 the	 compliance	 with
regulations	 and	 controls.	 This	 is	 achieved	 through	 a	 series	 of	 management
components	 that	 combines	 to	 make	 sure	 proper	 documentation,	 auditing	 and
accountability	 procedure	 are	 being	 followed.	 These	 components	 make	 sure,
compliance	with	regulations	internal	policies	along	with	the	form	of	a	structured
operations	 management	 program	 drives	 process	 and	 implements	 governance	 of
management	oversight.	Main	components	of	operations	are:
Change	Management
Change	 management	 is	 an	 approach	 used	 for	 managing	 the	 transition	 or
transformation	 of	 an	 organization's	 goals,	 technologies	 or	 processes.	 The
primary	 goal	 of	 change	 management	 is	 to	 implement	 strategies	 for	 effecting
change,	 controlling	 change	 and	 guiding	 people	 to	 follow	 the	 change.	 Such
strategies	include	 having	 a	structured	procedure	for	 requesting	a	 change,	along
with	the	mechanisms	for	responding	to	requests	and	following	them	up.
Change	Management	Process
The	process	of	change	management	needs	to	take	into	consideration	that	how	an
adjustment	 or	 replacement	 will	 affect	 the	 employees,	 process,	 and	 systems
within	the	organization.	There	should	be	a	process	for:

            Communicating	changes
            Documenting	change
            Evaluating	its	effects
            Planning	and	testing	change
            Scheduling	and	implementing	change
Documentation	 is	 a	 crucial	 component	 of	 change	 management,	 not	 only	 to
manage	 an	 audit	 trail	 but	 also	 to	 ensure	 compliance	 with	 internal	 and	 external
controls,	including	regulatory	compliance.
The	organization	developing	a	change	management	program	from	the	ground	up
typically	face	daunting	challenges.	Besides,	to	a	thorough	understanding	of	the
organization	 environment,	 the	 change	 management	 process	 needs	 an	 accurate
accounting	 of	 the	 systems,	 applications,	 and	 employees	 to	 be	 affected	 by	 a
change.	 Best	 practice	 framework	 can	 deliver	 guiding	 principles	 and	 assist
managers	to	align	the	scope	of	proposed	changes	with	available	digital	and	non-
digital	tools.
Change	Management	Models
Some	most	common	models	for	managing	change	include:

            ADKAR
            Bridges'	Transition	Model
            IT	Infrastructure	Library	(ITIL)
            Kotter's	8-Step	Process	for	Leading	Change
            Lewin's	Change	Management	Model
            McKinsey	7S

Change	Management	Tools
Digital	and	non-digital	change	management	tools	can	guide	change	management
officers	 to	 analyze,	 organize,	 research,	 and	 implement	 changes.	 Some	 of	 the
most	common	change	management	software	applications	include:

            ChangeGear	Change	Manager	(SunView	Software)
            ChangeScout	(Deloitte)
            eChangeManager	(Giva)
            Remedy	Change	Management	9	(BMC	Software)

Change	Management	Certifications
Change	management	specialists	can	earn	certifications	that	identify	their	ability
to	manage	projects,	manage	people	and	help	an	organization	through	a	period	of
transition	 or	 transformation.	 Popular	 certifications	 for	 change	 management	 are
issued	by:

            Association	of	Change	Management	Professionals	(ACMP)
            Change	Management	Institute	(CMI)
            Cornell	University's	SC	Johnson	College	of	Business
            Management	and	Strategy	Institute	(MSI)
            Prosci

Change	Management	in	Project	Management
Change	 management	 is	 an	 essential	 component	 of	 project	 management.	 The
project	 manager	 needs	 to	 inspect	 change	 requests	 and	 determine	 the	 effect	 a
change	will	have	on	the	project	completely.	The	team	or	even	a	person	in	charge
of	 change	 control	 needs	 to	 evaluate	 the	 effect,	 a	 change	 in	 one	 domain	 of	 the
project	can	have	on	another	domain,	including:
            Communications
            Costs
            Human	resources
            Procurement
            Quality
            Risk
            Schedule
            Scope
            Stakeholders

Continuity	Management
Continuity	 Management	 or	 Business	 continuity	 management	 (BCM)	 is	 a
framework	 used	 for	 recognizing	 an	 enterprises	 risk	 of	 exposure	 to	 internal	 and
external	threats	.
The	objective	of	BCM	is	to	provide	the	enterprises	with	the	ability	to	effectively
respond	 to	 threats	 such	 as	 data	 breaches	 or	 natural	 disasters	 and	 secure	 the
business	interests	of	the	enterprises.	BCM	includes
            Business	recovery’s
            Contingency	planning
            Crisis	management
            Disaster	recovery
            Emergency	management
            Incident	management
According	to	ISO	22301,	a	BCM	system	highlights	the	importance	of:

             Constant	improvement	based	on	objective	measurements.
             Implementing	 and	 operating	 controls	 and	 measures	 for	 managing
             enterprises	overall	continuity	risks.
             Monitoring	 and	 reviewing	 the	 performance	 and	 effectiveness	 of	 the
             BCM	system.
             Understanding	 continuity	 and	 preparedness	 needs,	 along	 with	 the
             necessity	for	establishing	BCM	policy	and	objectives.
Note	that	the	International	Organization	of	Standardization	standard	22301	(ISO
22301)	 is	 a	 proposed	 standard	 that	 specifies	 security	 requirements	 for	 disaster
recovery	preparedness	and	business	continuity	management	systems	(BCMS).
Information	Security	Management
An	Information	Security	Management	System	(ISMS)	is	a	set	of	rules,	policies,
and	 procedures	 for	 systematically	 managing	 an	 organization’s	 sensitive
information,	IT	services,	and	IT	systems.	The	objective	of	ISMS	is	to	reduce	risk
and	 assure	 business	 continuity	 by	 pro-actively	 limiting	 the	 effect	 of	 a	 security
breach.
An	 ISMS	 often	 addresses	 employee	 behavior	 and	 process	 along	 with	 the	 data
and	technology.	It	can	be	focused	on	the	specific	type	of	data,	such	as	customer
data,	or	it	can	be	implemented	in	a	comprehensive	way	that	becomes	an	integral
part	of	the	organization’s	culture.
ISO	27001	is	a	specification	for	creating	an	ISMS.	It	does	not	mandate	particular
actions,	but	includes:

           Constant	improvement
           Corrective
           Internal	audits
           Preventive	action
           Suggestions	for	documentation
Continual	Service	Improvement	Management
Continual	 Service	 Improvement	 (CSI)	 is	 a	 method	 used	 to	 identify	 and
implement	 opportunities	 to	 make	 IT	 processes	 and	 services	 enhanced	 and	 to
measure	the	effects	of	these	efforts	over	time.
This	 central	 business	 management	 concept	 was	 adopted	 into	 the	 continual
improvement	 goals	 of	 international	 standard	 ISO	 20000	 for	 IT	 service
management,	 and	 more	 broadly,	 it	 supports	 various	 IT	 service	 management
(ITSM)	initiatives.
ITSM	 includes	 policies,	 processes,	 and	 procedures	 that	 an	 organization	 uses	 to
design,	 deploy,	 operate	 and	 maintain	 a	 group	 of	 IT	 services.	 CSI	 represents	 a
central	tenant	of	ITSM	frameworks,	such	as	IT	Infrastructure	Library	(ITIL),	that
dictate	 how	 organizations	 deliver	 access	 to	 corporate	 networks,	 important
business	applications	such	as	email	and	other	IT	services.
The	 improvements	 typically	 enhance	 customer’s	 experience,	 boost	 service
quality,	lower	costs	and	make	processes	more	effective	and	efficient.	CSI	can	be
applied	 to	 all	 components	 of	 the	 ITIL	 framework	 or	 another	 life	 cycle
management	 approach	 it	 can	 also	 be	 used	 to	 review	 and	 assess	 improvement
recommendations	for	all	phases	of	the	life	cycle.
Note	that	ISO	20000	is	a	global	standard	that	describes	the	requirements	for	an
information	technology	service	management	(ITSM)	system.
Incident	Management
Incident	management	is	a	part	of	IT	Service	Management	(ITSM)	wherein	the	IT
team	returns	the	service	to	normal	as	soon	as	possible	after	a	disruption,	in	a	way
that	aims	to	create	an	adverse	effect	on	the	business	as	possible.
An	 incident	 is	 an	 unpredicted	 event	 that	 disrupts	 the	 normal	 process	 of	 an	 IT
service.	 A	 problem	 is	 a	 core	 issue	 that	 could	 lead	 to	 an	 incident.	 Problem
management	consists	of	the	events	taken	to	reduce	the	occurrence	of	an	incident.
Incident	management	guides	organization(s)	to	prepare	for	unexpected	hardware,
software	 and	 security	 failings,	 and	 it	 minimizes	 the	 duration	 and	 severity	 of
disruption	 from	 these	 events.	 Incident	 management	 can	 adopt	 the	 ITSM
framework,	 such	 as	 the	 IT	 infrastructure	 library	 (ITIL)	 or	 to	 follow	 the	 best
practices	guidelines.
Incident	Management	Process
Typically,	Incident	Management	depends	on	the	temporary	workaround	to	assure
services	 are	 up	 and	 running	 while	 the	 team	 investigates	 the	 incident,	 identifies
the	 main	 problem,	 and	 develops	 and	 roll	 out	 a	 permanent	 fix.	 Particular
workflows	 and	 process	 in	 incident	 management	 differs,	 depending	 on	 the	 way
each	organization	works	and	the	issues	they	are	focusing	on.
A	large	number	of	incident	management	workflows	start	with	users	and	IT	staff
pre-emptively	 addressing	 potential	 incidents	 such	 as	 a	 network	 slowdown.	 IT
staff	contains	the	incidents	to	stop	potential	issues	in	another	domain	of	the	IT
deployment.	Then,	they	search	a	temporary	workaround	or	implement	a	fix	also
does	 recovery	 of	 the	 system	 and	 release	 the	 system	 back	 into	 the	 production
environment.	IT	staff	then	reviews	and	logs	the	incident	for	future	reference.
Documentation	 allows	 the	 IT	 staff	 to	 search	 previously	 unseen	 and	 repeated
incident	 trends	 and	 address	 them.	 If	 a	 temporary	 workaround	 is	 taken	 into
account,	once	the	disruption	to	end	clients	is	reduced,	the	staff	can	fix	an	issue
for	long	lasting.
Types	of	Incidents
Generally,	incidents	are	categorized	as:

            Low	 Priorities:	 Incidents	 do	 not	 interrupt	 end	 users,	 who	 often
            complete	work	despite	the	issue.
            Medium	Priorities:	Incidents	are	issues	that	affect	end	users,	but	the
            disruption	is	either	brief	or	slight.
            High	Priorities:	 Incidents	 are	 issues	 that	 will	 affect	 most	 end	 users
            and	reduce	the	proper	functioning	of	a	system.
Besides,	 Incidents	 are	 classed	 as	 hardware,	 software	 or	 security;	 although	 in	 a
performance,	the	issue	can	often	result	from	any	combination	of	these	areas.

            Hardware	 incidents	 include	 downed	 or	 limited	 resources,	 network
            issues	or	other	system	outages.
            Security	incidents	encompass	attempted	and	active	threats	intended	to
            compromise	or	breach	data.
            Software	 incidents	 include	 service	 availability	 problems	 or
            application	bugs.

Incident	Management	Tools
Incident	 management	 teams	 and	 help	 desk	 are	 heavily	 depended	 on	 a
combination	 of	 tools	 to	 resolve	 incidents,	 including	 monitoring	 tools	 to	 collect
operations	 data,	 root	 cause	 analysis	 systems,	 incident	 management,	 automation
platforms,	and	other	support	products.
Some	of	the	incident	management	tools	are:
            PagerDuty
            VictorOps
            xMatters

Problem	Management
Problem	 management	 is	 an	 integral	 part	 of	 IT	 service	 management	 (ITSM)
which	 aims	 to	 resolve	 incidents	 and	 issues	 caused	 by	 end-user’s	 errors	 or	 IT
infrastructure	issues	and	prevents	recurrence	of	such	incidents.
Besides,	an	incident	is	an	event	that	disrupts	normal	operation.	A	problem	is	an
underlying	issue	that	could	lead	to	an	incident.
Problem	 management	 can	 either	 be	 reactive	 or	 proactive.	 Reactive	 means
solving	 problem	 when	 an	 error	 occur	 while	 proactive	 means	 identifying	 issues
and	potential	risks	before	they	become	problematic.
Release	and	Deployment	Management
Release	and	deployment	management	goals	are	to	plan,	schedule,	and	control	the
movement	 of	 releases	 to	 test	 and	 live	 environments.	 The	 basic	 objective	 of
release	 and	 deployment	 management	 is	 to	 assure	 that	 the	 integrity	 of	 the	 live
environment	is	protected	and	that	the	right	components	are	released.
The	objectives	and	goals	of	release	and	deployment	management	are:

           Define	and	agree	upon	deployment	plans
           Build	and	test	release	packages
           Make	sure	the	integrity	of	release	packages
           Record	and	track	all	release	packages	in	the	Definitive	Media	Library
           (DML)
           Manage	stakeholders
           Check	delivery	of	utility	and	warranty
           The	 utility	 is	 the	 functionality	 delivered	 by	 a	 product	 or	 service	 to
           meet	particular	requirements;	it	is	what	the	service	does.
           Warranty	is	the	assurance	that	a	product	or	service	will	meet	agreed-
           upon	requirements	(SLA);	it	is	how	the	service	is	delivered.
           Manage	risks
           Make	sure	knowledge	is	transfer
Besides,	 new	 software	 releases	 have	 to	 be	 done	 under	 the	 configuration
management	plan.	You	have	to	perform	the	security	testing	on	all	new	releases
before	deployment.	Release	management	is	especially	crucial	for	SaaS	and	PaaS
providers.
You	may	not	be	directly	involved	for	release	and	deployment	management	and
may	 be	 responsible	 only	 tangentially	 in	 the	 process.	 Regardless	 of	 who	 is
responsible,	 it	 is	 imperative	 that	 the	 process	 is	 tightly	 joined	 to	 change
management,	 incident	 and	 problem	 management,	 along	 with	 the	 configuration
and	availability	management	and	the	help/service	desk.
Configuration	Management
Configuration	 Management	 (CM)	 is	 a	 system	 engineering	 and	 governance
process	 for	 assuring	 continuity	 between	 physical	 and	 logical	 assets	 in	 an
operational	 environment.	 The	 CM	 process	 seeks	 to	 identify	 and	 track	 specific
Configuration	 Items	 (CIs),	 documenting	 functional	 capabilities	 and
interdependencies.	 Governance	 role	 like	 administrator,	 technicians	 or	 even
software	 developers	 can	 use	 configuration	 management	 tools	 to	 confirm	 the
effect	of	a	change	that	one	configuration	item	has	on	other	desired	system.
CM	is	the	operational	process	 that	is	identified	in	the	IT	Infrastructure	 Library
(ITIL)	 service	 management	 framework,	 although	 an	 organization	 does	 not
require	to	adopt	the	ITIL	framework	to	perform	CM.	It	is	referred	to	as	Service
Asset	and	CM	in	ITIL.
For	a	CM	system	to	operate,	it	requires	a	variety	of	mechanism	in	which	to	store
the	 information	 it	 governs.	 Initially,	 this	 was	 known	 as	 the	 Configuration
Management	 Database	 (CMDB);	 ITIL	 V3	 introduced	 the	 concept	 of	 a
Configuration	Management	System	(CMS)	to	replace	the	CMBD.
A	CMBD	is	a	database	that	stores	the	all-important	information	with	regards	to
hardware	and	software	components	used	in	the	organization.	A	CMBD	provides
an	organized	view	of	configuration	data	and	a	means	of	inspecting	the	data	from
any	desired	standpoint.
Most	 service	 management	 tools	 are	 implemented	 with	 a	 supporting	 data
repository.	 Without	 the	 governance	 process	 of	 CM	 validating	 its	 contents,	 in
general,	 the	 repository	 is	 an	 operational	 database	 with	 unverified	 data,	 not	 a
CMBD	 or	 CMS.	 Automated	 configuration	 audit	 and	 verification	 components
entitle	a	repository	to	be	leveraged	as	an	authorized	essential	component	of	the
asset.	A	mutual	audit	is	also	possible.	Special	CM	software	is	available,	such	as
BMC	 Software’s	 Atrium	 and	 Hewlett	 Packard	 Enterprise's	 Universal
Configuration	Management	Database.
A	CM	process	and	supporting	repository,	CMBD	or	CMS,	face	the	challenge	of
overlapping	 and	 contradicting	 data	 from	 sources	 across	 the	 organization.	 The
CM	plan	must	include	a	way	to	merge	and	reconcile	CIs	to	present	a	single	point
of	reference	or	a	single	source	of	truth.
CM	is	also	used	in	software	development	and	deployment,	where	it	is	known	as
Software	 Configuration	 Management	 (SCM)	 or	 Unified	 Configuration	 Management
(UCM).
Software	 CM	 tools,	 such	 as	 Chef	 and	 Puppet,	 can	 be	 used	 jointly	 with	 the
version-control	 tools	 for	 source	 code	 management,	 such	 as	 Apache	 Subversion
and	Git	.
Service	Level	Management
Service	Level	Management	(SLM)	is	one	of	the	essential	components	in	the	ITIL
Service	 Delivery	 domain.	 It	 is	 the	 most	 important	 set	 of	 processes	 within	 the
ITIL	 framework.	 It	 processes	 to	 provide	 a	 framework	 by	 which	 services	 are
defined,	 service	 levels	 needed	 to	 support	 business	 processes	 which	 are	 agreed
upon.	 Service	 Level	 Agreements	 (SLAs)	 and	 Operational	 Level	 Agreements
(OLAs)	 are	 developed	 to	 assure	 the	 agreements,	 and	 costs	 of	 services	 are	 also
developed.
Executing	 Service	 Level	 Management	 processes	 permits	 IT	 staff	 to	 more
accurately	 and	 cost	 effectively	 provision	 identified	 levels	 of	 service	 to	 the
business.	 The	 processes	 ensure	 business	 and	 IT	 understand	 their	 roles	 and
responsibilities	and	empower	the	business	units.
In	 the	 end,	 business	 units	 are	 justifying	 to	 senior	 management	 the	 levels	 of
service	 needed	 to	 support	 business	 processes,	 not	 IT.	 Moreover,	 the	 built-in
constant	 enhancement	 processes	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 when	 organization’s
requirements	change,	supporting	IT	services	change	with	them.
Availability	Management
The	availability	Management	objective	is	to	define,	analyze,	plan,	measure	and
enhance	 all	 components	 of	 the	 availability	 of	 IT	 services.	 Availability
management	 is	 responsible	 for	 assuring	 IT	 infrastructure,	 process,	 tools,	 roles,
and	many	more,	are	appropriate	for	the	agreed	upon	availability	target.
The	system	has	to	be	designed	to	meet	the	availability	requirements	listed	in	the
SLAs.	A	large	number	of	virtualization	platform	permits	for	the	management	of
system	 availability	 and	 can	 act	 in	 the	 event	 of	 a	 system	 outage	 (i.e.,	 failover
running	guest	OSes	to	a	different	host).
Capacity	Management
Capacity	management's	aim	is	to	ensure	that	IT	resources	are	right-sized	to	meet
current	 and	 future	 organization	 needs	 cost-effectively.	 It	 is	 an	 essential
component	of	the	ITIL	framework.
Capacity	management	is	focused	on	ensuring	the	organization	IT	infrastructure
and	it	is	sufficiently	provisioned	to	provide	the	agreed	service-level	targets	more
accurately	and	cost-effectively.	Capacity	management	takes	account	of	the	entire
resources	 essential	 to	 deliver	 IT	 services	 within	 the	 scope	 of	 the	 defined
organizations	need	.
Capacity	management	is	an	analytical	function.	The	system	capacity	needs	to	be
monitored,	 and	 thresholds	 need	 to	 be	 set	 to	 prevent	 systems	 from	 reaching	 an
over-capacity	situation.
Conduct	Risk	Assessment	to	Logical	and	Physical	Infrastructure
Risk	 is	 a	 measure	 of	 the	 extent	 to	 which	 an	 entity	 is	 threatened	 by	 a	 possible
situation	or	event	and	is	often	a	function	of:

            The	adverse	effect	that	would	arise	if	any	situation	or	event	occurred
            The	probability	of	occurrence
Information	 security	 risks	 arise	 from	 the	 loss	 of	 confidentiality,	 integrity,	 or
availability	 of	 information	 or	 information	 systems	 and	 reflect	 the	 possible
adverse	 effect	 on	 the	 organizational	 operations,	 organizational	 assets,
individuals,	or	other	organizations.
Risk	Management	Process
The	risk	management	process	includes:
                           Figure	5-4:	Risk	Management	Proces	s

Framing	Risk
Framing	risk	is	the	initial	phase	in	the	risk	management	process	that	addresses
how	 organizations	 describe	 the	 environment	 in	 which	 risk-based	 decisions	 are
made.	It	is	designed	to	deliver	a	risk	management	procedure	intended	to	address
how	the	organization	can	access,	respond	to,	and	monitor	risk.	This	enables	the
organizations	to	coherent	the	risks	that	it	requires	to	manage,	and	also	establishes
and	defines	the	boundaries	for	a	risk-based	decision	within	the	organization.
Risk	Assessment
Risk	 assessment	 is	 the	 process	 used	 to	 identify,	 estimate,	 and	 prioritize
information	security	risks.
According	to	the	NIST	Special	Publication,	800-39:
“Risk	assessment	is	a	key	component	of	the	risk	management	process.	The
purpose	of	engaging	in	risk-assessment	is	to	identify:”

           Threats	to	organizations	such	as	operations,	assets,	or	individuals	or
           threats	directed	through	organizations	against	other	organizations
           Organizations	have	the	external	and	internal	vulnerabilities
            The	harm	(i.e.,	adverse	impact)	that	may	occur	given	the	potential	for
            threats	exploiting	vulnerabilities
            Its	high	possibility	that	any	harm	will	occur
Identifying	these	factors	assists	to	address	risks	that	include	the	high	possibility
of	harm	occurring	and	the	potential	degree	of	harm.
Conducting	a	Risk	Assessment
Assessing	risk	needs	the	intense	analysis	of	threats	and	vulnerability	information
to	 determine	 the	 extent	 to	 which	 possible	 situation	 or	 event	 could	 adversely
affect	an	organization	and	the	likelihood	that	such	possible	situations	or	events
will	occur.
Organizations	have	the	right	of	performing	a	risk	assessment	in	one	of	the	two
ways.

            Qualitative	Assessments	often	employ	a	set	of	methods,	principles,
            or	rules	for	assessing	risk	based	on	non-numerical	categories	or	levels
            such	as	very	low,	low,	moderate,	high,	or	very	high.
            Quantitative	 Assessments	 often	 employs	 a	 set	 of	 methods,
            principles,	 or	 rules	 for	 assessing	 risk	 based	 on	 the	 use	 of	 numbers.
            This	 way	 of	 assessment	 efficiently	 supports	 cost-benefit	 analyses	 of
            alternative	 risk	 responses	 or	 system.	 The	 following	 measures	 and
            calculations	form	the	basis	of	quantitative	assessments:

                         Single	Loss	Expectancy	(SLE)
                         Annualized	Rate	of	Occurrence	(ARO)
                         Annualized	Loss	Expectancy	(ALO)

Responding	to	Risk
Risk	response	provides	a	consistent,	organization-wide	response	to	risk	under	the
organizational	risk	frame	by:

            Building	an	alternative	system	for	responding	to	risk
            Evaluating	the	alternative	system
            Determining	 the	 proper	 system	 consistent	 with	 organizational	 risk
            tolerance
            Deploying	risk	responses	based	on	a	selected	system
Besides,	four	main	components	of	risk	responses	are:
Accept	Risk
Risk	 can	 be	 accepted.	 Risk	 acceptance	 is	 the	 practice	 of	 accepting	 the	 specific
risk,	typically	based	on	an	organizational	decision	that	may	also	weight	the	cost
versus	the	benefits	of	dealing	with	the	risk	in	another	way.
Avoid	Risk
Risk	 can	 be	 avoided.	 Risk	 avoidance	 is	 the	 practice	 of	 coming	 up	 with	 an
alternative	so	that	the	risk	in	question	is	not	realized.
Transfer	Risk
Risk	 can	 be	 transferred.	 Risk	 transfer	 is	 the	 practice	 of	 passing	 on	 the	 risk	 in
question	to	another	entity,	such	as	an	insurance	company.
Mitigate	Risk
Risk	 can	 be	 mitigated.	 Risk	 mitigation	 is	 the	 practice	 of	 elimination	 or	 the
significant	decreases	in	the	level	of	the	risk	presented.
Monitoring	Risk
Risk	 monitoring	 is	 a	 continuous	 process	 that	 tracks	 and	 evaluates	 the	 levels	 of
risk	 in	 an	 organization.	 Along	 with	 monitoring	 itself,	 the	 discipline	 tracks
evaluate	 the	 effectiveness	 of	 risk	 management	 strategies.	 The	 findings	 that	 are
produced	 by	 risk	 monitoring	 processes	 can	 be	 used	 to	 assist	 in	 creating	 new
strategies	 and	 updating	 previous	 strategies	 that	 may	 have	 proved	 to	 be
ineffective.
The	 objective	 of	 risk	 monitoring	 is	 to	 constantly	 track	 the	 risks	 that	 occur	 and
the	 effectiveness	 of	 the	 responses	 that	 are	 implemented	 by	 an	 organization.
Monitoring	 can	 help	 to	 ascertain	 whether	 the	 suitable	 policies	 were	 adopted,
whether	new	risks	can	now	be	identified	or	whether	the	old	strategies	to	do	with
these	 risks	 are	 still	 valid.	 Monitoring	 is	 most	 important	 because	 a	 risk	 is	 not
static	.
The	Collection,	Acquisition,	and	Preservation	of	Digital	Evidence
According	to	the	ISO/IEC	27037:2012	:
“It	 provides	 guidelines	 for	 particular	 actions	 in	 the	 handling	 of	 digital
evidence,	 which	 are	 identification,	 collection,	 acquisition,	 and	 preservation
of	potential	digital	evidence	that	can	be	of	evidential	value.
It	also	guides	individuals	about	everyday	situations	encountered	during	the
digital	 evidence	 handling	 process	 and	 helps	 organizations	 in	 their
disciplinary	 procedures	 and	 in	 facilitating	 the	 interchange	 of	 potential
digital	evidence	among	jurisdictions.”
The	 International	 Standard	 Organization	 (ISO,	 2012)	 mostly	 deals	 with	 the
initial	 process	 of	 collecting	 and	 storing	 possible	 digital	 evidence	 and	 ignore
subsequent	 work	 with	 the	 evidence	 (e.g.,	 analysis,	 presentation,	 and	 disposal).
The	individuals	who	handle	digital	evidence	has	to	be	capable	of	identifying	and
managing	 risks	 that	 can	 arise	 when	 utilizing	 this	 type	 of	 evidence,	 in	 order	 to
prevent	 its	 debasement	 and	 rendering	 it	 useless.	 Digital	 Evidence	 First
Responder	(DEFR)	have	 to	 follow	 specific	 general	 principles	 to	 maintain	 the
integrity	 and	 reliability	 of	 digital	 evidence.	 The	 purpose	 of	 these	 particular
procedures	needs	to	include	the	following:

             Reducing	manipulation	with	digital	data	or	digital	devices.
             Documenting	 all	 activities	 and	 modifications	 made	 to	 the	 digital
             evidence,	 so	 that	 an	 independent	 professional	 can	 form	 their	 own
             opinion	about	the	reliability	of	submitted	evidence.
             Proceeding	by	the	laws	of	the	country.
             DEFR	should	not	act	beyond	his	or	her	competence.
These	 primary	 principles	 have	 to	 lead	 to	 the	 preservation	 of	 evidence	 for
investigation	objectives.	If	a	change	to	the	evidence	cannot	be	avoided,	then	all
activities	 that	 were	 carried	 out	 and	 the	 details	 for	 them	 are	 adequately
documented.	 Some	 of	 the	 components	 that	 are	 involved	 in	 handling	 digital
evidences	are:
Identification
The	identification	process	involves	searching,	detecting	and	documenting	digital
evidence	and	digital	evidence	is	represented	in	both	the	physical	and	the	logical
form.	 All	 devices	 that	 could	 contain	 digital	 evidence	 have	 to	 be	 identified
throughout	 this	 process.	 DEFR	 has	 to	 carry	 out	 a	 proper	 investigation	 of	 the
crime	scene	to	prevent	overlooking	small,	camouflaged	devices	or	material	that
appears	inappropriate	at	first	sight	.
Collection
After	the	identification	of	devices	that	may	have	digital	evidence,	these	devices
are	eliminated	from	their	current	location	and	moved	to	the	laboratory	when	they
are	 analyzed	 and	 processed	 as	 the	 further	 step.	 This	 process	 is	 documented
continuously,	 including	 packaging	 and	 transported	 to	 the	 laboratory.	 DEFR	 is
essential	 because	 it	 secures	 the	 physical	 material	 which	 may	 be	 the	 concern	 to
the	digital	data	that	has	been	collected.
Acquisition
The	earlier	component	of	digital	evidence	consists	mainly	of	producing	a	copy
of	evidence	and	documenting	the	methods	used.	If	essential,	allocated	along	with
the	unallocated	space,	has	to	be	obtained.	In	general,	the	original	copies	generate
a	similar	output	of	the	similar	verification	function.
Depending	 on	 the	 possible	 situation,	 DEFR	 has	 to	 select	 suitable	 methods	 and
procedures	 for	 acquiring	 data.	 In	 case,	 this	 process	 produces	 an	 inevitable
change	 in	 the	 created	 copy,	 as	 compared	 to	 the	 original,	 it	 is	 essential	 to
document	the	data	that	was	changed.	If	the	verification	process	cannot	be	carried
out,	DEFR	has	to	utilize	the	best	possible	solution	and	then	justify	and	vindicate
his	or	her	choice	of	method.
Preservation
In	terms	of	preserving	digital	evidence,	it	is	essential	to	secure	integrity	to	make
it	 functional	 for	 investigation.	 DEFR	 has	 to	 be	 capable	 of	 demonstrating	 the
evidence	 that	 has	 not	 been	 changed	 since	 it	 is	 collected	 and	 to	 provide
documentation	and	vindication	of	all	activities	that	led	to	its	changes.
Practitioners	conducting	such	activities	are	usually	a	forensic	expert	or	security
professionals.	ISO	27037	guides	the	following	devices:

            Digital	 storage	 media	 used	 in	 standard	 computers	 like	 optical	 and
            magneto-optical	 disks,	 hard	 drives,	 floppy	 disks,	 data	 devices	 with
            similar	functions

            Digital	still	and	video	cameras	(including	CCTV)
            Mobile	navigation	systems
            Mobile	 phones,	 Personal	 Digital	 Assistants	 (PDAs),	 Personal
            Electronic	Devices	(PEDs),	memory	cards
            Networks	based	on	TCP/IP	and	other	digital	protocols
            A	standard	computer	with	network	connections
Proper	Methodologies	for	Forensic	Collection	of	Data
Digital	 forensics	 is	 the	 branch	 of	 forensic	 science	 that	 focuses	 on	 identifying,
acquiring,	 processing,	 analyzing	 and	 reporting	 on	 data	 stored	 on	 a	 computer
system,	digital	device	or	other	storage	media.
Each	 branch	 of	 Digital	 Forensics	 needs	 extensive	 training	 and	 experience
making	it	difficult	for	the	forensic	examiner	to	be	professional	in	all	domains.
According	to	the	American	Academy	of	Forensic	Sciences	(AAFS):
“Forensic	Science	is	the	application	of	scientific	principles	and	technological
practices	to	the	purposes	of	justice	in	the	study	and	resolution	of	criminal,
civil,	and	regulation	issues.”
Digital	Forensic	Process
The	digital	forensic	process	is	a	recognized	forensic	and	scientific	process	used
in	 digital	 forensic	 investigations.	 This	 process	 is	 mainly	 used	 in	 mobile	 and
computer	forensic	investigations	and	contains	such	components	as	identification,
collection,	acquisition,	and	preservation.
This	 process	 is	 as	 same	 as	 the	 digital	 evidence	 process	 but	 some	 additional
points	and	examples	are	described	here.




                             Figure	5-5:	Digital	Forensic	Process

Identification
The	forensics	process	begins	with	the	identification	of	items	that	may	or	may	not
contain	 potential	 digital	 evidence.	 Identification	 is	 the	 “process	 involving	 the
search	 for,	 recognition	 and	 documentation	 of	 potential	 digital	 evidence	 ”
defined	by	ISO/IEC	27037:2012	.
Although	 the	 identification	 of	 potential	 digital	 evidence	 sounds	 simple	 in
principle,	there	are	subtle	complexities	.

For	example:
Digital	evidence	has	both	a	physical	and	virtual	representation.	Consider	a	hard
drive	containing	potential	digital	evidence.	The	physical	location	of	the	evidence
is	 the	 hard	 drive,	 but	 the	 evidence	 itself	 is	 the	 data	 contained	 within	 the	 drive.
Besides,	 it	 also	 may	 not	 be	 at	 all	 obvious	 where	 potential	 digital	 evidence	 is
housed.	 A	 server	 may	 have	 some	 directly	 attached	 disks	 and	 have	 an	 essential
component	of	its	storage	within	a	SAN	or	NAS.
Collection
After	possible	digital	evidence	is	identified,	it	needs	to	be	collected:
The	collection	is	the	“Process	of	gathering	items	that	contain	potential	digital
evidence	”	defined	by	ISO/IEC	27037:2012.
Besides,	the	collection	is	equivalent	to	the	standard	law	enforcement	practice	of
seizing	 items	 having	 potential	 digital	 evidence	 under	 the	 authority	 of	 a	 legal
order	and	eliminating	them	to	a	forensics	lab	or	other	facility	for	processing	and
analysis.
Acquisition
The	acquisition	is	the	“Process	of	creating	a	copy	of	data	within	a	defined	set
”	defined	by	ISO/IEC	27037:2012
Besides,	 an	 acquisition	 is	 mostly	 used	 in	 the	 private	 sector	 due	 to	 the
organizational	 requirements	 to	 reduce	 the	 effect	 of	 a	 continuous	 investigation.
Similar	relates	to	minimizing	the	effect	on	other	applications,	and	customers	will
make	acquisition	more	likely	to	process	in	the	cloud	environment	as	well.
It	has	to	be	noted	that	the	copy	created	throughout	the	acquisition	process	could
range	 from	 the	 forensic	 image	 of	 a	 hard	 drive	 to	 a	 copy	 of	 the	 contents	 of	 a
server’s	memory	to	the	logical	contents	of	a	specific	user’s	email	box	reliant	on
the	purpose	and	scope	of	the	investigation.
In	 most	 cases,	 the	 need	 for	 the	 copy	 is	 similar:	 it	 must	 be	 made	 using	 an
accurate,	 defensible,	 well-documented	 process.	 Besides,	 the	 process	 needs	 to
include	integrity	measures	to	ensure	that	the	copy	has	not	been	changed	since	the
acquisition.	 The	 multiple	 forms	 of	 potential	 digital	 evidence	 to	 be	 copied,	 and
the	requirements	for	the	copying	process,	makes	the	acquisition	a	more	difficult
and	challenging	process	as	compared	to	the	Collection.
Preservation
Once	 potential	 digital	 evidence	 has	 been	 collected	 or	 acquired,	 it	 needs	 to	 be
preserved.	 ISO	 27037	 defines	 preservation	 as	 the	 “process	 to	 maintain	 and
safeguard	 the	 integrity	 and	 original	 condition	 of	 the	 potential	 digital
evidence	.	”
The	 preservation	 of	 potential	 digital	 evidence	 is	 a	 complex	 and	 significant
process.	 Evidence	 preservation	assists	to	assure	 admissibility	in	a	court	 of	 law.
However,	 digital	 evidence	 is	 very	 weak	 and	 is	 easily	 modified	 or	 destroyed.
Given	that	the	backlog	in	numerous	forensic	laboratories	ranges	from	six	months
to	 a	 year	 (and	 that	 delays	 in	 the	 legal	 system	 might	 create	 further	 delays).
Potential	digital	evidence	may	occupy	a	significant	period	in	storage	before	it	is
analyzed	 or	 used	 in	 a	 legal	 proceeding.	 Storage	 needs	 strict	 access	 control	 to
secure	 the	 items	 from	 accidental	 or	 deliberate	 change,	 along	 with	 the	 proper
environmental	controls.
Evidence	Management
From	 collection	 to	 trail,	 maintaining	 evidence	 is	 an	 integral	 component	 of	 the
digital	forensics.	Contain	procedures	and	policies	in	place	for	the	collection	and
management	 of	 evidence.	 You	 may	 need	 to	 gather	 digital	 evidence	 on	 short
notice	 in	 some	 cases.	 To	 be	 aware	 not	 to	 gather	 data	 outside	 the	 scope	 of	 the
requesting	 legal	 document.	 Assure	 legal	 discovery	 documents,	 or	 order	 will
specify	 that	 you	 and	 Cloud	 Service	 Provider	 (CSP)	 be	 not	 allowed	 to	 disclose
any	specific	activities	undertaken	in	support	of	the	order.
The	 CSP	 must	 also	 be	 aware	 of	 the	 issue	 surrounding	 the	 disclosure	 of	 data
collecting	 activities.	 Depending	 on	 the	 SLA(s)	 the	 customer	 has	 in	 place,	 the
data-collecting	 activities	 undertaken	 to	 support	 a	 forensic	 examination	 of	 a
tenant’s	 data	 which	 may	 not	 have	 to	 be	 disclosed	 to	 the	 tenants	 or	 any	 of	 the
other	tenants	in	a	multi-tenant	hosting	solution.
Manage	Communication	with	Relevant	Parties
Communication	 is	 always	 most	 important	 and	 essential	 aspect	 among	 parties
with	any	organization	or	kind	of	operation,	but	especially	those	parties	who	have
engaged	 in	 your	 business.	 Cloud	 services	 adds	 an	 additional	 layer	 of
complexities	 and	 considerations,	 and	 is	 highly	 recommended	 in	 regular
communication.	 For	 communications	 to	 be	 active	 and	 foster	 optimal
relationships,	they	must	be	both	accurate	and	concise.
The	Five	WS	and	One	H
They	must	clearly	identify	the	“five	WS	and	the	one	H”	about	communication
which	is	essential,	as	the	ability	to	do	so	directly	affects	the	level	of	success	that
will	 be	 accomplished	 about	 aligning	 the	 cloud-based	 solution	 architecture	 and
needs	 of	 the	 organization.	 Besides,	 the	 ability	 to	 successfully	 drive	 and
coordinate	 effective	 governance	 across	 the	 organization	 is	 affected	 by	 the
success	or	failure	of	these	communication	activities.
The	“five	WS	and	the	One	H”	of	communication	are:
 WS                                         Description
 and	H
 Who        Who	is	the	target	of	the	communication?
 What       What	is	the	communication	designed	to	achieve?
 When       When	 is	 the	 communication	 best	 delivered	 or	 most	 likely	 to	 reach
            its	intended	target(s)?
 Where      Where	is	the	communication	pathway	best	managed	from?
 Why        Why	is	the	communication	being	initiated	in	the	initial	place?
 How        How	 is	 the	 communication	 being	 transmitted	 and	 how	 is	 it	 being
            received?
                                    Table	5-4	-	WS	and	H

The	 ability	 to	 make	 sure	 concise	 and	 clear	 communication,	 and,	 as	 a	 result,
alignment	 and	 successfully	 achievement	 of	 objective,	 depend	 on	 the	 ability	 to
handle	the	“five	WS	and	the	one	H”	of	communication.
It’s	a	CSP	responsibility	that	must	drive	communication	in	the	organization	and
through	the	ecosystem	that	it	supports	to	make	sure	the	long-term	survivability
of	 the	 organization’s	 architecture	 that	 is	 continuously	 observed,	 discussed,	 and
provided	for.
Vendors
Communication	with	vendors	is	most	important	and	cost-effective.	The	only	way
to	 deploy	 a	 better	 system	 within	 your	 organization	 is	 to	 deploy	 a	 system	 in	 a
cloud	 because	 of	 communication.	 So,	 the	 communication	 perspective
Communication-as-a-Service	(CaaS)	model	is	used.
CaaS	is	an	outsourced	organization	communications	solution	that	can	be	leased
from	a	particular	vendor.	Such	communications	can	include	Voice	over	IP	(VoIP)
services,	 Instant	 Messaging	 (IM),	 and	 video	 conferencing	 applications	 using
fixed	and	mobile	devices.	CaaS	has	evolved	along	the	same	lines	as	Software	as
a	Service	(SaaS).
The	 CaaS	 vendor’s	 responsibility	 is	 to	 manage	 all	 hardware	 and	 software	 and
provide	assured	Quality	of	Service	(QoS).	CaaS	enables	organizations	to	deploy
communications	devices	when	it	is	needed.	This	model	removes	the	significant
capital	 investment	 and	 constant	 overhead	 for	 a	 system	 whose	 capability	 may
typically	exceed	or	fall	short	of	current	demand.
CaaS	provides	flexibility,	reliability,	and	expandability.	The	small,	medium,	and
large-sized	organization	allows	for	the	addition	of	 devices,	modes,	 or	coverage
on	demand.	The	network	capability	and	feature	set	can	be	continuously	changed
if	essential,	so	that	functionality	keeps	pace	with	demand	and	resources	are	not
wasted.	There	is	no	possibility	of	the	system	becoming	out-dated	and	requiring
periodic	significant	upgrades	or	replacement.
Customers
With	 a	 customer’s	 perspective	 in	 a	 cloud-computing	 environment,	 cloud-based
Customer	Relationship	Management	(CRM)	is	used.	 Cloud-based	CRM	is	also
known	as	a	Software-as-a-Service	(SaaS)	or	on-demand	CRM;	data	is	stored	on
an	external,	remote	network	that	personnel	can	access	anytime,	anywhere	there
is	an	internet	connection,	typically	with	a	third-party	service	provider	managing
deployment	 and	 implementation.	 For	 instance,	 the	 Cloud’s	 quick	 ,	 secure
deployment	 capabilities	 appeal	 to	 organizations	 with	 limited	 technological
expertise	or	resources.
Some	 organizations	 may	 focus	 on	 cloud	 CRM	 as	 a	 cost-effective	 option.	 A
vendor	such	as	Salesforce	charge	by	the	user	on	a	subscription	basis	and	provide
the	option	of	monthly	or	yearly	payments.
Partners
With	 a	 partner’s	 perspective	 in	 a	 cloud-computing	 environment,	 cloud-based
Partner	Relationship	Management	(PRM)	is	used.	PRM	is	a	mixture	of	process,
software,	 and	 approaches,	 organization	 use	 these	 to	 business	 process	 with
partners	who	sell	their	products.
PRM	 system	 typically	 includes	 a	 partner	 portal,	 customer	 database,	 and	 other
tools	 that	 enable	 organizations	 and	 partners	 to	 manage	 the	 business	 leads,
revenues,	 opportunities,	 and	 sales	 metrics.	 PRM	 systems	 track	 discounting,
inventory,	operations,	and	pricing.
In	 this	 era,	 most	 of	 the	 organization	 rely	 on	 partner	 companies	 to	 sell	 their
products	on	their	behalf	as	a	component	of	a	channel	approach,	rather	than	using
a	direct	distribution	channel.
PRM	software	has	to	include:

            Partner	 portals	 for	 vendors	 to	 communicate	 and	 transfer	 data	 with
            their	channel	partner;
            Access	management	features	to	control	who	can	view	the	data;
            Collaboration	tools	for	vendors	and	partner	personnel	to	work	jointly
            and	business	lead;
            Dashboards	 with	 partner	 performance	 management	 tools	 to	 measure
            objectives	and	monitor	results	using	key	performance	indicator	(KPI);
            Integration	 with	 organization	 tools	 including	 calendars,
            communication	 channels,	 content	 management	 systems,	 contract
            management,	expenses,	project	management,	and	time	management.

Regulators
Initial	 communication	 is	 most	 important	 with	 regulators	 when	 developing	 a
cloud	 environment.	 As	 a	 CSP,	 you	 are	 responsible	 for	 assuring	 that	 the	 entire
infrastructure	 is	 compliant	 with	 the	 regulatory	 requirements	 that	 may	 apply	 to
the	organization.
These	 requirements	 will	 vary	 significantly	 based	 on	 various	 factors	 such	 as
business	 type,	 geography,	 and	 services	 offered.	 However,	 if	 some	 regulatory
laws	or	standards	should	be	implemented	or	adhered	to,	you	must	understand	all
of	 the	 requirements	 and	 expectations	 of	 compliance	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 the
organization	can	prove	compliance	when	asked	to	do	so.
Other	Stakeholders
Depending	 on	 the	 application	 or	 project,	 there	 may	 be	 other	 stakeholders	 that
need	 to	 be	 included	 in	 communication	 processes.	 It	 is	 either	 specific	 to	 the
project	or	specific	to	regulatory	requirements.	The	CSP	must	evaluate	each	set	of
a	 possible	 situation	 to	 determine	 whether	 there	 are	 other	 appropriate
stakeholders,	 and	 determine	 what	 type	 of	 communication	 is	 required	 and	 its
frequency.
Summary
To	operate	a	cloud-computing	environment	securely,	the	CSP	must	be	capable	of
focussing	 on	 numerous	 different	 issues	 at	 the	 same	 time.	 Understanding	 the
physical	 and	 logical	 design	 components	 of	 the	 cloud	 environment	 is	 the	 initial
step	 on	 the	 path	 towards	 operational	 security	 and	 stability.	 The	 CSP	 has	 to	 be
capable	 of	 describing	 the	 specifications	 essential	 for	 the	 physical,	 logical,	 and
environmental	 design	 of	 the	 data	 center	 along	 with	 identifying	 the	 essential
requirements	 to	 build	 and	 implement	 the	 physical	 and	 logical	 infrastructure	 of
the	cloud.
To	be	able	to	operate	and	manage	the	cloud,	the	CSP	must	describe	policies	and
processes	 that	 are	 focused	 on	 providing	 secure	 access,	 analysis,	 availability,
maintenance	 capabilities,	 and	 monitoring.	 The	 CSP	 needs	 to	 be	 able	 to
demonstrate	 the	 ability	 to	 understand,	 identify,	 and	 manage	 risk	 within	 the
organization	and	specifically	as	it	relates	to	the	cloud	environment	as	well.	To	be
able	 to	 identify	 the	 essential	 regulations	 and	 controls	 to	 make	 sure	 compliance
for	the	operation	and	management	of	cloud	infrastructure	within	the	organization
along	 with	 the	 understanding	 and	 managing	 the	 process	 of	 conducting	 a	 risk
assessment	 of	 the	 physical	 and	 logical	 infrastructure	 are	 essential	 as	 well.	 The
need	to	 manage	 the	 process	 for	 collection,	 acquisition,	 and	 preservation	 of	 the
digital	 evidence	 in	 a	 forensically	 sound	 manner	 with	 cloud	 environments	 also
have	to	be	a	focus	for	the	CSP.
Figure	5-6:	Mind	map	of	Operations
Practice	Questions

    1.	 Which	engineering	is	a	study	of	HVAC	system	design?

     a)			Mechanical	Engineering
     b)			Electrical	Engineering
     c)			Chemical	Engineering
     d)			Software	Engineering
    2.	 Identify	the	lowest	temperature	recommended	by	ASHRAE:

     a)			16°C
     b)			18°C
     c)			20°C
     d)			22°C
    3.	 Identify	the	highest	temperature	recommended	by	ASHRAE:

     a)			23°C
     b)			25°C
     c)			27°C
     d)			29°C
    4.	 Choose	the	right	network	controller	to	build	a	physical	infrastructure:

     a)		Traditional	networking	model
     b)		Converged	networking	model
     c)		Both	A	and	B
     d)		None	of	the	above
    5.	 Which	 type	 of	 license	 is	 offered	 by	 Red	 Hat	 Enterprise	 Linux
        (RHEL)	for	Kernel-based	Virtual	Machine	(KVM)?

     a)			Floating	licensing
     b)			Open-source
     c)			Proprietary
     d)			Source-available
    6.	 Which	type	of	firewall	has	to	be	added	in	the	VM	series	to	KVM?

     a)			Application-level	firewall
 b)		Stateful	multilayer	inspection	firewall
 c)			Transparent	firewalls
 d)		Next-generation	firewalls	(NGFW)
7.	 Identify	the	right	layer	to	make	up	the	TLS:

 a)		TLS	Handshake	Protocol
 b)		TLS	Record	Protocol
 c)		Both	A	and	B
 d)		None	of	the	above
8.	 Which	network	technology	automatically	assign	the	IP	address	to	the
    computer?

 a)			VLAN
 b)			TLS
 c)			DHCP
 d)			DNS
9.	 Which	 networking	 technology	 translates	 the	 domain	 name	 into
    numeric	form?

 a)			VLAN
 b)			TLS
 c)			DHCP
 d)			DNS
    10.	How	many	clustered	storage	architectures	are	available?

 a)			Two
 b)			Three
 c)			Four
 d)			Five
     11.	Which	 remote	 access	 technique	 is	 most	 commonly	 used	 in	 the
   cloud	infrastructure?

 a)		Virtual	Desktop	Infrastructure	(VDI)
 b)		Remote	Desktop	Protocol	(RDP)
 c)		Access	through	a	secure	terminal
 d)		All	of	the	above
   12.	How	many	primary	types	of	a	firewall	are	there?

a)			Two
b)			Three
c)			Four
d)			Five
   13.	Which	 primary	 type	 of	 firewall	 is	 used	 in	 the	 cloud
 infrastructure?

a)			Host-based	firewall
b)			Network-based	firewal	l
c)		Both	A	and	B
d)		None	of	the	above
   14.	Identify	the	correct	vulnerabilities	assessment	scans:

a)			Application	Scans
b)			Database	scans
c)			Host-based	scans
d)		All	of	the	above	options
  15.	Identify	 the	 main	 interconnected	 components	 of	 cloud
 orchestration:

a)			Resource	orchestration
b)			Service
c)			Workload
d)		All	of	the	above
  16.	Identify	 the	 right	 tools	 to	 automate	 server	 configuration	 and
 management:

a)			Terraform
b)			Salt
c)			Puppet
d)			Ansible
e)		All	of	the	above
   17.	Identify	the	right	tools	to	do	a	cloud	performance	monitoring:
a)		VMware	Consolidated	Backup	(VCB)
b)			vSphere
c)		None	of	the	above
d)		All	of	the	above
   18.	Which	ISO	standard	defines	a	BCM	system?

a)			ISO	22301
b)			ISO	27001
c)			ISO	20000
d)			ISO	27037
   19.	How	many	types	of	incidents	are?

a)			Low	priorities
b)			Medium	priorities
c)			High	priorities
d)		All	of	the	above
   20.	Identify	the	right	tools	that	can	perform	incident	management?

a)			PagerDuty
b)			VictorOps
c)			xMatters
d)						None	of	the	above
Chapter	06:	Legal	&	Compliance
The	 objective	 of	 the	 Legal	 and	 Compliance	 domain	 is	 to	 provide	 you	 an
understanding	 of	 how	 to	 utilize	 the	 various	 legal	 and	 regulatory	 challenges
unique	to	cloud	computing.	To	achieve	and	maintain	compliance,	it	is	important
to	 understand	 the	 audit	 processes	 utilized	 within	 cloud	 computing,	 including
assurance	issues,	auditing	controls,	and	the	specific	reporting	attributes.
You	 will	 gain	 knowledge	 of	 legal	 processes	 and	 required	 compliance	 with
regulatory	frameworks,	which	includes	investigative	methods	for	crime	analysis
and	 evidence-gathering	 techniques.	 Organization	 risk	 considerations	 and	 the
impact	of	outsourcing	for	design	and	hosting	are	explored	as	well.
Legal	Requirements	and	Unique	Risks	within	the	Cloud
Environment
As	 the	 global	 nature	 of	 cloud	 computing	 technology	 continues	 to	 evolve,	 it
essentially	 simplifies	 and	 enables	 the	 convenience	 which	 was	 once	 thought
impossible,	meeting	the	internal	regulatory	laws	and	legislation	is	has	become	a
challenge	of	all	the	time.
Ensuring	adherence,	compliance,	or	conformity	with	these	can	be	very	difficult
within	traditional	“on-premise”	environments,	or	even	on	the	third	party/hosted
environments-add	cloud	computing	and	the	complexity	increases	significantly.
Constantly,	when	dealing	with	legal,	compliance	and	regulatory	issues,	the	first
step	must	be	to	consult	with	relevant	teams	or	professionals	specialized	in	those
domains.	 	 As	 a	 security	 professional,	 your	 objective	 should	 be	 to	 establish	 a
baseline	 understanding	 of	 the	 fluid	 and	 ever-changing	 legal	 and	 regulatory
landscape	with	which	you	may	need	to	interact.	
International	Legislation	Conflicts
Cloud	 computing	 provides	 excellent	 opportunities	 for	 user	 related	 to	 access,
automatic	updates,	cost	saving,	ease	of	use,	scalable	resourcing	and	so	on.	From
a	 legal	 point	 of	 view,	 the	 reality	 can	 be	 different	 because	 cloud	 computing
introduces	multiple	legal	challenges	which	the	security	practitioners,	architects,
professionals	 etc.	 need	 to	 be	 aware	 of.	 A	 primary	 objective	 is	 created	 by	 the
existence	 of	 conflicting	 legal	 requirements	 coupled	 with	 the	 inability	 to	 apply
local	 laws	to	 a	 global	technology	 offering.	This	can	result	in	uncertainty	and	a
lack	of	clarity	on	the	full	scope	of	risks	when	operating	globally.
In	 recent	 years,	 the	 amplified	 use	 of	 technology	 and	 the	 rise	 in	 the	 number	 of
businesses	 operating	 globally	 have	 resulted	 in	 the	 number	 of	 trans-border
disputes	 increasing	 dramatically.	 In	 particular,	 these	 included	 intellectual
property,	copyright	law,	and	violation	of	patents.	More	recently,	there	have	been
breaches	 of	 legislative	 requirements,	 data	 protection,	 and	 other	 privacy-related
components.
Examples
Some	examples	of	recent	areas	of	concern	include	the	following.
 According	 to	ZDNet:	“In	 June	 2011,	 Cloudfare,	 a	 web	 hosting,	 and	 Services
 Company	became	enmeshed	in	the	middle	of	a	multi-jurisdictional	battle	over
 the	 hacking	 activities	 of	 LulzSec.	 On	 June	 15,	 2011,	 LulzSec	 attacked	 the
 United	 States	 Central	 Intelligence	 Agency’s	 (CIA)	 websites	 and	 took	 them
 offline.	 LulzSec	 contracted	 to	 use	 Cloudflare	 for	 hosting	 services	 before
 launching	the	attacks,	but	it	also	used	seven	hosting	companies	in	Canada,	the
 U.S.,	and	Europe.	The	ensuing	hunt	to	find	and	take	down	LulzSec,	involving
 various	intelligence	agencies	and	governments,	as	well	as	black	and	white	hat
 hackers	 from	 around	 the	 world,	 caused	 Cloudfare	 and	 other	 hosting
 companies	 to	 become	 the	 targets	 of	 Distributed	 Denial	 of	 Service	 (DDoS)
 attacks	that	required	the	spreading	of	traffic	across	14	data	centers	globally	to
 successfully	thwart.”
Another	example
 According	to	the	United	State	District	Court:	“In	a	proceeding	in	2014	before
 the	 U.S.	 Court,	 Microsoft	 was	 ordered	 to	 turn	 over	 an	 email	 belonging	 to	 a
 user	of	its	hosted	mail	service.	That	email	belonged	to	a	user	outside	the	U.S.
 The	email	itself	was	located	on	a	server	in	a	data	center	in	Ireland—outside
 the	U.S.,	which	should	be	out	of	the	reach	of	U.S.	authorities	and	subject	to	the
 requirements	 of	 the	 EU	 privacy	 laws.	 Microsoft	 challenged	 the	 order	 and
 lost.”
Appraisal	of	Legal	Risks	Specific	to	Cloud	Computing
Cloud	 computing	 adds	 complexities	 concerning	 legal	 issues.	 With	 a	 traditional
data	center,	the	organization	will	own	and	control	the	systems,	environment,	and
resources,	along	with	the	data	that	is	housed	within	them.	Even	in	environments
where	 hosting	 and	 support	 services	 are	 contracted	 out	 to	 a	 third	 party,	 the
organization	 offering	 contract	 will	 still	 hold	 control	 over	 their	 data	 and	 system
and	 usually	 will	 be	 physically	 segregated	 within	 a	 data	 center	 from	 a	 network
perspective	 as	 well	 as	 in	 cages	 on	 the	 data	 center	 floor.	 This	 makes	 the	 legal
requirements	very	clear	to	the	parties	for	the	following	types	of	issues	that	might
arise.
The	 following	 issues	 also	 contain	 legislative	 items	 that	 may	 affect	 cloud
environments	:
State	law
This	 law	 usually	 refers	 to	 the	 law	 of	 each	 U.S.	 state	 (50	 states	 in	 total,	 each
treated	 separately),	 with	 their	 state	 constitutions,	 state	 governments,	 and	 state
courts.
Copyright/Piracy	laws
Copyright	infringement	can	be	performed	for	financial	or	non-financial	gain.	It
usually	happens	when	copyright	material	is	violated	upon,	made	accessible	to	or
shared	with	others	by	a	party	which	is	not	the	legal	owner	of	the	information.
Intellectual	Property	Rights
This	can	describe	creations	of	the	mind	such	as	logos,	literature,	symbols,	words,
other	 artistic	 creations,	 and	 literary	 works.	 Copyright	 protection,	 patents,	 and
trademarks	 all	 exist	 to	 protect	 a	 company’s	 or	 a	 person’s	 intellectual
entitlements.	Intellectual	property	rights	give	the	individual	who	created	an	idea,
an	exclusive	right	to	their	idea	for	a	defined	period.
Enforceable	Governmental	Request
An	 enforceable	 governmental	 request	 is	 a	 request	 or	 order	 that	 is	 capable	 of
being	performed	based	on	the	government’s	order.
Privacy	law
This	law	can	be	described	as	the	right	of	an	individual	to	determine	when,	how,
and	to	what	extent	he/she	would	release	personal	information.	Also,	privacy	law
usually	 includes	 language	 indicating	 that	 personal	 information	 needs	 to	 be
destroyed	when	its	retention	is	no	longer	required.
Criminal	law
Criminal	law	is	a	body	of	rules	and	statutes	that	define	conduct	that	is	prohibited
by	 the	 government	 and	 is	 enforced	 to	 protect	 the	 safety	 and	 well-being	 of	 the
public.	 Along	 with	 defining	 prohibited	 conduct,	 criminal	 law	 also	 defines	 the
punishment	 when	 the	 law	 is	 broken.	 Crimes	 are	 categorized	 based	 on	 their
seriousness	with	the	categories	carrying	maximum	punishments.
Tort	law
This	 is	 a	 body	 of	 rights,	 obligations,	 and	 remedies	 that	 assures	 protection	 for
persons	suffering	harm	because	of	the	illegal	acts	of	others.	These	laws	set	out
that	 the	 individual	 liable	 for	 the	 costs	 or	 consequences	 of	 the	 illegal	 act	 is	 the
individual	who	committed	the	act	as	opposed	to	the	individual	who	suffered	the
consequences.	 Tort	 actions	 are	 not	 dependent	 on	 an	 agreement	 between	 the
parties	to	a	lawsuit	.
The	Doctrine	of	the	Proper	law
Where	a	conflict	of	laws	occurs,	this	determines	in	which	jurisdiction	the	dispute
will	 be	 resolved,	 based	 upon	 contractual	 language	 professing	 an	 express
selection	or	a	clear	intention	through	a	choice-of-law	clause	.	If	there	is	not	an
express	 selection	 stipulated,	 then	 implied	 selection	 might	 be	 used	 to	 infer	 the
intention	 and	 meaning	 of	 the	 parties	 from	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 contract	 and	 the
circumstances	involved.
Conflict	of	laws
This	law	relates	to	a	difference	between	the	laws.	In	the	United	States	(US),	the
existence	of	various	states	with	legal	rules	often	at	variance	makes	the	subject	of
conflict	of	laws	especially	urgent.	The	conflict	of	laws	is	the	basis	for	deciding
which	laws	are	most	appropriate	in	a	situation	where	there	are	conflicting	laws
in	different	states.	The	conflicting	legal	rules	may	come	from	U.S.	federal	law,
the	laws	of	U.S.	states,	or	the	laws	of	other	countries.
Legal	Controls
Depending	 on	 whether	 an	 organization	 is	 employing	 a	 community,	 hybrid,	 or
public	Cloud,	there	are	some	issues	that	the	organization	has	to	understand.	The
extra	 dynamic	 is	 the	 presence	 of	 a	 third	 party:	 The	 Cloud	 service	 provider
(CSP)	:	so,	the	organization	needs	to	understand	how	laws	and	regulations	apply
to	the	Cloud.	In	other	words,	it	becomes	essential	to	understand	how	laws	apply
to	 the	 different	 parties	 involved	 and	 how	 compliance	 will	 ultimately	 be
addressed.
Regardless	 of	 which	 models	 you	 are	 using,	 you	 must	 consider	 the	 legal	 issues
that	apply	to	how	you	collect,	store,	process,	and,	finally,	destroy	data.	There	are
likely	 to	 be	 important	 national	 and	 international	 laws	 that	 you,	 together	 with
your	 legal	 functions,	 need	 to	 consider	 ensuring	 you	 are	 in	 legal	 compliance.
There	 can	 be	 various	 compliance	 requirements	 such	 as	 Safe	 Harbor,	 HIPAA,
PCI,	 Sarbanes-Oxley	 Act	 (SOX),	 and	 GLBA	 and	 other	 technology	 and
information	 privacy	 laws	 and	 regulations.	 Failure	 to	 comply	 may	 mean	 heavy
punishments	and	liability	issues.
These	laws	and	regulations	usually	specify	responsibility	and	accountability	for
the	protection	of	information.
Safe	Harbor
This	 program	 was	 developed	 by	 the	 U.S	 Department	 of	 Commerce	 and	 the
Commission	 to	 address	 the	 Commission’s	 determination	 that	 the	 United	 States
(US)	 does	 not	 have	 in	 place	 of	 a	 regulatory	 framework	 that	 provides	 adequate
protection	 for	 personal	 data	 transferred	 from	 the	 European	 Economic	 Area
(EEA)	 .	 Specific	 industries	 such	 as	 telecommunication	 carriers,	 banks,	 and
insurance	companies	may	not	be	eligible	for	this	program	.
HIPAA
The	 Health	 Insurance	 Portability	 and	 Accountability	 Act	 (HIPAA)	 is	 a	 United
States	 Act	 used	 to	 set	 out	 the	 requirements	 of	 the	 Department	 of	 Health	 and
Human	 Services	 to	 adopt	 national	 standards	 for	 electronic	 healthcare
transactions	 and	 national	 identifiers	 for	 employers,	 health	 plans,	 and	 provider.
Protected	 health	 information	 can	 be	 stored	 through	 Cloud	 computing	 under
HIPAA.	This	act	was	published	in	1996.
PCI
According	 to	 the	 Payment	 Card	 Industry	 (PCI),	 organization:	 “The	 Payment
Card	 Industry	 is	 a	 Security	 Standards	 Council	 and	 is	 a	 global	 forum	 for	 the
continuing	 development,	 improvement,	 dissemination,	 storage,	 and
implementation	of	security	standards	for	account	data	protection.”
Sarbanes-Oxley	Act	(SOX)
The	 Sarbanes-Oxley	 Act	 of	 2002	 is	 U.S.	 legislation	 enacted	 to	 protect
shareholders	 and	 the	 public	 from	 accounting	 errors	 and	 fraudulent	 practices	 in
the	 organization.	 Securities	 and	 Exchange	 Commission	 (SEC)	 administered
the	SOX	act,	and	sets	goals	for	compliance	and	publishes	rules	on	requirements.
SOX	is	not	a	set	of	business	practices	and	does	not	specify	how	business	ought
to	store	records;	rather,	it	defines	the	records	that	are	to	be	stored	and	for	how
long.
GLBA
The	 Gramm-Leach-Bliley	 Act	 (GLBA)	 is	 a	 federal	 law	 enacted	 in	 the	 US	 to
control	 the	 directions	 that	 financial	 institutions	 manage	 the	 private	 information
of	individuals.	It	is	a	Financial	Modernization	Act	of	1999.
eDiscovery	(e.g.,	ISO/IEC	27050,	CSA	Guidance)
eDiscovercy	 (also	 known	 as	 Electronic	 discovery)	 is	 a	 procedure	 by	 which
parties	 involved	 in	 litigation,	 collect,	 review,	 and	 exchange	 information	 in
electronic	formats	to	use	it	as	evidence.
There	 are	 various	 different	 electronic	 formats	 -	 or	 electronically	 stored
information	(ESI)	,	 as	 it	is	recognized	in	the	e-discovery	world	-	that	may	be
sought	in	e-discovery,	ranging	from	conventional	data	sources,	such	as	primary
email	 and	 Microsoft	 documents,	 to	 more	 modern	 ones,	 like	 instant	 messaging,
social	media,	and	smartphone	applications,	to	more	arcane	ones	like	files	from	a
company-specific	database.
ISO/IEC	27050
According	to	the	ISO/IEC	27050	standard:
“It	aims	to	put	in	place	internationally-recognized	standard	procedures	and
practices	for	the	stages	in	a	process	commonly	referred	to	as	“e-discovery.”
The	 stages	 of	 the	 e-discovery	 process	 are	 generally	 believed	 to	 include	 the
analysis,	 collection,	 identification,	 preservation,	 processing,	 review,	 and
production	of	electronically	stored	information.”
CSA	Guidance
According	to	the	Cloud	Security	Alliance	(CSA),	“eDiscovery	is	the	process	by
which	an	opposing	party	obtains	private	documents	for	use	in	litigation	and	to
cover	a	wide	range	of	potential	documents.	In	particular,	discovery	need	not	be
limited	to	documents	known	at	the	outset	to	be	admissible	as	evidence	in	court;
instead,	discovery	will	 apply	to	all	documents	reasonably	calculated	to	lead	 to
admissible	evidence	and	the	evidence	that	is	both	relevant	and	probative.”
EDiscovery	Challenges
The	 challenges	 associated	 with	 e-discovery	 include	 the	 vast	 volumes	 of
electronic	 information	 in	 the	 possession	 or	 control	 of	 number	 of	 organization,
the	 ease	 with	 which	 electronic	 documents	 are	 duplicated,	 transferred	 and
dispersed.	 The	 dynamic	 and	 changeable	 nature	 of	 electronic	 information,
difficulties	with	regard	to	disposal	of	electronic	information	when	desirable,	and
the	 fast	 pace	 of	 technological	 change	 which	 can	 render	 obsolete	 the	 hardware
and/or	software	required	to	review	electronically	stored	information.
Possession,	Custody,	and	Control
In	most	jurisdiction	systems	in	the	United	States,	a	party’s	obligation	to	produce
valuable	 information	 is	 limited	 to	 documents	 and	 data	 within	 its	 possession,
custody	or	control.	Hosting	relevant	data	through	a	third	party,	such	as	a	Cloud
provider,	generally	does	not	obviate	a	party’s	obligation	to	produce	information.
Nonetheless,	not	all	data	hosted	by	a	Cloud	provider	may	be	in	the	control	of	a
client	 (e.g.,	 disaster	 recovery	 systems	 or	 specific	 metadata	 created	 and
maintained	by	the	Cloud	provider	to	operate	its	environment).	Distinguishing	the
data	 that	 is	 and	 is	 not	 available	 to	 the	 client	 may	 be	 in	 the	 interest	 of	 both	 the
client	and	the	provider	at	the	outset	of	a	relationship.	The	responsibilities	of	the
Cloud	 service	 provider	 as	 Cloud	 data	 supervisor	 about	 the	 production	 of
information	 in	 response	 to	 legal	 process	 is	 an	 issue	 left	 to	 each	 jurisdiction	 to
sort	out.
Forensics	Requirements
When	incidents	happen,	it	could	be	necessary	to	perform	forensic	investigations
related	to	that	incident.	Depending	on	the	Cloud	model	that	you	are	deploying,	it
could	not	be	easy	to	collect	the	required	information	to	perform	active	forensic
investigations.
“Cloud	 computing	 forensic	 science	 is	 the	 application	 of	 scientific	 principles,
technological	 practices,	 and	 derived	 and	 proven	 methods	 to	 reconstruct	 past
cloud	 computing	 events	 through	 identification,	 collection,	 preservation,
examination,	interpretation,	and	reporting	of	digital	evidence.”
Performing	 a	 forensic	 network	 analysis	 on	 Cloud	 is	 not	 as	 easy	 as	 performing
the	 same	 investigation	 compare	 to	 the	 on-premises	 or	 traditional	 environment.
This	 is	 because	 you	 could	 not	 have	 access	 to	 the	 information	 that	 you	 require
and,	therefore,	need	to	ask	the	Cloud	service	provider	to	provide	the	information.
Communication	 in	 this	 scenario	 is	 essential	 because	 of	 all	 members	 that	 are
involved	 in	 the	 incident	 that	 work	 together	 to	 collect	 the	 most	 important
information	related	to	the	incident.	In	some	cases,	the	Cloud	customer	could	not
be	 able	 to	 obtain	 and	 review	 security	 incident	 logs	 because	 they	 are	 in
possession	 of	 the	 service	 provider.	 The	 service	 provider	 could	 be	 under	 no
obligation	 to	 provide	 this	 information	 or	 could	 be	 unable	 to	 do	 so	 without
violating	the	confidentiality	of	the	other	tenants	sharing	the	Cloud	infrastructure.
ISO	 has	 provided	 a	 suite	 of	 standards	 specifically	 related	 to	 digital	 forensics,
which	includes:

            ISO/IEC	 27037:2012:	 Guide	 for	 collecting,	 identifying,	 and
            preserving	electronic	evidence
            ISO/IEC	27041:2015:	Guide	for	incident	investigations
            ISO/IEC	27042:	2015	:	Guide	for	digital	evidence	analysis
            ISO/IEC	 27043:2015:	 Incident	 investigation	 principles	 and
            processes
            ISO/IEC	27050-1:2016:	Overview	and	principles	for	eDiscovery.
The	objective	of	such	standards	is	to	promote	best	practices	for	the	acquisition
and	 investigation	 of	 digital	 evidence.	 While	 some	 security	 professionals	 favor
specific	 methods,	processes,	 and	controls,	ISO	27050-1	looks	to	introduce	 and
make	certain	standardization	of	approaches	globally.
Privacy	Issues,	Including	Jurisdictional	Variation
Privacy	 issues	 can	 vary	 significantly	 between	 different	 jurisdictions.	 This
variation	can	relate	to	the	types	of	records	and	information	protected	along	with
the	required	controls	and	notifications	that	apply	.
Difference	between	Contractual	and	Regulated	PII
NIST,	 in	 Special	 Publication	 (SP)	 800-122,	 defines	 Personally	 Identifiable
Information	 (PII)	 as	 any	 information	 about	 an	 individual	 maintained	 by	 an
agency,	including:

             Any	 information	 that	 can	 be	 used	 to	 distinguish	 or	 trace	 an
             individual’s	identity,	such	as	date,	name,	Social	Security	Number,	and
             place	of	birth,	mother’s	maiden	name,	or	biometric	records
             Any	other	information	that	is	linked	or	linkable	to	an	individual,	such
             as	educational,	financial,	medical,	and	employment	information.
There	are	two	types	of	PII	associated	with	cloud	and	non-cloud	environments.
Contractual	PII
Where	an	entity	or	organization	processes,	transmits	or	stores	PII,	as	part	of	its
services	or	business,	 this	information	is	required	to	 be	 sufficiently	 protected	in
line	 with	 relevant	 local	 states,	 national,	 regional,	 federal,	 or	 other	 laws.
Outsourcing	 of	 services,	 roles,	 or	 functions	 the	 relevant	 contract	 has	 to	 list	 the
proper	rules	and	requirements	from	the	organizations	which	“own”	the	data	and
applicable	law	to	which	the	providers	must	adhere.
Besides,	the	contractual	components	related	to	PII	have	to	list	requirements	and
appropriate	 levels	 of	 confidentiality,	 as	 well	 as	 security	 provisions	 or
requirements	 necessary.	 As	 part	 of	 the	 contract,	 the	 provider	 will	 be	 bound	 by
confidentiality,	privacy,	and	information	security	requirements	established	by	the
entity	 or	 organization	 to	 which	 it	 provides	 services.	 The	 contractor	 could	 be
required	to	document	adherence	or	compliance	with	the	contract	at	set	intervals
and	in	line	with	an	audit	and	governance	requirements	from	its	customer(s).
Failure	 to	 meet	 or	 satisfy	 contractual	 requirements	 may	 lead	 to	 penalties
(financial	or	service	compensated)	through	the	termination	of	the	contract	at	the
discretion	of	the	organization	to	which	services	are	provided.
Contractual	Components
From	 a	 contractual,	 regulated,	 and	 PII	 perspective,	 the	 following	 components
have	to	be	reviewed	and	fully	understood	by	the	CSP	contract	(along	with	other
most	essential	components	within	a	Service	Level	Agreement	(SLA)):

            Appropriate/required	data	security	controls
            Audit	or	right	to	audit	subcontractors
           Location	of	data
           Removal	or	deletion	of	data
           Return	of	data	or	restitution	of	data
           Scope	of	processing
           Use	of	sub-contractor

Regulated	PII
While	many	of	the	previously	listed	elements	could	be	required	for	contractual
PII,	they	are	in	no	small	extent	required	and	form	an	essential	foundation	for	the
regulation	of	PII.	The	key	focus	and	transparent	criteria	to	which	the	regulated
PII	should	adhere	are	required	under	law	and	statutory	requirements,	as	opposed
to	the	contractual	criteria	that	could	be	based	on	best	practice	or	organizational
security	policies.
A	key	differentiator	from	a	regulated	perspective	is	the	“must	haves”	to	satisfy
regulatory	 requirements	 (such	 as	 HIPAA	 and	 GLBA)	 of	 which	 failed	 to	 do	 so
can	result	in	sizable	and	crucial	financial	penalties,	through	to	restrictions	around
processes,	storing,	and	providing	of	services.
Regulations	 are	 put	 in	 place	 to	 reduce	 exposure	 and	 to	 protect	 entities	 and
individuals	 from	 some	 risks	 ultimately.	 They	 also	 force	 and	 require
responsibilities	and	actions	to	be	taken	by	providers	and	processers	alike.
The	reasons	for	regulations	include	(but	are	not	limited	to)

           Apply	adequate	protections
           Create	 a	 repeatable	 and	 measurable	 approach	 to	 regulated	 data	 and
           systems
           Continue	 to	 align	 with	 statutory	 bodies	 and	 fulfill	 professional
           conduct	requirements
           Make	sure	appropriate	mechanisms	and	controls	are	implemented
           Establish	a	standard	level	of	controls	and	processes
           Protect	users
           Provide	 transparency	 among	 customers,	 partners,	 and	 related
           industries
           Reduce	the	likelihood	of	malformed	or	fractured	practices
           Take	and	make	sure	due	to	care

Country-Specific	Legislation	Related	to	PII	/	Data	Privacy
Many	 countries	have	laws	that	protect	and	regulate	PII	and	data	privacy;	there
can	be	significant	variance	among	numerous	jurisdictions	as	to	what	is	required
or	 allowed.	 The	 following	 is	 not	 a	 comprehensive	 or	 complete	 list	 of	 all
countries	 and	 regulations;	 rather,	 it	 is	 a	 sampling	 of	 the	 essential	 jurisdictions
and	their	respective	regulations.
United	States	(US)
The	 US	 has	 many	 laws	 that	 cover	 numerous	 specific	 aspects	 of	 data	 privacy;
there	 is	 no	 particular	 federal	 law	 governing	 data	 protection.	 Interestingly,	 the
term	 “privacy”	 is	 not	 mentioned	 in	 the	 US	 Constitution;	 however,	 privacy	 is
recognized	 differently	 in	 specific	 states	 and	 under	 different	 circumstances.	 The
California	 and	 Montana	 constitutions	 both	 recognize	 privacy	 as	 an
“inalienable	right	”	and	“essential	to	the	well-being	of	a	free	society	.”
There	are	few	restrictions	on	the	transfer	of	personal	data	out	of	the	US,	making
it	relatively	easy	for	organizations	to	engage	CSP	located	outside	of	the	US.	The
Federal	 Trade	 Commission	 (FTC)	 and	 other	 standard	 U.S.	 regulators	 do,
however,	 hold	 that	 the	 applicable	 U.S.	 laws	 and	 regulations	 apply	 to	 the	 data
after	it	leaves	its	jurisdiction,	and	the	U.S.	regulated	organization	remain	liable
for	the	following:

            Data	exported	out	of	the	US
            Processing	of	data	overseas	by	sub-contractors
            Sub-contractors	using	the	same	protection	for	the	regulated	data	when
            it	leaves	the	country.
Most	 importantly,	 the	 Safe	 Harbor	 Program	 deals	 with	 the	 international
transfer	of	data.	However,	it	is	essential	to	understand	about	Health	Insurance
Portability	and	Accountability	Act	(HIPAA)	,	the	Gramm-Leach-Bliley	Act
(GLBA)	 ,	 the	 Stored	 Communications	 Act	 (SCA)	 and	 the	 Sarbanes-Oxley
Act	(SOX)	,	as	they	each	have	an	impact	on	how	the	U.S	handles	privacy	and
data.
Safe	 Harbor	 Program,	 HIPAA,	 GLBA,	 and	 SOX	 are	 defined	 in	 the	 legal
control	 section.	 However,	 the	 Stored	 Communications	 Act	 is	 defined	 in	 this
section.
Stored	Communications	Act	(SCA)
The	 SCA	 was	 enacted	 in	 the	 US	 in	 1986	 as	 part	 of	 the	 Electronic
Communications	 Privacy	 Act	 (ECPA)	 .	 It	 provides	 privacy	 protections	 for
specific	 electronic	 communication	 and	 computing	 services	 from	 unauthorized
access	or	interception.
European	Union	(EU)
From	 an	 EU	 standpoint,	 different	 levels	 of	 data	 protection	 in	 different
jurisdictions	 has	 resulted	 in	 the	 prohibition	 of	 EU	 data	 controllers	 transferring
personal	data	outside	of	their	country	to	non-EEA	jurisdictions	that	do	not	have
a	sufficient	level	of	protection.
Therefore,	 organizations	 outsourcing	 to	 Cloud	 must	 have	 total	 certainty	 as	 to
where	 in	 the	 Cloud	 the	 data	 can	 be	 stored,	 or	 they	 must	 agree	 with	 the	 Cloud
provider	as	to	the	specific	jurisdictions	in	which	the	data	can	be	processed.	This
can	be	very	difficult	to	do,	as	various	Cloud	providers	process	data	across	many
jurisdictions	 through	 federated	louds	 .	 This	 may	 include	 non-EEA	 countries
where	a	different,	and	maybe	lower	standard	of	data	protection	may	apply	.
Also,	this	challenge	is	exacerbated	by	the	fact	that	it	is	typically	challenging	to
know	 precisely	where	in	the	network	a	piece	of	data	is	being	 processed	at	any
given	 time	 when	 there	 is	 a	 network	 of	 Cloud	 servers	 and	 data	 is	 stored	 on
different	servers	in	different	jurisdictions.
This	 set	 of	 conditions	 raise	 specific	 issues	 and	 possible	 concerns	 relating	 to
standards	 of	 data	 protection	 and	 the	 ability	 to	 adhere	 to	 obligations	 under	 data
protection	legislation.
Directive	95/46	EC
This	 directive	 focuses	 on	 the	 protection	 of	 individuals	 about	 the	 processing	 of
personal	data	and	the	free	movement	of	such	data;	it	captures	the	human	right	to
privacy,	as	referenced	in	the	European	Convention	on	Human	Rights	(ECHR)
.
EU	General	Data	Protection	Regulation
In	 2012,	 the	 European	 Commission	 proposed	 a	 major	 reform	 in	 the	 EU	 legal
framework	on	the	protection	of	personal	data.	The	new	proposals	will	strengthen
individual	 rights	 and	 tackle	 the	 challenges	 of	 globalization	 and	 new
technologies.
The	 objective	 is	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 individuals	 have	 complete	 ownership	 and
control	 over	 their	 data,	 and	 the	 EU	 is	 operating	 under	 same	 data	 privacy	 laws
and	regulations	uniformly.
The	United	Kingdom	and	Ireland
There	 is	 a	 common	 standard	 of	 protection	 at	 the	 EU	 level	 concerning
transferring	 personal	 data	 from	 Ireland	 and	 the	 UK	 to	 an	 EEA	 country.
Challenges	 arise	 when	 data	 is	 being	 transferred	 from	 either	 country	 to	 a
jurisdiction	 outside	 of	 the	 EEA.	 Companies	 must	 meet	 special	 conditions	 to
make	 sure	 that	 the	 countries	 can	 in	 question	 provide	 a	 sufficient	 level	 of	 data
protection.

 Note:
 Inalienable	 Rights:	 Freedom	 that	 each	 in	 the	 US	 has,	 which	 cannot	 be
 transferred	 to	 another	 person	 or	 surrendered	 except	 by	 the	 individual	 having
 those	rights.
 Federal	Trade	Commission	(FTC)	:	FTC	is	a	US	federal	regulatory	agency
 designed	to	monitor	and	prevent	anticompetitive,	deceptive	or	unfair	business
 practices.
 European	 Union	 (EU)	 :	 EU	 is	 an	 economic	 and	 political	 union	 of	 28
 countries.	It	operates	an	internal	(or	single)	market	that	allows	free	movement
 of	goods,	capital,	services,	and	people	between	member	states.
 European	Economic	Area	(EEA)	:	EEA	includes	European	Union	countries
 and	also	Iceland,	Liechtenstein,	and	Norway.	It	allows	them	to	be	part	of	the
 EU’s	single	market.
 EU	 countries	 are	 Austria,	 Bulgaria,	 Belgium,	 Croatia,	 Republic	 of	 Cyprus,
 Czech	 Republic,	 Denmark,	 Estonia,	 France,	 Finland,	 Greece,	 Germany,
 Hungary,	 Ireland,	 Italy,	 Latvia,	 Lithuania,	 Luxembourg,	 Malta,	 Netherlands,
 Poland,	Portugal,	Romania,	Slovakia,	Slovenia,	Spain,	Sweden	and	the	UK.
 Electronic	 Communications	 Privacy	 Act	 (ECPA)	 :	 ECPA	 is	 a	 US	 federal
 statute	 that	 prohibits	 a	 third	 party	 from	 intercepting	 or	 disclosing
 communications	without	authorization.
 European	 Convention	 on	 Human	 Rights	 (ECHR)	 :	 ECHR	 protects	 the
 human	rights	of	people	in	countries	that	belong	to	the	Council	of	Europe.
 Federated	Clouds:	A	federated	Cloud	is	the	deployment	and	management	of
 various	 internal	 and	 external	 cloud	 computing	 services	 to	 match	 business
 needs.	 	 A	 federation	 is	 the	 union	 of	 several	 smaller	 parts	 that	 perform	 a
 common	action.	Federated	Cloud	is	also	known	as	cloud	federation.
Difference	between	Confidentiality,	Integrity,	Availability,	and	Privacy
The	 three	 main	 aspects	 of	 security	 are	 confidentiality,	 integrity,	 and
availability	.	As	more	services	and	data	have	moved	online,	especially	with	the
expansion	 of	 mobile	 computing	 and	 apps	 that	 utilize	 sensitive	 information,
privacy	has	 become	 a	 crucial	 fourth	 aspect.	 All	 four	 aspects	 of	 security	 work
together	closely.
                           Figure	6-1:	Main	Components	of	Securit	y

Confidentiality
Confidentiality	is	a	set	of	rules	that	limit	access	to	information.	Confidentiality	is
roughly	 equivalent	 to	 privacy.	 Security	 measures	 are	 undertaken	 to	 make	 sure
confidentiality	 is	 designed	 to	 prevent	 sensitive	 information	 from	 reaching	 the
malicious	 user	 while	 ensuring	 that	 the	 right	 user	 can	 get	 it:	 Access	 must	 be
restricted	only	 to	the	authorized	to	view	the	data	in	question.	It	is	common,	as
well,	for	data	to	be	categorized	according	to	the	amount	and	type	of	damage	that
could	be	done	should	fall	into	unintended	hands.	Relatively	stringent	measures
can	then	be	implemented	according	to	those	categories.
Sometimes	 safeguarding	 data	 confidentiality	 may	 involve	 specialized	 training
for	that	privy	to	such	documents.	Such	training	would	typically	include	security
risks	 that	 could	 threaten	 this	 information.	 Training	 can	 help	 familiarize
authorized	 people	 with	 risk	 factors	 and	 how	 to	 secure	 data	 against	 them.
Additional	 aspects	 of	 training	 include	 strong	 passwords	 and	 password-related
best	 practices	 and	 information	 about	 social	 engineering	 methods	 ,	 to	 prevent
them	 from	 bending	 data-handling	 rules	 with	 good	 intentions	 and	 potentially
disastrous	results.
Integrity
Integrity	 is	 the	 assurance	 that	 the	 information	 is	 accurate	 and	 trustworthy.
Integrity	 contains	 maintaining	 the	 accuracy,	 consistency,	 and	 reliability	 of	 data
over	its	entire	life	cycle.	Data	should	not	be	changed	in	transit,	and	steps	should
be	taken	to	make	sure	that	unauthorized	people	can	not	transform	data	(e.g.,	in	a
breach	of	confidentiality).	These	security	measures	contain	file	permissions	and
user	access	controls.
Version	 Control	 may	 be	 used	 to	 prevent	 erroneous	 changes	 or	 accidental
deletion	 by	 authorized	 users.	 Similarly,	 some	 means	 must	 be	 in	 place	 to	 detect
any	changes	in	data	that	might	occur	because	of	non-human-caused	events	such
as	an	Electromagnetic	Pulse	(EMP)	or	server	crash.	Some	data	might	include
checksums,	even	cryptographic	checksums,	for	verification	of	integrity.	Backups
or	redundancies	must	be	available	to	restore	the	affected	data	to	its	correct	state.
Availability
Availability	 is	 a	 guarantee	 of	 reliable	 access	 to	 the	 information	 to	 authorized
people.	 Availability	 is	 ensured	 by	 rigorously	 maintaining	 all	 hardware,
performing	 hardware	 repairs	 immediately	 when	 needed	 and	 maintaining	 a
properly	 functioning	 operating	 system	 environment	 that	 is	 free	 of	 software
conflicts.	It	is	also	essential	to	keep	current	with	all	necessary	system	upgrades.	
Providing	sufficient	communication	bandwidth	and	preventing	the	occurrence	of
bottlenecks	 are	 equally	 important.	 Redundancy,	 failover,	 RAID	 even	 high-
availability	 clusters	 can	 mitigate	 serious	 consequences	 when	 hardware	 issues
start	to	occur.		Fast	and	adaptive	disaster	recovery	is	important	for	the	worst-case
scenarios;	 that	 capacity	 is	 dependent	 on	 the	 existence	 of	 a	 comprehensive
Disaster	Recovery	Plan	(DRP)	.	Protections	against	data	loss	or	interruptions	in
connections	must	include	unpredictable	events	such	as	fire	and	natural	disasters.
To	prevent	data	loss	from	such	occurrences,	a	backup	copy	may	be	stored	in	a
geographically	 isolated	 location,	 perhaps	 even	 in	 a	 waterproof	 safe,	 fireproof.
Extra	security	equipment	such	as	proxy	servers	and	firewalls	can	guard	against
downtime	 and	 unreachable	 data	 due	 to	 malicious	 actions	 such	 as	 network
intrusions	and	dDenial-of-Service	(DoS)	attacks.
 Note:
 Redundant	Array	of	Independent	Disks	(RAID)	:	RAID	is	a	way	of	storing
 the	 same	 data	 in	 different	 places	 on	 various	 hard	 disks	 to	 secure	 data	 in	 the
 case	of	a	drive	failure.
 Disaster	Recovery	Plan	(DRP)	:	DPR	is	a	documented,	structured	approach
 with	instructions	for	responding	to	unplanned	incidents.
 Denial-of-Service	(DoS)	attack	:	DoS	attack	is	a	security	event	that	happens
 when	 an	 attacker	 prevents	 legitimate	 users	 from	 accessing	 specific	 computer
 systems,	devices,	services	or	other	IT	resources.
Privacy
Data	 privacy,	 also	 known	 as	 information	 privacy,	 is	 the	 part	 of	 information
technology	 that	 deals	 with	 the	 ability	 of	 an	 organization	 or	 individual,	 has	 to
determine	what	data	in	a	computer	system	can	be	shared	with	third	parties.
In	 the	 US,	 legislation	 concerning	 data	 privacy	 has	 been	 enacted	 in	 a	 sectorial
manner,	which	means	that	each	law	or	compliance	regulation	has	been	created	in
response	to	the	needs	of	a	particular	industry	or	some	part	of	the	population.	
Examples:
Children’s	 Online	 Privacy	 Protection	 Act	 (COPPA)	 :	 This	 act	 gives	 parents
control	over	what	information	websites	can	collect	from	their	kids.
Video	Privacy	Protection	Act:	This	act	prevents	unauthorized	disclosure	of	an
individual's	Personally	Identifiable	Information	(PII)	stemming	from	their	rental
or	purchase	of	audio-visual	material.
                  Security                                           Privacy
Security	 refers	 to	 protection	 against Privacy	 defines	 the	 ability	 to	 protect
unauthorized	access.                       personally	 identifiable	 information
                                           (PII).
Security	protects	all	types	of	data	and Privacy	 means	 protecting	 sensitive
information	 including	 the	 ones	 that information	related	to	individuals	and
are	stored	electronically.                 organizations.
Security	 can	 be	 achieved	 without Privacy	 cannot	 be	 achieved	 without
privacy.                                   security
Security	program	 focuses	on	all	sorts Privacy	 program	 focuses	 on	 personal
of	 information	 assets	 that	 an information	such	as	names,	addresses,
organization	collects.                     social	 security	 numbers,	 login
                                           credentials,	   financial	      accounts
                                           information,	etc.
It	 implements	 security	 protocols	 to It	refers	to	protection	of	privacy	rights
provide	 confidentiality,	 integrity,	 and concerning	the	processing	of	personal
availability	of	information	assets.        data.
                      Table	6-1:	Differences	between	Security	and	Privacy



Note:
Social	engineering:	An	attack	vector	relies	heavily	on	human	interaction	and
typically	 involves	 manipulating	 user	 into	 breaking	 standard	 security
procedures	and	best	practices	to	gain	access	to	networks,	systems,	or	physical
locations,	or	for	financial	gain.
Data	 handling:	It	 is	 the	 process	 of	 ensuring	 that	 data	 is	 stored,	 archived	 or
disposed	of	safely	and	securely.
Version	Control:	A	system	 that	records	changes	to	a	file	or	set	of	files	over
time	so	that	you	can	recall	specific	versions	later.
Electromagnetic	 Pulse	 (EMP)	 :	 EMP	 is	 an	 intense	 burst	 of	 electromagnetic
(EM)	 energy	 caused	 by	 an	 abrupt,	 rapid	 acceleration	 of	 charged	 particles,
usually	electrons.
Audit	Process,	Methodologies,	and	Required	Adaptations	for	a
Cloud	Environment
This	section	defines	the	process,	methods,	and	required	adaptions	necessary	for
an	audit	within	a	cloud	environment.	Before	we	define	this	topic,	we	first	need	to
define	an	Audit	Process.
 “Audit	 is	 an	 assurance	 function	 that	 some	 method,	 standard,	 or	 practice	 is
 followed.	Depending	on	the	type	of	audit,	the	auditor	systematically	examines
 the	evidence	for	compliance	with	established	criteria.”
Internal	and	External	Audit	Controls
As	the	organization	moves	to	the	transaction	service	to	the	cloud	environment,
there	 is	 a	 need	 for	 continuous	 assurances	 from	 both	 cloud	 customers	 and
providers	that	controls	are	set	up	or	in	the	process	of	being	identified.
An	organization’s	internal	audit	acts	as	a	third	line	of	defense	after	the	business
or	IT	functions	and	risk	management	functions	through

            Independent	verification	of	the	cloud	program’s	effectiveness
            Assuring	the	risk	management	functions	of	the	organization	regarding
            cloud	risk	exposure.
The	internal	audit	function	can	also	play	a	“trusted”	advisor	and	proactively	be
involved	by	working	with	IT	and	business	in	identifying	and	addressing	the	risk
associated	with		various	cloud	services	and	deployment	model.	In	this	capacity,
the	organization	is	actively	taking	a	risk-based	approach	on	its	journey	with	the
cloud.	 The	 internal	 audit	 function	 can	 engage	 with	 stakeholders,	 review	 the
current	 risk	 framework	 with	 a	 clouded	 lens	 ,	 assist	 with	 risk	 mitigation
strategies,	and	perform	some	cloud	audits	such	as

            The	organization’s	current	cloud	governance	program
            Data	classification	governance
            Shadow	IT
Cloud	providers	have	to	include	an	internal	audit	in	their	discussion	about	new
services	 and	 deployment	 models	 to	 obtain	 feedback	 in	 the	 planned	 design	 of
cloud	 controls	 their	 customers	 will	 need,	 as	 well	 as	 mitigate	 the	 risk.	 The
internal	audit	function	will	still	need	to	consider	how	to	maintain	independence
from	the	overall	process;	ultimately,	it	will	need	actually	to	perform	the	audit	on
these	controls.
The	internal	audit	function	will	also	continue	to	perform	audits	in	the	traditional
environment,	 which	 are	 directly	 relied	 on	 the	 output	 of	 the	 organization’s	 risk
assessment	process	.
Cloud	 customers	 will	 want	 not	 only	 to	 engage	 in	 their	 discussion	 with	 cloud
providers	 security	 professionals	 but	 also	 consider	 meeting	 with	 the
organization's	internal	audit	group.
Another	potential	source	of	independent	verification	on	internal	controls	will	be
the	 audit	 performed	 by	 external	 auditors.	 An	 external	 auditor’s	 scope	 varies
significantly	from	an	internal	audit,	whereas	the	external	audit	usually	forces	on
the	internal	control	over	financial	reporting.	Therefore,	the	scope	of	services	is
usually	 limited	 to	 the	 IT	 and	 business	 environment	 that	 support	 the	 financial
health	of	an	organization	and	in	most	cases	does	not	provide	specific	assurance
on	cloud	risks	other	than	the	vendor	risk	considerations	on	the	financial	health	of
the	cloud	provider.
 Note:
 The	Third	Line	of	Defense:	In	the	financial	services	industry,	people	are	used
 to	 the	 third	 lines	 of	 defense	 for	 the	 majority	 of	 the	 risk	 functions.	 Generally,
 the	first	line	of	defense	for	management	of	risk	is	the	business,	the	second	line
 of	 defense	 is	 a	 control	 function,	 and	 the	 third	 line	 of	 defense	 is	 an	 internal
 audit.
 Cloudless:	It	is	the	first	service-provider	agnostic	visibility	platform,	capable
 of	providing	access	to	packet	data	in	Amazon	Web	Services	(AWS),	Microsoft
 Azure,	 IBM	 Bluemix,	 Google	 Cloud	 Platform,	 Alibaba	 Cloud,	 CenturyLink
 cloud	and	more;	the	platform	also	supports	Window	and	Linux	environments

Impact	of	Requirements	Programs	by	the	Use	of	Cloud
Cloud	providers	and	customers	are	essential	to	understanding	how	cloud	services
will	impact	the	audit	requirements	set	forth	by	their	organization.	By	default,	the
cloud,	auditors	need	to	understand	how	they	audit	and	obtain	evidence	to	support
their	audit.
The	CSP	needs	to	understand	that	traditional	auditing	methods	may	not	apply	to
cloud	environments.
Because	the	organization	will	not	have	such	level	of	control	or	access	over	the
physical	environment;	joined	with	the	reality	of	geographic	distribution	of	cloud
environments,	this	makes	being	on	site	virtually	impossible.
Assurance	Challenges	of	Virtualization	and	Cloud
When	you	are	using	virtualization	as	an	essential	component	in	the	cloud,	it	is
important	to	get	assess	and	then	get	assurances	relating	to	the	security	of	virtual
instances.
The	task,	however,	is	not	a	simple	one,	particularly	from	an	auditing	perspective
and	 least	 of	 all	 using	 non-invasive	 systems	 that	 audit	 the	 hypervisor	 and
associated	components	.
How	 can	 the	 CSP	 attest	 to	 the	 security	 relating	 to	 virtualization	 (sometimes
spread	across	hundreds	of	devices),	in	the	absence	of	testing	and	verification?
Given	 the	 evolving	 technology	 landscape,	 the	 rate	 at	 which	 updates,	 version
upgrades,	 additional	 components,	 and	 associated	 system	 changes	 are
implemented	presents	the	ultimate	moving	target	for	the	CSP.
Presently,	much	of	the	focus	is	on	the	continuing	confidentiality	and	integrity	of
the	 VM	 (virtual	 machine)	 and	 its	 associated	 hypervisors	 (conscious	 that	 the
availability	 will	 typically	 be	 covered	 extensively	 under	 the	 SLA).	 The	 thought
process	is	that	if	the	availability	of	the	VM	is	affected,	this	fact	will	be	captured
as	 part	 of	 the	 general	 SLA	 (where	 confidentiality	 and	 integrity	 may	 not	 be
explicitly	covered	under	virtualization).
Within	the	SLAs,	items	such	as

             Mean	Time	Between	Failures	(MTBF)
             Mean	Time	To	Repair	(MTTR)
             Mean	Time	To	Recovery
All	 these	 items	 may	 be	 called	 out;	 however,	 a	 failure	 to	 delve	 much	 more	 in-
depth,	or	specifically	focus	on	VMs	or	the	hypervisor	itself,	is	an	issue.
To	obtain	assurance	and	perform	proper	auditing	on	the	VM	or	hypervisor,	the
CSP	must

            Understand	the	virtualization	management	architecture
            Verify	 system	 is	 up-to-date	 and	 hardened	 according	 to	 the	 best
            practice	standards
 Note:
 Hypervisor	:	Also	known	as	a	virtual	machine	(VM)	monitor,	is	a	process	that
 creates	 and	 runs	 VMs.	 A	 hypervisor	 allows	 one	 host	 computer	 to	 support
 several	 guest	 VMs	 by	 virtually	 sharing	 its	 resources,	 like	 memory	 and
 processing.
 Mean	Time	Between	Failures	(MTBF)	:	MTBF	is	a	measure	of	how	reliable
 a	 hardware	 product	 or	 component	 is.	 For	 most	 components,	 the	 measure	 is
 typically	in	thousands	or	even	tens	of	thousands	of	hours	between	failures.
 Mean	Time	To	Repair	(MTTR)	:	MTTR	is	the	average	time	required	to	fix	a
 failed	device	or	component	and	return	it	to	production	status.
Mean	Time	To	Recovery	(MTTR)	:	MTTR	is	the	average	time	that	a	device
will	take	to	recover	from	any	failure.
Types	of	Audit	Reports
There	 are	 many	 different	 audit	 reports	 that	 have	 been	 standardized	 throughout
the	industry.	While	they	differ	in	approach	and	audience,	but	they	have	similar
design	and	serve	for	similar	purposes.
SAS
The	 Statement	 on	 Auditing	 Standards	 (SAS)	 Number	 70,	 which	 is	 commonly
known	 as	 SAS	 70,	 is	 a	 standard	 published	 by	 the	 American	 Institute	 of
Certified	 Public	 Accounts	 (AICPA)	 and	 is	 intended	 to	 guide	 auditors	 when
analyzing	 service	 organizations	 individually.	 Typically,	 it	 is	 also	 known	 as	 a
“service	auditor’s	examination.”
There	are	two	types	of	reports	under	SAS-70.

            Type	1	:	Reports	are	focused	on	an	evaluation	by	the	auditor	as	to	the
            service	 organization’s	 declarations,	 and	 to	 the	 security	 controls	 they
            have	put	in	place.
            Type	2	 :	 Audit,	 the	 same	 information,	 and	 evaluation	 are	 included,
            but	 additional	 evaluations	 and	 opinions	 on	 behalf	 of	 the	 auditor	 are
            added	 as	 to	 the	 effectiveness	 in	 actually	 meeting	 the	 control
            objectives	on	behalf	of	the	service	organization.

SSAE
The	 Statements	on	Standards	for	Attestation	Engagements	(SSAE)	16	replaced
the	 SAS	 70	 as	 of	 2011	 and	 is	 the	 standard	 that	 most	 in	 the	 United	 States	 now
use.	 Rather	 than	 focusing	 on	 specific	 control	 sets,	 the	 SSAE	 16	 is	 focused	 on
auditing	methods.	It	is	also	known	as	the	Service	Organization	Control	(SOC)
report.
There	are	three	types	of	reports	under	SSAE	16.

            SOC	1	:	Reports	effectively	are	the	direct	replacement	for	the	SAS	70
            reports	 and	 are	 explicitly	 focused	 on	 financial	 reporting	 controls.
            SOC	1	has	two	subtypes.	Type	1	reports	and	Type	2	reports.

            SOC2	:	Reporting	is	a	model	that	incorporates	“principles.”	With	the
            last	update	to	SOC	2	in	2014,	five	principles	were	established.	Under
            the	guidelines,	the	security	principle	must	be	included	with	any	of	the
            following	four	to	form	a	complete	report:

       Availability,	Confidentiality,	Processing	Integrity	and	Privacy.
            SOC3:	Reports	are	designed	to	be	for	general	use.	Also,	reports	will
            not	 contain	 sensitive	 or	 proprietary	 information	 that	 a	 service
            organization	would	not	want	open	or	available	to	release	and	review.
            SOC	3	reports	are	similar	to	the	SOC	2	reports.

ISAE
The	International	Standard	on	Assurance	Engagements	(ISAE)	3402	reports	was
issued	by	International	Auditing	and	Assurance	Standard	Board	(IAASB).	This
report	was	very	similar	by	default	and	structure	to	the	SOC	Type	2	reports.	ISAE
report	is	used	internationally,	but	SOC	reports	used	in	the	US.	ISAE	reports	were
developed	 to	 provide	 an	 international	 assurance	 standard	 for	 allowing	 public
accountants	 to	 issue	 a	 report	 for	 use	 by	 their	 auditors	 or	 organizations	 as	 well.
ISAE	reports	have	two	subtypes.
Type	1	:	They	have	aligned	with	SOC	type	2	reports,	in	that	they	are	based	on	a
snapshot	of	a	single	point	in	time.
Type	 2	 :	 They	 are	 also	 aligned	 with	 SOC	 Type	 2	 reports	 in	 scope	 and	 intents,
and	typically,	they	are	done	for	six	months	to	show	the	management	and	use	of
control	over	the	period.
Restrictions	of	Audit	Scope	Statements	(e.g.,	SAS	70)
Parameters	must	be	set	and	enforced	to	focus	an	audit’s	efforts	on	relevancy	and
auditability.	These	parameters	are	commonly	known	as	audit	scope	restrictions.
Besides,	 Audit	 scope	 restrictions	 are	 used	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 the	 operational
impact	 of	 the	 audit	 is	 limited,	 effectively	 lowering	 any	 risk	 to	 production
environments	and	high-priority	or	essential	components	required	for	the	delivery
of	services.
Finally,	 scope	 restrictions	 typically	 specify	 operational	 components,	 as	 well	 as
the	 asset	 restriction,	 which	 includes	 acceptable	 times	 and	 period	 (e.g.,	 time	 of
day)	 and	 acceptable	 and	 non-accepted	 testing	 methods	 (e.g.,	 no	 destructive
testing).	These	limit	the	impact	on	a	production	system.
Gap	Analysis
Gap	 analysis	 benchmarks	 and	 identifies	 relevant	 “gaps”	 against	 specified
standards	or	frameworks.
Typically,	 personnel	 or	 resources	 which	 are	 not	 engaged	 or	 functioning	 within
the	 area	 of	 scope	 perform	 gap	 analysis.	 The	 use	 of	 independent	 or	 impartial
resources	is	best	served	to	make	sure	there	are	no	favoritisms	or	conflicts.	You
do	 not	 want	 existing	 relationships	 to	 dilute	 or	 in	 any	 way	 impact	 the	 findings
(positively	or	negatively).
Auditor	performed	the	gap	analysis	or	subject	matter	expert	against	a	number	of
listed	requirements,	which	could	range	from	a	complete	assessment	or	a	random
sample	 of	 controls	 (subset),	 resulting	 in	 a	 report	 highlighting	 the	 findings,
including	 risks,	 recommendations,	 and	 conformity,	 or	 compliance	 against	 the
specified	assessment	(ISO	27001:2013,	ISO	19011:2011	,	etc.	)
The	objective	of	a	gap	analysis	is	to	identify	and	report	on	any	gap	or	risks	that
may	 impact	 the	 availability,	 confidentiality,	 or	 integrity	 of	 critical	 information
assets.	The	value	of	such	an	assessment	is	typically	determined	based	on	what
we	 did	 not	 know	 or	 for	 an	 independent	 resource	 to	 communicate	 to	 relevant
management	 or	 senior	 personnel	 such	 risks,	 as	 opposed	 to	 internal	 resources
saying	we	need	or	have	to	be	doing	it	.
Audit	Plan
The	audit	plan	ensures	the	appropriate	focus	and	emphasis	on	components	that
are	most	important	to	Cloud	computing	includes	four	phases:




                                   Figure	6-2:	Audit	Plan

Define	Objective
These	 important	 objectives	 have	 to	 interpret	 the	 goals	 and	 outputs	 from	 the
audit:

            Define	audit	outputs	and	format
            Define	frequency	and	audit	focus
            Define	the	number	of	auditors	and	subject	matter	experts	required
            Document	and	define	audit	objectives
            Ensure	 alignment	 with	 audit	 or	 risk	 management	 processes	 and	 the
            process	is	internal.

Define	Scope
There	are	many	considerations	that	defines	the	audit	scope,	but	some	of	them	are
defined	here.

           Define	cloud	services	to	be	audited	(IaaS,	PaaS,	SaaS)
           Define	key	components	of	services	(storage,	utilization,	processing)
           Define	geographical	locations	permitted	or	required
           Define	locations	for	an	audit	to	be	undertaken
           Ensure	the	primary	objective	and	boundaries	to	which	the	audit	will
           operate.

Conduct	Audit
When	conducting	an	audit,	keep	the	following	issues	in	consideration.

           Proper	Staff
           Sufficient	tools
           Schedule
           Supervision	of	audit
           Reassessment

Lessons	learned	and	analysis
Once	 the	 audit	 is	 completed,	 management	 and	 system	 staff	 will	 analyze	 the
process	 and	 findings	 to	 determine	 what	 lessons	 have	 been	 learned	 and	 how
continuous	improvement	process	can	be	applied.	There	are	some	points	to	focus
and	analysis	after	an	audit:

           Ensure	that	approach	and	scope	are	most	important
           Ensure	that	audit	criteria,	and	scope	is	accurate
           Ensure	that	reporting	details	are	sufficient	to	enable	precise,	concise,
           and	appropriate	business	decisions	to	be	made
           Determine	opportunities	for	reporting	improvement	or	enhancement
           Ensure	that	the	accurate	skillsets	are	available	and	utilized	to	deliver
           accurate	results	and	to	report

Standards	Requirements
Industry	 group	 or	 regulatory	 bodies	 have	 established	 the	 standards	 or	 to	 set
common	configurations,	expectations,	operational	requirements	and	definitions.
There	are	two	primary	standards	to	follow	the	industry.
ISO/IEC	27018
ISO/IEC	 27018	 is	 the	 first	 international	 standard	 of	 privacy	 controls	 in	 Cloud
computing.	 ISO	 27018	 was	 published	 on	 July	 30,	 2014,	 by	 the	 International
Organization	 for	 Standardization	 (ISO)	 as	 a	 new	 component	 of	 the	 ISO	 27001
standard.	ISO/IEC	27018	addresses	the	privacy	aspects	of	Cloud	computing	for
consumers.
Cloud	service	providers	(CSPs)	who	adopt	ISO/IEC	27018	should	be	aware	of
the	following	five	fundamental	principles:
Consent:	Personal	 data	 that	 the	 CSPs	 receive	 may	 not	 be	 used	 for	 advertising
and	marketing	unless	the	customer	has	expressly	consented	to	allow	its	use	.
Control:	 Customer	 will	 have	 and	 maintain	 explicit	 control	 over	 how	 their
information	is	to	be	used	by	the	CSPs.
Communication:	Clear	records	about	any	incident	and	their	response	to	it	have
to	be	kept	by	the	CSPs	and	customers	have	to	be	notified.
Transparency:	CSPs	must	inform	the	customers	about	items	such	as	where	their
data	 resides.	 The	 CSP	 also	 needs	 to	 disclose	 to	 customers	 the	 use	 of	 any	 sub-
contractors	that	will	be	used	to	process	PII.
Independent	 and	 Yearly	 Audit:	 To	 remain	 compliant,	 the	 CSP	 must	 subject
itself	 to	 yearly	 third-party	 reviews.	 This	 will	 allow	 the	 customers	 to	 rely	 upon
the	findings	to	support	their	own	regulatory	obligations.
GAPP
Generally	 Accepted	 Privacy	 Principles	 (GAPP)	 is	 the	 American	 Institute	 of
Certified	 Public	 Accountants	 (AICPA)	 standard	 describes	 many	 details	 to	 the
privacy	principles.
According	to	GAPP,	the	primary	privacy	principle	groups	are	the	following:

            The	 entity	 defines	 documents,	 communicates	 and	 assigns
            accountability	for	its	privacy	policies	and	procedures.
            The	 entity	 collects	 personal	 information	 only	 for	 the	 purposes
            identified	in	the	notice.
            The	entity	discloses	personal	information	to	third	parties	only	for	the
            purposes	 identified	 in	 the	 notice	 and	 with	 the	 implicit	 or	 explicit
            consent	of	the	individual.
            The	 entity	 describes	 the	 choices	 available	 to	 the	 individual	 and
            obtains	implicit	or	explicit	consent	concerning	the	collection,	use,	and
            disclosure	of	personal	information.
            The	 entity	 limits	 the	 use	 of	 personal	 information	 to	 the	 purposes
            identified	 in	 the	 notice	 and	 for	 which	 the	 individual	 has	 provided
            implicit	or	explicit	consent.
            The	 entity	 maintains	 accurate,	 complete,	 and	 relevant	 personal
            information	for	the	purposes	identified	in	the	notice.
            The	 entity	 monitors	 compliance	 with	 its	 privacy	 policies	 and
            procedures	 and	 has	 procedures	 to	 address	 privacy-related	 inquiries,
            complaints,	and	disputes.
            The	 entity	 provides	 notice	 about	 its	 privacy	 policies	 and	 procedures
            and	 identifies	 the	 purposes	 for	 which	 personal	 information	 is
            collected,	used,	retained,	and	disclosed.
            The	 entity	 provides	 individuals	 with	 access	 to	 their	 personal
            information	for	review	and	update.
            The	entity	protects	personal	information	against	unauthorized	access
            (both	physical	and	logical).

Internal	Information	Security	Management	System	(ISMS)
An	ISMS	is	a	set	of	policies	and	procedures	used	for	systematically	managing	an
organization's	sensitive	data.	The	objective	of	an	ISMS	is	to	mitigate	the	risk	and
make	sure	business	continuity	by	pr0-actively	limiting	the	impact	of	a	security
breach.
An	ISMS	typically	addressed	employee	behavior	and	processes	along	with	data
and	 technology.	 It	 can	 be	 targeted	 towards	 a	 specific	 type	 of	 data,	 such	 as
customer	 data,	 or	 it	 can	 be	 applied	 in	 a	 proper	 way	 that	 becomes	 part	 of	 the
organization’s	culture.
ISO27001	is	a	specification	for	creating	an	ISMS.	It	does	not	mandate	specific
actions	 but	 contains	 suggestions	 for	 documentation,	 internal	 audits,	 continual
improvement,	and	corrective	and	preventive	action.
Note	 that	 ISO	 27001	 (officially	 known	 as	 ISO/IEC	 27001:2005	 )	 is	 a
specification	for	ISMS.	An	ISMS	is	a	framework	of	policies	and	procedures	that
includes	 all	 legal,	 physical	 and	 technical	 controls	 involved	 in	 an	 organization's
information	risk	management	processes.
Internal	Information	Security	Controls	System
According	to	the	ISO	27001:	2013	:
“Established	guidelines	and	general	principles	for	initiating,	implementing,
maintaining,	 and	 improving	 information	 security	 management	 with	 an
organization.”
The	controls	are	mapped	to	address	requirements	identified	through	a	formal	risk
assessment.
The	following	domain	makes	up	the	ISO	27001:2013,	the	most	commonly	used
global	standard	for	ISMS	implementation.

            A.5	Security	Policy	Management
            A.6	Corporate	Security	Management
            A.7	Personnel	Security	Management
            A.8	Organizational	Asset	Management
            A.9	Information	Access	Management
            A.10	Cryptography	Policy	Management
            A.11	Physical	Security	Management
            A.12	Operational	Security	Management
            A.13	Network	Security	Management
            A.14	System	Security	Management
            A.15	Supplier	Relationship	Management
            A.16	Security	Incident	Management
            A.17	Security	Continuity	Management
            A.18	Security	Compliance	Management

Policies
Policies	 can	 be	 document	 and	 articulate	 in	 a	 formal	 manner	 the	 desired	 or
required	 systems	 and	 operations	 standard	 for	 any	 IT	 system	 or	 organization.
They	are	crucial	for	implementing	an	effective	data	security	strategy.	Typically,
they	 act	 as	 the	 connectors	 that	 hold	 many	 parts	 of	 the	 data	 security	 together
across	both	technical	and	non-technical	elements.	The	failure	to	implement	and
utilizes	 policies	 in	 a	 cloud-based	 computing	 or	 a	 non-cloud	 based	 computing
would	 likely	 become	 in	 different	 part	 or	 isolation	 of	 activities,	 efficiently
operating	 as	 standalone	 and	 leading	 to	 multiple	 duplication	 and	 limited
standardization.
From	an	organization’s	perspective,	policies	are	nothing	new.	Policies	have	long
been	 providing	 guiding	 decisions	 and	 principles	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 actions	 and
decisions	achieve	the	desired	and	logical	outcome.
From	a	cloud	computing	environment,	the	use	of	policies,	while	essential,	can	go
a	 long	 way	 determining	 the	 security	 posture	 of	 cloud	 services,	 as	 well	 as
standardizing	practices.
There	are	many	types	of	policies,	but	few	of	them	are	defined	below:
Organizational	Policies
These	 policies	 form	 the	 basis	 of	 functional	 policies	 that	 can	 decrease	 the
likelihood	of

            Financial	loss
            Irretrievable	loss	of	data
            Misuse	or	abuse	of	systems	and	resources
            Reputational	damage
            Regulatory	and	legal	consequences

Functional	Policies
Organizations	that	have	a	well-ingrained	and	operational	ISM	use	the	following
functional	policies	to	be	regulated	properly.

            Acceptable	usage	policy
            Data	classification	policy
            Data	backup	policy
            Disaster	recovery	policy
            E-mail	use	policy
            Employee	background	checks	or	screening	policy
            Human	resources	security	policy
            Information	security	policy
            Internet	use	policy
            Incident	response	or	incident	management	policy
            Information	technology	policy
            Legal	compliance	policy	or	guidelines
            Network	security	policy
            Password	policy
            Remote	access	policy
            Software	security	policy
            Segregation	of	duties	policy
            Third-party	access	policy
            Virus	and	spam	policy

Identification	and	Involvement	of	Relevant	Stakeholders
A	 stakeholder	 is	 a	 group,	 individual	 or	 organization	 who/which	 may	 affect,	 be
affected	by	or	perceive	itself	to	be	affected	by	a	decision,	activity,	or	result	of	a
project.
Identify	 Stakeholder	 is	 a	 process	 of	 identifying	 stakeholders	 regularly
throughout	 the	 project	 life	 cycle	 and	 documenting	 relevant	 information
regarding	 their	 interests,	 independencies,	 influence,	 and	 potential	 impact	 on
project	success.
Also,	 to	 reach	 your	 target	 group	 and	 achieve	 your	 project’s	 goals,	 you	 might
need	 to	 involve	 external	 organizations	 and	 people.	 This	 may	 include
stakeholders	in	some	of	the	following	roles:

            stakeholders	that	can	support	your	project	by	providing	resources	and
            competencies	(e.g.,	partners,	funding	bodies,	related	projects)
            stakeholders	 influencing	 your	 target	 group	 and	 their	 possibilities	 to
            save	energy	(e.g.,	service	providers,	municipal	authorities)
            stakeholders	who	are	influenced	by	your	project	and	may	support	or
            oppose	it	(e.g.,	family	members,	neighbors,	co-workers).
The	goal	of	stakeholder	involvement	is	to	make	sure	that	interactions	necessary
to	 the	 process	 are	 accomplished,	 while	 not	 allowing	 excessive	 numbers	 of
affected	groups	and	individuals	to	impede	process	execution.

            Identify	 stakeholders	 relevant	 to	 this	 process	 and	 their	 appropriate
            involvement.
            Share	these	identifications	with	project	planners	or	other	planners	as
            appropriate.
            Involve	relevant	stakeholders	as	planned.

Specialized	Compliance	Requirements	for	Highly	Regulated	Industries
Organizations	 operating	 within	 highly	 regulated	 industries	 need	 to	 be	 familiar
with	any	specific	industry	regulatory	requirements	(e.g.,	HIPAA	for	healthcare,
PCI	 for	 finance,	 and	 FedRAMP	 for	 the	 U.S.	 government).	 While	 risk
management	in	a	cloud	computing	environment	is	a	mutual	provider	or	customer
activity,	 accountability	 entirely	 remains	 with	 the	 customer.	 Organizations	 must
consider	 existing	 requirements,	 their	 existing	 level	 of	 compliance,	 and	 any
geographic	 -	 or	 jurisdiction	 -	 specific	 restrictions	 that	 will	 make	 leveraging
accurate	cloud	scale	difficult.
Impact	of	Distributed	IT	Model
Distributed	 IT	 or	 distributed	 information	 systems	 are	 becoming	 increasingly
common	 in	 conjunction	 with	 amplified	 by	 the	 adoption	 of	 cloud	 computing
services.	 The	 globalization	 of	 companies,	 along	 with	 collaboration	 and
outsourcing,	 continue	 to	 allow	 organizations	 and	 users	 to	 avail	 themselves	 to
distributed	services.
The	 drives	 for	 adopting	 such	 services	 are	 many	 (e.g.,	 increasing	 enterprise
productivity,	 reducing	 IS	 development	 cost)	 and	 the	 impact	 in	 organizations
regarding	visibility	and	control	over	a	distributed	or	effectively	dispersed	model
can	be	wide-ranging.
The	 Cloud	 Service	 Provider	 (CSP)	 needs	 to	 review	 and	 address	 the	 following
components	to	make	sure	that	the	distributed	IT	model	does	not	negatively	affect
the	factors.
Communications/Clear	Understanding
Traditional	IT	deployment	and	operations	typically	allow	a	clear	line	of	sight	or
understanding	 of	 the	 personnel,	 their	 roles,	 functions,	 and	 core	 areas	 of	 focus,
either	allowing	for	far	more	access	to	individuals,	on	a	name	basis	or	based	on
their	 roles.	 Communications	 allow	 for	 collaboration,	 information	 sharing,	 and
the	availability	of	relevant	details	and	information	when	necessary.	This	can	be
from	operations,	engineering,	controls,	or	development.
Distributed	IT	models	challenge	and	fundamentally	redefine	the	roles,	functions,
and	ability	for	direct	interactions,	such	as	emails,	phone	calls,	or	messengers.
Coordination/Management	of	Activities
Project	 management	 is	 an	 essential	 component,	 ensuring	 the	 smooth	 and
successful	delivery	of	technology	projects,	deployments,	and	solutions	delivery.
Enter	the	complexity	or	benefit	of	distributed	and	outsourced	IT	models.	There
are	 some	 benefits	 when	 outsourced	 models	 are	 involved	 in	 the	 delivery	 of
services	and	solutions;	mainly	when	it	is	their	business	to	ensure	such	services
and	 solutions	 are	 delivered	 to	 clients,	 and	 even	 more	 so	 when	 large-scale
services	and	solutions	are	available	for	customers	(e.g.,	Salesforce,	Google,	and
Microsoft).
Governance	of	Processes/Activities
Effective	 governance	 allows	 for	 serenity	 and	 a	 level	 of	 confidence	 to	 be
established	in	an	organization.	This	is	even	more	true	with	distributed	IT	and	the
use	of	IT	services	or	solutions	across	dispersed	organizational	boundaries	from	a
variety	of	users.
Implications	of	Cloud	to	Enterprise	Risk	Management
The	 cloud	 computing	 signifies	 a	 fundamental	 shift	 in	 the	 way	 technology	 is
offered.	 The	 shift	 is	 towards	 the	 consumerization	 of	 Information	 Technology
(IT)	services	and	convenience.
                            Figure	6-3:	Risk	Management	Changes

Access	Providers	Risk	Management
It	is	essential	for	both	the	cloud	customer	and	the	cloud	provider,	to	be	focused
on	 risk.	 The	 way	 in	 which	 common	 risk	 management	 activities,	 processes,
behaviors,	 and	 related	 procedures	 are	 performed	 may	 require	 significant
revisions	and	redesign.	After	all,	the	way	services	are	delivered	changes	delivery
mechanisms,	 locations,	 and	 providers	 -	 all	 of	 which	 result	 in	 governance	 and
risk-management	changes.
These	changes	must	be	identified	at	the	scoping	and	strategy	phases,	through	to
continuing	 and	 recurring	 tasks.	 Addressing	 these	 risks	 requires	 that	 cloud
customer’s	 and	 the	 cloud	 provider	 policies	 and	 procedures	 to	 be	 aligned	 as
closely	as	possible	because	risk	management	needs	to	be	a	shared	activity	to	be
implemented	successfully.
Difference	between	Data	Owner/Controller	vs.	Data	Custodian/Processor
Treating	 information	 as	 an	 asset	 needs	 multiples	 roles	 and	 distinctions	 to	 be
clearly	defined	and	identified.	The	following	are	vital	roles	associated	with	data
management	:
Data	Subject	:	An	individual	who	is	the	subject	of	personal	data.
Data	 Controller	 :	 A	 person	 who	 (either	 alone	 or	 jointly	 with	 other	 persons)
determines	 the	 purposes	 for	 which	 and	 the	 way	 in	 which	 any	 personal	 data	 is
processed.
Data	 Processor	 :	 Concerning	 personal	 data	 is	 any	 person	 (other	 than	 an
employee	 of	 the	 data	 controller)	 who	 processes	 the	 data	 on	 behalf	 of	 the	 data
controller.
Data	 Stewards	 :	 Commonly	 responsible	 for	 data	 content,	 context,	 and
associated	business	rules.
Data	 Custodians:	 Responsible	 for	 the	 safe	 custody,	 storage	 of	 the	 data,	 and
transport	and	implementation	of	business	rules.
Data	Owners	:	Hold	the	legal	rights	and	complete	control	over	a	single	piece	or
set	of	 data	elements.	Data	owners	possess	the	ability	to	define	distribution	and
associated	policies	as	well.
For	example:
Risk	Profile
The	 risk	 profile	 is	 determined	 by	 an	 organization’s	 willingness	 to	 take	 risks,
along	with	the	threats	to	which	it	is	itself	exposed.	It	has	to	identify	the	level	of
risk	to	be	accepted,	how	risks	are	taken,	and	how	risk-based	decision-making	is
performed.	Also,	the	risk	profile	should	allow	for	potential	costs	and	disruptions
have	to	more	than	one	risks	being	exploited.
It	 is	 vitally	 important	 that	 an	 organization	 completely	 engages	 in	 a	 risk-based
assessment	and	review	against	Cloud	computing	services,	service	providers,	and
the	overall	impacts	on	the	organization	have	to	utilize	Cloud-based	services.
Risk	Appetite
Fast	decision	making	can	lead	to	significant	advantages	for	the	organization,	but
when	assessing	and	measuring	relevant	risks	in	cloud	service	offerings,	its	best
to	 have	 a	 systematic,	 measurable,	 and	 pragmatic	 approach	 to	 cloud	 risk
management.	Undertaking	these	steps,	effectively	allow	the	business	to	balance
the	 risks	 off-set	 any	 excessive	 risk	 components,	 all	 while	 satisfying	 listed
requirements	and	objectives	for	security	and	growth.
Many	developing	and	emerging	organizations	will	more	likely	to	take	significant
risks	when	utilizing	cloud-computing	services	so	they	can	be	first	to	the	market.
Risk	Mitigation
When	 taking	 on	 risk	 management	 and	 associated	 activities,	 the	 approach	 and
desired	result	always	have	to	reduce	and	mitigate	risks.	Mitigation	of	risks	will
decrease	the	exposure	to	a	risk	or	the	likelihood	of	it	occurring.	When	applying
risk	 mitigation	 to	 a	 cloud	 environment	 or	 cloud-based	 assessments,	 these	 are
most	 often	 obtained	 by	 implementing	 additional	 controls,	 policies,	 processes,
procedures,	 or	 utilizing	 improved	 technical	 security	 features.	 Additional	 access
control,	 vulnerability	 management,	 or	 selecting	 a	 particular	 cloud	 provider	 are
some	of	the	various	examples	of	risk	mitigation	or	risk	reduction.
Different	Risk	Frameworks
The	challenge	that	having	several	risk	frameworks	poses	is	the	significant	effort
and	investment	required	to	perform	such	risk	reviews,	along	with	the	 time	and
associated	reporting.	The	risk	frameworks	include




                                 Figure	6-4:	Risk	Framework

ISO	31000:2018
Technical	 Committee	 ISO/TC	 262	 prepared	 this	 standard.	 This	 second	 edition
cancels	 and	 replaces	 the	 first	 edition	 (ISO	 31000:2009	 )	 which	 has	 been
technically	revised.
As	ISO	31000:2018	is	a	guidance	standard	and	is	not	intended	for	certification
purposes;	implementing	it	does	not	address	specific	or	legal	requirements	related
to	 risk	 assessments,	 risk	 reviews,	 and	 overall	 risk	 management.	 However,
implementation	 and	 use	 of	 the	 ISO	 31000:2009	 standard	 will	 set	 out	 a	 risk-
management	framework	and	process	that	can	assist	in	addressing	organizational
requirements	 and,	 most	 importantly,	 provide	 a	 structured	 and	 measurable	 risk-
management	approach	to	assist	with	the	identification	of	cloud-related	risks.
ISO	 31000:2018	 sets	 out	 terms	 and	 definitions,	 principles,	 a	 framework,	 and	 a
process	 for	 managing	 risk.	 Like	 other	 ISO	 standards,	 it	 provides	 many	 critical
principles	 as	 a	 guiding	 set	 of	 rules	 to	 enable	 security	 professionals	 and
organizations	to	manage	risks.	Some	of	them	are	listed	below:
According	to	the	ISO31000:2018:

            “This	 standard	 is	 for	 use	 by	 people	 who	 create	 and	 protect	 value	 in
            organizations	 by	 managing	 risks,	 making	 decisions,	 setting	 and
            achieving	objectives	and	improving	performance.
            Organizations	of	all	types	and	sizes	face	external	and	internal	factors
            and	influences	that	make	it	uncertain	whether	they	will	achieve	their
            objectives.
            Managing	risk	is	iterative	and	assists	organizations	in	setting	strategy,
            achieving	objectives	and	making	informed	decisions.
            Managing	 risk	 is	 part	 of	 governance	 and	 leadership	 and	 is
            fundamental	 to	 how	 the	 organization	 is	 managed	 at	 all	 levels.	 It
            contributes	to	the	improvement	of	management	systems.
            Managing	risk	is	part	of	all	activities	associated	with	an	organization
            and	includes	interaction	with	stakeholders.
            Managing	 risk	 considers	 the	 external	 and	 internal	 context	 of	 the
            organization,	including	human	behavior	and	cultural	factors.”

ENISA
European	Network	and	Information	Security	Agency	(ENISA).
ENISA	produced	“Cloud	Computing:	Benefits,	Risks,	and	Recommendations
for	Information	Security	,”	which	can	be	utilized	as	an	effective	foundation	for
risk	 management.	 ENISA	 identifies	 35	 types	 of	 risks	 for	 organizations	 to
consider,	 coupled	 with	 “Top	 8”	 security	 risks	 based	 on	 likelihood	 and	 impact.
This	framework	is	not	globally	accepted	like	ISO	Standards.

            Compliance	risk
            Data	protection
            Isolation	failure
            Insecure	or	incomplete	data	deletion
            Loss	of	governance
            Lock-in
            Management	interface	failure
            Malicious	insider

NIST	SP	800-37
According	to	the	National	Institute	of	Standards	and	Technology	(NIST)	Special
Publication	(SP)	800-37:
“This	 publication	 focused	 on	 risk	 components	 and	 the	 proper	 analysis	 of	 such
risks.	 While	 NIST	 serves	 as	 an	 international	 reference	 for	 many	 of	 the	 world’s
leading	entities,	it	continues	to	be	strongly	adopted	by	the	U.S.	government	and
related	agency	sectors”.
Metrics	for	Risk	Management
Risk	has	to	communicate	in	a	way	which	is	concise	and	simple	to	understand.	It
can	also	be	essential	to	communicate	risk	information	outside	the	organization.
To	be	successful	in	this,	the	organization	must	agree	to	a	set	of	risk	management
metrics.
Using	a	risk	scorecard	is	recommended.	The	impact	and	probability	of	each	risk
are	assessed	separately,	and	then	the	outcomes	are	joined	to	give	an	indication	of
exposure	using	a	five-level	scale	in	each	of	these	quantities:

           Minimal
           Low
           Moderate
           High
           Maximum
This	enables	a	clear	and	simple	graphical	representation	of	project	risks.
Likelihood           Minimal   Low    Moderate     High   Critical
                        1       2        3          4        5
A	(almost	certain)     H        H       E           E        E
B	(likely)             M        H       H           E        E
C	(possible)            L       M       H           E        E
D	(unlikely)            L       L       M           H        E
E	(rare)                L       L       M           H       H
                                   Table	6-2:	Risk	Scorecard

 Note:
 E	=	Extreme	Risk	:	Immediate	action	required	to	mitigate	the	risk	or	decide	if
 not	to	proceed.
 H	=	High	Risk	:	Action	must	be	taken	to	compensate	the	risk.
 M=	Moderate	Risk	:	Action	must	be	taken	to	monitor	the	risk.
 L	=	Low	Risk:	Routine	acceptance	of	the	risk
Assessment	of	Risk	Environment
To	 sufficiently	 evaluate	 risk	 in	 cloud	 computing,	 various	 levels	 must	 be
accessed.	 The	 specific	 service,	 vendor	 or	 ecosystem	 is	 the	 first	 component,
involves	 the	 same	 analysis	 to	 be	 hosting	 in	 a	 traditional	 data	 center,	 with	 the
addition	 of	 cloud-specific	 aspects	 added	 into	 the	 mix.	 The	 cloud	 provider	 also
needs	to	be	evaluated	for	risk,	based	on	their	record	of	accomplishment,	focus,
stability,	financial	health,	and	future	direction.
Outsourcing	and	Cloud	Contract	Design
It	is	essential	that	things	like	proper	governance	be	involved	in	contract	design
and	management	of	outsourcing.	An	exhaustive	understanding	of	contracts	and
contract	management	is	essential	and	in	large	organizations	is	typically	managed
by	a	separate	department.	It	is	the	cloud	security	professional’s	responsibility	to
make	sure	that	these	contract	managers	understand	the	details	of	what	they	are
managing	so	that	the	organization	does	not	experience	undue	risk.
Business	Requirements
Before	 entering	 into	 a	 contract	 with	 a	 cloud	 supplier,	 your	 organization	 has	 to
evaluate	 its	 particular	 needs	 and	 requirements	 that	 will	 form	 the	 basis	 and
foundation	of	the	organizational	cloud	strategy.	To	develop	a	cloud	strategy,	the
primary	 organizational	 assets	 will	 need	 to	 be	 agreed	 upon	 and	 assessed	 for
adequacy	or	suitability	for	a	cloud	environment.
Service	Level	Agreement	(SLA)
Every	cloud	service	provider	is	subject	to	local	laws	and	regulation	based	on	its
physical	 location,	 making	 it	 imperative	 that	 he/she	 complies	 with	 numerous
standards	 like	 HIPAA,	GLBA,	 ISO27001:2005,	PCI-DSS,	SAS70,	 etc.	 While
compliance	 with	 these	 standards	 provide	 a	 level	 of	 assurance,	 regulatory
standards	may	not	meet	the	business	requirements	of	customers	might	be	spread
across	 different	 geographies	 and	 might	 not	 be	 subject	 to	 the	 same	 laws	 and
regulations.
Users	are	advised	to	discuss	and	review	the	SLAs	with	their	chief	legal	officers
before	the	execution	of	any	cloud	provider’s	agreement.	The	number	of	standard
vendor	SLAs	will	not	indemnify	or	assume	liability	if	a	breach	occurs.
SLAs	must	be	written	by	customers	to	make	sure	policy	compliance	and	satisfy
auditing	and	regulatory	obligations	in	the	domain	listed	below:

            Backup	management
            Communications	and	networks
            Deployment	 and	 availability	 of	 required	 and	 necessary	 skills,
            resource,	etc.,	to	assure	the	quality	of	the	service.
            Systems	and	applications	monitoring
            Information	security	incident	handling
            User	management
            Protection	against	malicious	software’s
            Vulnerability	management	and	security	audit
            Mobile	computing	and	teleworking
            Proper	 operating	 procedure	 to	 protect	 data	 from	 unauthorized
            disclosure,	modification,	removal,	and	destruction.

SLA	Components
While	 SLAs	 tend	 to	 vary	 significantly	 depending	 on	 the	 provider,	 more	 often
than	not	they	are	structured	in	favor	of	the	provider	to	expose	them	to	the	least
amount	of	risk	ultimately.




                                 Figure	6-5:	SLA	Components

Vendor	Management
Once	 an	 organization	 decides	 to	 move	 its	 network	 and	 data	 in	 a	 cloud
environment,	the	process	of	choosing	a	cloud	provider	needs	to	done	with	care
and	 exhaustive	 evaluation.	 cloud	 computing	 is	 still	 an	 emerging	 technology	 on
IT	landscape,	as	such,	many	companies	are	scrambling	to	offer	cloud	solutions
and	to	become	a	part	of	the	explosive	growth	in	the	IT	industry.	While	the	level
of	 competition	 is	 indeed	 beneficial	 to	 any	 customer,	 it	 also	 means	 that	 various
new	organizations	are	emerging	that	do	not	have	long-established	reputations	or
track	records	of	performance	to	evaluate.	It	is	significant	to	make	sure	that	any
vendor	being	considered	is	stable	and	reputable	to	host	critical	business	system
and	sensitive	data	with	it.	The	last	thing	any	organization	would	want	is	to	give
critical	 business	 systems	 to	 a	 cloud	 provider	 that	 is	 not	 a	 mature	 enough	 to
manage	the	growth	and	operational	demands,	or	too	small	a	start-up	that	might
not	be	around	when	the	contract	has	run	its	course.	Although	some	organizations
are	providing	cloud	services	and	have	extensive	track	records	in	IT	industry,	the
start-up	trying	to	gain	a	share	of	the	explosion	in	cloud	services	may	offer	very
low-pricing	or	added	options	in	an	attempt	to	establish	a	strong	presence	in	the
industry	based	on	the	majority	of	customers	using	their	services	.
Selection
There	 are	 various	 factors	 that	 must	 be	 determined	 before	 choosing	 a	 cloud
provider.	 The	 following	 is	 a	 list	 of	 essential	 factors	 an	 organization	 needs	 to
consider	in	the	selection	process.

            What	is	the	reputation	of	the	cloud	provider?
            How	does	the	organization	handle	their	cloud	services?
            Does	 the	 organization	 conform	 /	 is	 it	 certified	 against	 relevant
            security	 and	 professional	 standards/frameworks?	 What	 certifications
            do	an	organization	have?
            Where	are	the	facilities	located	for	the	cloud	provider?
            How	does	the	company	manage	the	security	incidents?
            Does	 the	 cloud	 provider	 build	 their	 platform	 on	 standards	 and
            flexibility,	or	do	they	focus	a	lot	more	on	proprietary	configurations?
Apart	 from	 the	 number	 of	 operational	 and	 technological	 questions	 with	 the
selection,	 certifications	 play	 a	 significant	 role;	 especially	 as	 regulatory
compliance	becomes	increasingly	essential	and	public.
Common	Criteria	Framework
The	 Common	 Criteria	 (CC)	 framework	 (ISO/IEC	 15408-1:2009)	 is	 an
international	ISO	standard	to	provide	guidelines	and	specification	for	evaluating
information	security	products,	with	the	view	for	ensuring	they	meet	an	agreed-
upon	security	standard	for	governments	entities	and	agencies.
The	 objective	 of	 CC	 has	 ensured	 customers	 that	 the	 products	 they	 are	 buying
have	 been	 evaluated	 and	 that	 a	 vendor-neutral	 third	 party	 has	 verified	 the
vendor's	claims.
CC	 looks	 at	 certifying	 a	 product	 only	 and	 does	 not	 include	 business	 or
administrative	processes.	While	it	views	these	as	beneficial,	we	are	all	too	aware
of	the	dangers	of	relying	only	on	technology	for	robust	and	effective	security.
Contract	Management	(e.g.,	right	to	audit,	metrics,	definitions,	termination,
litigation,	assurance,	compliance,	access	to	Cloud/data)
The	 most	 critical	 business	 activity	 amplified	 by	 the	 significant	 outsourcing	 of
roles	and	responsibilities,	contract	management	needs	governance	to	be	relevant
and	 useful.	 Contract	 management	 involves	 meeting	 ongoing	 requirement,
monitoring	 contract	 performance,	 adhering	 to	 contract	 terms	 and	 handling	 any
outages,	incidents,	violation,	or	variations	to	contractual	obligations.	The	role	of
the	 cloud	 management	 and	 cloud	 governance	 should	 not	 be	 underestimated	 or
overlooked	.
Remember	that	the	contract	is	the	only	proper	format	that	will	be	reviewed	and
assessed	 as	 part	 of	 a	 dispute	 between	 the	 cloud	 service	 provider	 and	 the	 cloud
customer.
The	primary	considerations	and	components	of	the	contract	are	as	follows:
Right	to	Audit
Right	 to	 audit	 has	 to	 allow	 for	 the	 organization	 owning	 the	 data	 to	 audit	 or
engage	 the	 services	 of	 an	 independent	 party	 to	 ensure	 if	 the	 contractor	 or	 sub-
contractor	is	satisfying	contractual	and	regulatory	requirements.
Metrics
The	 contract	 has	 to	 clearly	 define	 what	 criterias	 are	 to	 be	 measured	 as	 far	 as
system’s	performance	and	availability	is	concerned,	and	the	agreement	between
the	cloud	provider	and	cloud	customer	as	to	how	the	criteria	will	be	measured,
collected,	quantified,	and	processed.
Definitions
The	 contract	 has	 to	 include	 agreed-upon	 definitions	 of	 any	 terms	 and
technologies.	 However,	 it	 may	 seem	 obvious	 to	 people	 in	 the	 industry	 what
many	 terms	 mean;	 having	 them	 in	 the	 contract	 formalizes	 the	 definitions	 and
makes	sure	that	everyone	has	the	same	understanding.
Termination
Termination	 should	 the	 need	 arise;	 the	 contract	 should	 clearly	 define	 the	 terms
under	which	a	party	can	terminate	the	contract,	and	what	conditions	are	needed
as	part	of	doing	so.	This	will	often	include	specific	processes	for	formal	notice
of	 non-performance,	 remedy	 steps	 and	 timelines	 that	 can	 be	 taken,	 along	 with
potential	 penalties	 and	 termination	 costs,	 depending	 on	 the	 reasons	 for	 and
timing	of	such	action.
Litigation
Sometimes,	the	cloud	customer	could	be	the	subject	of	legal	action,	which	would
likely	also	impact	the	cloud	provider	and	need	their	involvement.	The	contract
will	document	the	responsibilities	for	both	parties	in	such	a	situation,	along	with
the	required	response	times	and	potential	liabilities.
Access	to	Cloud	or	Data
How	both	users	and	the	cloud	customer	will	get	access	to	systems	and	data	is	a
key	 contract	 and	 SLA	 component.	 This	 includes	 multifactor	 authentication
requirements,	 along	 with	 supported	 identity	 providers	 and	 systems.	 From	 the
cloud	 customer’s	 perspective,	 this	 defines	 what	 level	 of	 administrative	 or
privileged	access	they	are	granted,	depending	on	which	cloud	model	is	used	and
the	services	offered	by	its	concerned	cloud	provider.
Execute	Vendor	Management
For	 managing	 outsourced	 and	 cloud	 services,	 the	 SLA	 is	 essential	 in
documenting	the	responsibilities	and	expectations	of	all	vendors	and	customers
involved.	 The	 SLA	 orders	 requirements	 for	 uptime,	 support,	 response	 time,
incident	 management,	 and	 virtually	 all	 operational	 aspects	 of	 the	 contract.	 The
SLA	 also	 clears	 appropriate	 penalties	 for	 non-compliance	 and	 the	 impact	 they
will	have	on	the	entire	contract	and	satisfactory	performance	of	it.
Supply-chain	Management	(e.g.,	ISO/IEC	27036)
With	 the	 nature	 of	 modern	 applications	 built	 on	 a	 myriad	 of	 different
components	 and	 services,	 the	 supply	 chain	 of	 any	 application	 or	 system	 is
emerging	to	a	scale	far	outside	a	single	organization.	This	complexity	makes	the
security	of	an	entire	system	increasingly	tricky,	as	a	breach	of	any	components
of	the	supply	chain	can	affect	all	other	components	or	the	overall	application	or
the	system	itself.
There	are	many	complexities	and	risks	in	supply	chain	management:

            Financial	instability	of	provider
            Single	points	of	failure
            Data	Breaches
            Malware	infestations
            Data	loss
To	resolve	these	complexities	and	risks	in	supply	chain	management,	follow	the
ISO/IEC	27036	standard	because	the	international	standard	provides	guidelines
and	solution	to	the	overall	system	and	application.
According	to	the	ISO/IEC	27036	:
“ISO/IEC	 27036	 is	 a	 standard	 for	 providing	 guidance	 on	 the	 evaluation	 and
treatment	of	information	risks	involved	in	the	acquisition	of	goods	and	services
from	suppliers.	The	implied	context	is	business-to-business	relationships,	rather
than	retailing,	and	information-related	products.”
ISO/IEC	27036	is	a	various	form	of	standards.
As	an	information	security	standard,	the	products	most	obviously	covered	by	the
standards	include:

            IT	outsourcing	and	cloud	computing	services;
           There	are	many	professional	services,	e.g.,	security	guards,	cleaners,
           delivery	 services	 (couriers),	 equipment	 maintenance	 or	 servicing,
           consulting	and	specialist	advisory	services,	knowledge	management,
           research	 and	 development,	 manufacturing,	 logistics,	 source	 code
           escrow	and	healthcare;
           Provision	 of	 ICT	 hardware,	 software,	 and	 services	 including
           telecommunications	and	Internet	services;
           On-demand	 products	 and	 services	 where	 the	 acquirer	 specifies	 the
           requirements	and	typically	has	an	active	role	in	the	product	design.
Also,	 Information	 security	 guidance	 to	 the	 vendors	 and	 customers	 of	 cloud
services.
Responding	to	risks	specific	to	the	provision	of	cloud	services	that	can	have	an
information	security	impact	on	organizations	using	these	services.
Summary
When	taking	into	account	the	issues	that	the	legal	and	compliance	domain	raises,
the	 CSP	 must	 be	 able	 to	 focus	 on	 various	 different	 issues	 constantly.	 These
issues	include	understanding	how	to	recognize	the	numerous	legal	requirements
and	 unique	 risks	 related	 with	 the	 cloud	 environment	 about	 legislation,	 legal
risks,	 controls,	 and	 forensic	 requirements.	 Besides,	 the	 CSP	 must	 able	 to
describe	 the	 potential	 personal	 and	 data	 privacy	 issues	 specific	 to	 personal
identifiable	 information	 (PII)	 with	 the	 cloud	 environment.	 There	 is	 a	 need	 for
concise	 and	 clear	 definition	 of	 the	 process,	 the	 methods,	 and	 the	 required
adaptions	 necessary	 to	 execute	 an	 audit	 in	 a	 cloud	 environment.	 The	 CSP	 also
needs	 to	 be	 able	 to	 understand	 the	 implications	 of	 cloud	 to	 organization	 risk
management.	 The	 CSP	 should	 be	 able	 to	 assist	 the	 organization	 to	 accomplish
the	levels	of	understanding	required	to	address	risks	via	a	proper	audit	process.
They	must	address	supply	chain	management	and	contract	design	for	outsourced
in	a	cloud	environment	is	important	as	well.
Figure	6-6:	Mind	map	of	Legal	and	Compliance
Practice	Questions

    1.	 Which	organization	developed	the	Safe	Harbor	program?

     a)			ISO
     b)		U.S	Department	of	Commerce
     c)			IEC
     d)		None	of	the	above
    2.	 When	 was	 the	 Health	 Insurance	 Portability	 and	 Accountability	 Act
        (HIPAA)	published?

     a)			1994
     b)			1995
     c)			1996
     d)			1997
    3.	 Which	organization	has	administered	the	Sarbanes-Oxley	Act?

     a)		U.S	Department	of	Commerce
     b)			ISO
     c)		Security	and	Exchange	Commission	(SEC)
     d)		None	of	the	above
    4.	 Which	act	is	a	Financial	Modernization	Act?

     a)			HIPAA
     b)			SEC
     c)			GLBA
     d)		None	of	the	above
    5.	 Which	ISO	standard	provides	guidance	for	incident	investigation?

     a)			ISO/IEC	27037:2012
     b)			ISO/IEC	27041:2015
     c)		ISO/IEC	27042:	2015
     d)			ISO/IEC	27050-1:2016
    6.	 Which	ISO	standard	provides	a	principle	of	eDiscovery?

     a)			ISO/IEC	27037:2012
 b)			ISO/IEC	27041:2015
 c)		ISO/IEC	27042:	2015
 d)			ISO/IEC	27050-1:2016
7.	 Which	program	or	act	deals	with	the	international	transfer	of	data?

 a)		Safe	Harbor	Program
 b)			HIPAA
 c)			GLBA
 d)			SCA
8.	 When	was	the	Stored	Communications	Act	(SCA)	published?

 a)			1986
 b)			1987
 c)			1988
 d)			1989
9.	 How	 many	 types	 of	 PII	 associated	 with	 Cloud	 and	 non-Cloud
    environments?

 a)			Two	types
 b)			Three	types
 c)			Four	types
 d)			Five	types
    10.	How	many	types	of	audit	reports	are	used	in	Cloud	computing?

 a)			Two	types
 b)			Three	types
 c)			Four	types
 d)			Five	types
    11.	Which	 organization	 published	 the	 Statement	 on	 Auditing
   Standards	(SAS)?

 a)		U.S	Department	of	Commerce
 b)		Security	and	Exchange	Commission	(SEC)
 c)		American	Institute	of	Certified	Public	Accounts	(AICPA)
 d)		None	of	the	above
    12.	Which	 audit	 report	 is	 also	 known	 as	 a	 service	 auditor’s
  examination?

a)			SAS
b)			SSAE
c)			ISAE
d)		None	of	the	above
   13.	Which	 audit	 report	 is	 also	 known	 as	 a	 Service	 Organization
  Control	(SOC)?

a)			SAS
b)			SSAE
c)			ISAE
d)		None	of	the	above
   14.	Which	 organization	 is	 published	 the	 International	 Standard	 on
  Assurance	Engagements	(ISAE)	report?

a)		International	Auditing	and	Assurance	Standard	Board	(IAASB).
b)		Security	and	Exchange	Commission	(SEC)
c)		American	Institute	of	Certified	Public	Accounts	(AICPA)
d)		None	of	the	above
   15.	How	many	phases	are	there	in	audit	plan?

a)			One
b)			Two
c)			Three
d)			Four
   16.	Which	 organization	 owns	 the	 Generally	 Accepted	 Privacy
  Principles	(GAPP)?

a)		International	Auditing	and	Assurance	Standard	Board	(IAASB).
b)		Security	and	Exchange	Commission	(SEC)
c)		American	Institute	of	Certified	Public	Accountants	(AICPA)
d)		None	of	the	above
   17.	How	many	types	of	risks	are	identified	in	the	ENISA?

a)			34
b)			35
c)			36
d)			37
   18.	Common	Criteria	(CC)	framework	follows	this	standard:

a)			ISO/IEC	15408-1:2009
b)		ISO/IEC	27042:	2015
c)			ISO/IEC	27050-1:2016
d)		None	of	the	above
    19.	Identify	 the	 appropriate	 steps	 of	 security	 under	 the	 privacy
  issues?

a)		Confidentiality,	Integrity,	Availabilit	y
b)		Confidentiality,	Integrity,	Availability,	and	Privacy
c)		Confidentiality,	Integrity,	Availability,	and	Credibility
d)		None	of	the	above
   20.	Identify	the	correct	types	of	SLA	components?

a)	 	Uptime	Guarantees,	Suspension	of	Service,	Provider	Liability,	Data
Protection	Requirements,	Disaster	Recovery,	Security	recommendation
b)	 	 Uptime	 Guarantees,	 Integrity,	 Provider	 Liability,	 Data	 Protection
Requirements,	Disaster	Recovery,	Security	recommendation
c)	 	 Uptime	 Guarantees,	 Suspension	 of	 Service,	 Availability,	 Data
Protection	Requirements,	Disaster	Recovery,	Security	recommendation
d)		None	of	the	above
Answers:
Chapter	1:	Architectural	Concepts	&	Design	Requirements

       1.	 a,	b,	c

Explanation:	 Cloud	 computing	 is	 a	 new	 operational	 model	 and	 set	 of
technologies	 for	 managing	 shared	 pools	 of	 computing	 resources.	 Cloud
computing	 is	 the	 practice	 of	 using	 a	 network	 of	 remote	 servers	 hosted	 on	 the
internet	 to	 store,	 manage	 and	 process	 data	 rather	 than	 using	 a	 local	 server	 or
personal	computer.	It	is	the	on-demand	delivery	of	computing	resources	through
a	Cloud	services	platform	with	pay-as-you-go	pricing.
2.	e
Explanation:	 The	 advantage	 of	 Cloud	 computing	 is	 go	 global	 in	 minutes,
increased	 speed	 and	 agility,	 stop	 spending	 money	 on	 running	 and	 maintaining
data	centers,	benefits	from	massive	economies	of	scale.
3.	b
Explanation:	Integrity:	Ensuring	that	information	is	not	subject	to	unauthorized
modification.
4.	b
 Explanation:	 A	 Cloud	 Service	 Provider	 (CSP)	 offers	 cloud-based	 platform,
application,	 infrastructure,	 or	 storage	 services.	 The	 CSP	 will	 possess	 the	 data
centre,	owns	and	deals	with	the	resources	(hardware	or	software),	employs	the
staff,	 monitors	 service	 provision	 and	 security,	 and	 gives	 administrative
assistance	to	the	customer.
5.	a,	b,	c
Explanation:	Key	Cloud	computing	characteristics	are	on-demand	self-service,
broad	 network	 access,	 rapid	 elasticity	 and	 scalability,	 multi-tenancy,	 resource
pooling,	and	measured	service.
6.b
Explanation:	 Broad	 network	 access:	 Capabilities	 are	 accessible	 over	 the
network	 and	 available	 through	 standard	 devices	 including	 laptops	 and	 mobile
devices.
7.b
 Explanation:	Cloud	service	customer	can	arrangement	computing	capabilities,
as	 required,	 naturally	 or	 with	 little	 cooperation	 or	 earlier	 correspondence	 with
the	Cloud	service.
8	.a
Explanation:	 Virtualization	 is	 making	 virtual	 image	 of	 something	 such	 as
server,	storage,	operating	system.
9.	d
Explanation:	The	advantage	of	virtualization	technology	is	as

        A	big	step	towards	new	technology	making	life	easier	and	better.

        It	helped	to	make	Cloud	computing	more	efficient	and	eco-friendly
        It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 cost-saving,	 hardware-reducing	 and	 energy-saving
        technique.
        Isolation
        Resource	sharing
        Aggregation	of	resources
        Dynamical	resources

10.a,	b,	c
Explanation:	SaaS,	PaaS,	NaaS,	IaaS	are	the	Cloud	service	model
11.	c
Explanation:	Cloud	networking	introduces	another	path	to	deploy,	operate,	and
manage	distributed	enterprise	networks.
12.	d
Explanation:	There	are	some	advantages	of	Cloud	data	base	as

        No	software	licensing
        On-demand	Oracle	and	MS	SQL	server	solution
        No	hardware	provisioning
        Portal-based	self-service	database	solution
        Cost	effective	estimated	20%	to	75%	lower	cost.

13.	c
Explanation:	 A	 cloud	 database	 is	 a	 database	 that	 typically	 runs	 on	 cloud
computing	platform,	access	to	is	gives	as	a	service.
14.a
Explanation:	The	acronym	of	DSaaS	is	Data	Storage	as	a	service.
15.b
Explanation:	 PaaS	 (Platform	 as	 a	 Service)	 provides	 a	 platform	 allowing
customers	to	develop,	run,	and	manage	applications	without	the	complexity	of
building	and	maintaining	the	infrastructure.
16.	b
Explanation:	DSaaS	enables	user	to	pay	for	the	measure	of	data	storage	he/she
is	utilizing.
17.	c
Explanation:	The	advantage	of	Cloud	encryption	is	as:
Encrypted	 data	 is	 only	 readable	 for	 authorized	 parties	 with	 access	 to	 the
decryption	keys.	Encrypting	data	guarantees	that	if	that	data	falls	into	the	wrong
hand,	it	is	useless	as	long	as	its	keys	stay	secure.
Cloud	 encryption	 is	 critical	 for	 industries	 that	 need	 to	 meet	 regulatory
compliance	requirements
18.	b
Explanation:	 Data	 in-motion	 is	 data	 effectively	 moving	 from	 one	 location	 to
another	such	as	across	the	internet	or	through	a	private	network.
19.	d
Explanation:	There	are	different	types	of	sanitization	for	each	type	of	media	as
clearing,	disposal,	purging,	destroying,	shredding.
20.	c
Explanation:	 Hypervisor-based	 virtualization	 technology	 is	 the	 best	 choice	 of
implementing	methods	to	achieve	a	secure	Cloud	environment.
Chapter	2:	Cloud	Data	Security

    1.	 d

Explanation:	IaaS	uses	the	following	storage	types:

        Volume	storage
        Object	storage

    2.	 a,	c

Explanation:	 It	 is	 essential	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 the	 relevant	 data	 security
technologies	you	may	need	to	deploy	or	work	with	to	ensure	the	confidentiality,
integrity,	and	availability	of	data	in	the	Cloud.
Potential	controls	and	solutions	can	include

        Encryption
        DLP
        File	and	database	access	monitor
        Obfuscation,	anonymization,	tokenization,	and	masking

    3.	 d

Explanation:	 For	 database	 encryption,	 you	 should	 understand	 the	 following
options:

        File-level	encryption
        Transparent	encryption
        Application-level	encryption
    4.	 b

Explanation:	Where	national	or	community	laws	or	regulations	determine	the
purposes	and	means	of	processing,	the	controller	or	the	specific	criteria	for	his
nomination	may	be	designated	by	national	or	community	law.
The	customer	determines	the	ultimate	purpose	of	the	processing	and	decides	on
the	 outsourcing	 or	 the	 delegation	 of	 all	 or	 part	 of	 the	 concerned	 activities	 to
external	organizations.	Therefore,	the	customer	acts	as	a	controller.	In	this	role,
the	customer	is	responsible	and	subject	to	all	the	legal	duties	that	are	addressed
in	 the	 Privacy	 and	 Data	 Protection	 (P&DP)	 laws	 applicable	 to	 the	 controller’s
role.	The	customer	may	task	the	service	provider	with	choosing	the	methods	and
the	technical	or	organizational	measures	to	be	used	to	achieve	the	purposes	of
the	controller.

    5.	 a

Explanation:	 The	 following	 points	 show	 key	 capabilities	 common	 to	 IRM
solutions:
Persistent	Protection	:	Make	sure	that	documents,	messages,	and	attachments
are	protected	at	rest,	in	transit,	and	even	after	they	are	distributed	to	recipients
Dynamic	 Policy	 Control	 :	 Allows	 content	 owners	 to	 define	 and	 change	 user
permissions	 (view,	 forward,	 copy,	 or	 print)	 and	 recall	 or	 expire	 content	 even
after	distribution
Automatic	Expiration	:	Provides	the	ability	to	automatically	revoke	access	to
documents,	 e-mails,	 and	 attachments	 at	 any	 point,	 thus	 allowing	 information
security	policies	to	be	enforced	wherever	content	is	distributed	or	stored
Continuous	Audit	Trail	:	Provides	confirmation	that	content	was	delivered	and
viewed	 and	 offers	 proof	 of	 compliance	 with	 your	 organization’s	 information
security	policies
Support	 for	 existing	 Authentication	 Security	 Infrastructure	 :	 Reduces
administrator	involvement	and	speeds	deployment	by	leveraging	user	and	group
information	that	exists	in	directories	and	authentication	systems

    6.	 b
Explanation:	 Since	 the	 other	 options	 are	 not	 entirely	 applicable	 to	 Cloud
computing,	 the	 only	 reasonable	 method	 remaining	 is	 encrypting	 the	 data.	 The
process	of	encrypting	the	data	to	dispose	of	it	is	known	as	crypto-shredding	or
digital	shredding.
TO	 using	 an	 encryption	 method	 to	 rewrite	 the	 data	 in	 an	 encrypted	 format	 to
make	it	unreadable	without	the	encryption	key.

    7.	 b

Explanation:	 To	 determine	 the	 necessary	 controls	 to	 be	 deployed,	 you	 must
first	understand

        Function(s)	of	the	data
        Location(s)	of	the	data
        Actor(s)	upon	the	data

Once	 you	 understand	 and	 document	 these	 three	 items,	 you	 can	 design	 the
appropriate	controls	and	apply	them	to	the	system	to	safeguard	data	and	control
access	to	it.	These	controls	can	be	of	a	preventative,	detective	(monitoring),	or
corrective	nature.

    8.	 b

Explanation:	PaaS	utilizes	the	following	data	storage	types:

        Structured
        Unstructured

    9.	 c

Explanation:	Data	loss	prevention	tool	implementations	usually	conform	to	the
following	topologies:
Data	in	Motion	(DIM)	:	Referred	to	as	network-based	or	gateway	DLP.	In	this
topology,	the	monitoring	engine	is	deployed	near	the	organizational	gateway
to	monitor	outgoing	protocols	such	as	HTTP/HTTPS/SMTP	and	FTP.
Data	at	Rest	(DAR)	:	Referred	to	as	storage-based.	In	this	topology,	the	DLP
engine	 is	 installed	 where	 the	 data	 is	 at	 rest,	 usually	 one	 or	 more	 storage	 sub-
systems	and	file	and	application	servers.
Data	 in	 Use	 (DIU):	 Referred	 to	 as	 client-	 or	 endpoint-based,	 the	 DLP
application	is	installed	on	a	user’s	workstations	and	endpoint	devices.

          10.	a

Explanation:	 Data	 discovery	 tools	 differ	 by	 technique	 and	 data	 matching
abilities.	Three	basic	analysis	methods	are	employed:

         Metadata
         Labels
         Content	analysis

          11.	b

Explanation:	The	Cloud	Security	Alliance	Cloud	Controls	Matrix	(CCM)	is
an	essential	and	up-to-date	security	controls	framework	that	is	addressed	to	the
Cloud	community	and	stakeholders.	A	fundamental	richness	of	the	CCM	is	its
ability	to	provide	mapping/cross	relationships	with	the	main	industry-accepted
security	 standards,	 regulations,	 and	 controls	 frameworks	 such	 as	 the	 ISO
27001/27002,	ISACA’s	COBIT,	and	PCI-DSS.

          12.	d

Explanation:	A	 data	 retention	 policy	 is	 an	 organization’s	 established	 protocol
for	 retaining	 information	 for	 operational	 or	 regulatory	 compliance	 needs.	 A
good	data	retention	policy	should	define

         Retention	periods
         Data	formats
         Data	security
        Data	retrieval	procedures	for	the	enterprise

         13.	c

Explanation:	To	support	 continuous	operations,	the	following	principles	must
be	adopted	as	part	of	the	security	operation	policies:

    1.	 Audit	logging

The	 continuous	 operation	 of	 audit	 logging	 is	 comprised	 of	 three	 important
processes:

    2.	 Detecting	new	events:
    3.	 Adding	new	rules:
    4.	 Reducing	false	positives:

        Contract/authority	maintenance
        Secure	disposal
        Incident	response	legal	preparation

         14.	c

Explanation:	In	a	Cloud	environment,	the	container	is	not	a	storage	type.	Both
the	object	and	volume	storage	types	are	used	within	Infrastructure	as	a	Service
(IaaS),	 and	 the	 structured	 storage	 type	 is	 used	 as	 part	 of	 a	 Platform	 as	 a
Service(PaaS)	offering.

         15.	a		

Explanation:	Billing	records	would	most	likely	be	available	in	a	Software	as	a
Service	 (SaaS)	 environment	 if	 required	 or	 allowed	 by	 the	 contract.	 The	 other
options	 like	 network	 capture,	 management	 plane	 logs,	 and	 operating	 system
logs	would	all	be	solely	accessible	and	used	by	the	Cloud	provider	in	a	SaaS
environment,	 as	 none	 of	 the	 systems	 that	 generate	 those	 logs	 falls	 under	 the
responsibility	or	access	allowed	to	the	Cloud	customer.

         16.	b

Explanation:	 On	 the	 user’s	 device	 is	 the	 right	 choice	 of	 data-in-use
monitoring.	 Integrated	 with	 the	 database	 server	 would	 provide	 coverage	 for
data	at	rest,	while	on	the	network	boundary	would	provide	coverage	for	data	in
transit.	 On	 the	 application	 server	 is	 also	 not	 applicable	 as	 the	 actual	 use	 and
viewing	 of	 data	 would	 occur	 through	 the	 client,	 as	 well	 as	 being	 outside	 the
immediate	security	enclave	of	the	application.

         17.	a

Explanation:	 Monitoring	 is	 not	 a	 feature	 of	 a	 SIEM	 solution.	 The	 solutions
work	 by	 aggregating	 data,	 which	 can	 then	 be	 used	 for	 alerting	 on	 conditions,
but	not	used	in	the	sense	of	system	monitoring.	Dashboards	are	also	a	common
feature	 of	 SIEM	 solutions	 to	 present	 reporting	 and	 alerting	 outputs	 to
management	or	users.

         18.	b

Explanation:	HIPAA	governs	the	protection	of	healthcare-related	data.

         19.	c

Explanation:	Chain	of	custody	is	not	part	of	an	IRM	solution,	as	it	is	central	to
eDiscovery	 and	 other	 legal	 mechanisms.	 With	 an	 IRM	 solution	 and	 the
protection	 of	 data	 assets,	 the	 concepts	 of	 expiration,	 policy	 control,	 and	 the
auditing	of	acceptable	and	authorized	users	are	all	key	components.

         20.	d

Explanation:	 None	 of	 the	 environments	 gives	 responsibility	 for	 physical
security	 to	 the	 Cloud	 customer.	 In	 all	 Cloud	 hosting	 environments,	 the	 Cloud
provider	has	sole	responsibility	for	the	physical	infrastructure	and	the	security
of	it.
Chapter	3:	Cloud	Platform	&	Infrastructure	Security

     1.	 d
Explanation:	 The	 components	 of	 Cloud	 infrastructure	 are	 physical
environment,	 compute,	 network	 and	 communication,	 virtualization,	 storage,
and	management	plane.

     2.	 a
Explanation:	Cloud	data	centers	are	designed	to	support	protect	security	and
availability	of	customer	data.

      3.	 c
Explanation:	 network	 and	 communications	 is	 another	 imperative	 of	 Cloud
infrastructure	 because	 it	 provides	 the	 best	 way	 for	 customers	 and	 users	 to
access	their	applications,	systems,	and	software	tools.

    4.	 c
Explanation:	Software-Defined	Networking	is	the	acronym	of	SDN.

    5.	 a
Explanation:	There	are	two	types	of	hypervisors

         Type	1	hypervisor
         Type	2	hypervisor

      6.	 d
Explanation:	There	are	various	counter-measures	that	can	be	executed	in	the
Cloud	 infrastructure	 includes	 Access	 management,	 Identity	 and	 access
reporting,	 Centralized	 directory,	 Role-based	 access	 control,	 User	 access
certifications,	and			Separation	of	duties.

      7.	 b			
Explanation:	 Data	 in	 use	 in	 protected	 through	 secure	 API	 calls	 and	 web
services	 by	 means	 of	 the	 use	 of	 encryption,	 dedicated	 network	 pathways,	 or
digital	signatures.
     8.	 d
Explanation:	 Below	 are	 the	 relevant	 Virtualization	 system	 protection
consideration	Protecting	the	management	plane

        Isolation	of	the	management	network	from	other	networks
        Proper	network	design	as	well	as	properly	operating	components,	such
        as,	firewalls.
        Use	of	trust	zones

     9.	 b
Explanation:	Identity	 and	 access	 management	 innovation	 can	 be	 utilized	 to
capture,	 record,	 initiate,	 and	 manage	 user	 identities	 and	 their	 access
permissions.

       10.	a
Explanation:	Authentication	is	the	process	for	confirming	the	identity	of	the
user.

        11.	b
Explanation:	Federated	Identity	enables	a	user	to	access	an	application	in	one
domain,	 such	 as	 software	 as	 a	 Service	 (SaaS)	 application,	 using	 the
authentication	 that	 occurred	 in	 another	 domain,	 such	 as	 corporate	 Identity
Management	(IdM)	system.

       12.	a
Explanation:	Recovery	Service	Level	is	the	acronym	of	RSL.

        13.	b
Explanation:	 RPO	 is	 the	 amount	 of	 data	 that	 a	 company	 would	 require	 to
maintain	and	recover	in	order	to	function	at	a	level	suitable	to	management.

        14.	b
Explanation:	RTO	is	the	period	of	time	within	which	applications,	systems,	or
functions	 must	 be	 recovered	 in	 the	 event	 of	 a	 disaster	 to	 the	 point	 where
management’s	objectives	for	BC/DR	are	happened.

       15.	C
Explanation:	The	capacity	for	an	enterprise	to	follow	what	applications	users
are	 accessing	 (and	 when)	 is	 a	 concern	 from	 both	 a	 security	 and	 regulatory
viewpoint.

Chapter	4:	Cloud	Application	Security

     1.	 A
Explanation:	Use	the	SOAP	envelope	and	then	HTTP	(SMTP/FTP)	to
transfer	the	data.

   2.	 b
Explanation:	SOAP	provides	a	web	services	feature.

    3.	 a
Explanation:	Static	Application	Security	Testing	(SAST)	is	considered	a
white-box	test,	where	the	application	test	performs	an	analysis	of	the
application	byte	code,	source	code,	and	binaries	without	executing	the
application	code.

    4.	 b
Explanation:	Dynamic	Application	Security	Testing	(DAST)	is	considered	a
black-box	test,	where	the	tool	should	find	specific	execution	paths	in	the
application	being	analysed.

   5.	 b
Explanation:	DAST	is	used	against	applications	in	their	running	state.

    6.	 a
Explanation:	The	most	common	software	vulnerabilities	are	found	in	the
Open	Web	Application	Security	Project	(OWASP)	Top	10.	There	are	OWASP
10	entries	for	2017	are

        Injection	attack
        Broken	Authentication
        Sensitive	Data	Exposure
        XML	External	Entities	(XXE)
        Broken	access	control
        Security	Misconfiguration
        Cross-site	scripting	(XSS)
        Insecure	Deserialization
        Using	Components	with	Known	Vulnerabilities
        Insufficient	Logging	and	Monitor

   7.	 a
Explanation:	There	are	two	types	of	federations.

        Web-of-trust	model
        Third	party	identifier

    8.	 c
Explanation:	The	SDLC	process	is	a	set	of	stages	or	phases	that	drive	a
software	development	project	from	conception	and	requirement	gathering
through	requirement,	designing,	development,	testing,	and	maintenance.

   9.	 b
Explanation	:	STRIDE	has	following	parts

        Spoofing
        Tampering
        Repudiation
        Information
        Disclosure
        Elevation

       10.	a
Explanation:	DAM	can	be	network-based	(NDAM)	or	agent-based	(ADAM).

          11.	d
Explanation:	A	WAF	is	a	protocol	layer	7	in	the	OSI	model.	Layer	7	is	the
application	layer	in	the	OSI	Model.

          12.	d
Explanation:	An	API	gateway	is	a	device	that	filters	API	traffic;	it	can	be
installed	as	a	proxy	or	as	a	specific	part	of	your	application's	stack	before	data
is	processed.

Chapter	5:	Operations
    1.	 a
Explanation:	 HVAC	 system	 design	 is	 a	 study	 of	 mechanical	 engineering,
based	on	the	principles	of	thermodynamics,	fluid	mechanics	and	heat	transfer.

    2.	 b

Explanation:	 The	 American	 Society	 of	 Heating,	 Refrigeration,	 and	 Air
Conditioning	Engineers	(ASHRAE)	recommended	that	the	lowest	temperature
is	18°C.

    3.	 c

Explanation:	 The	 American	 Society	 of	 Heating,	 Refrigeration,	 and	 Air
Conditioning	 Engineers	 (ASHRAE)	 recommended	 that	 the	 highest
temperature	is	27°C.

    4.	 c

Explanation:	 The	 two	 networking	 models	 that	 have	 to	 be	 considered	 are
traditional	and	converged.

    5.	 b

Explanation:	 Kernel-based	 Virtual	 Machine	 (KVM)	 is	 an	 open	 source
virtualization	technology	built	into	Linux.

    6.	 d

Explanation:	 The	 VM-Series	 for	 KVM	 allows	 service	 providers	 and
organization	 similar	 to	 add	 next-generation	 firewall	 and	 advanced	 threat
prevention	 capabilities	 to	 their	 cloud-based	 initiatives	 and	 Linux-based
virtualization.

    7.	 c

Explanation:	 There	 are	 two	 layers	 which	 made	 the	 TLS.	 TLS	 Handshake
Protocol	and	TLS	Record	Protocol.

    8.	 c
Explanation:	 Dynamic	 Host	 Configuration	 Protocol	 (DHCP)	 is	 a	 client	 or
server	protocol	that	automatically	provides	an	Internet	Protocol	(IP)	host	with
its	IP	address	and	other	related	configuration	information	such	as	the	default
gateway	and	subnet	mask.

    9.	 d

Explanation:	DNS	 is	 used	 to	 translate	 a	 domain	 name	 (like	 ipspecialist.net)
into	 numeric	 Internet	 address	 like	 (197.166.1.0).	 DNS	 is	 a	 hierarchical,
distributed	 database	 that	 contains	 a	 mapping	 of	 DNS	 domain	 names	 to
multiple	forms	of	data	such	as	the	Internet	Protocol	(IP)	addresses.

            10.	a

Explanation:	 There	 are	 two	 main	 clustered	 storage	 architectures	 available.
Tightly	coupled	and	Loosely	Coupled.

            11.	d

Explanation:	Most	 increasingly	 popular	 remote	 access	 techniques	 to	 permit
teleworkers	access	to	internal	business	applications	and	data	is	to	allow	them
to	log	into	virtual	desktops.	These	are

             Virtual	Desktop	Infrastructure	(VDI)
             Remote	 Desktop	 Protocol	 (RDP)	 permit	 for	 desktop	 access	 to
             remote	systems
             Access	through	a	secure	terminal

            12.	a

Explanation:	The	two	primary	types	of	firewalls	are	host-based	and	network-
based	firewalls.

            13.	b

Explanation:	 A	 host-based	 firewall	 is	 introduced	 in	 the	 light	 of	 individual
servers	 and	 screens	 approaching	 and	 friendly	 flags,	 while	 network-based
firewall	can	be	incorporated	with	the	Cloud's	foundation,	or	it	can	be	a	virtual
firewall	benefit.
          14.	d

Explanation:	Cloud	 orchestration	 is	 often	 used	 to	 deploy,	 provision,	 or	 start
servers;	 acquire	 and	 assign	 storage	 capacity;	 manage	 networking;	 develop
VMs;	and	authorize	to	particular	software	on	Cloud	services.	This	is	achieved
through	three	main,	interconnected	components	of	Cloud	orchestration	which
are:

           Resource	orchestration
           Service
           Workload

          15.	e

Explanation:	 Several	 hundreds	 of	 tools	 exist	 for	 automation	 of	 server
configuration	 and	 management,	 including	 Terraform,	 Salt,	 Puppet,	 and
Ansible.

          16.	c

Explanation:	 Vendors	 have	 developed	 new	 tools	 designed	 specifically	 to
evaluate	 the	 performance	 of	 customer-based	 Cloud	 computing	 applications.
Some	of	Cloud	performance-monitoring	tools	are:

           BMC's	End	User	Experience	Management	tool
           Cloudkick	Inc
           LoadStorm
           SevOne's
           SOASTA's	CloudTest

          17.	a

Explanation:	 According	 to	 ISO	 22301,	 a	 BCM	 system	 highlights	 the
importance	of:

           Constant	improvement	based	on	objective	measurements.
           Implementing	 and	 operating	 controls	 and	 measures	 for	 managing
           enterprises	overall	continuity	risks.
           Monitoring	and	reviewing	the	performance	and	effectiveness	of	the
           BCM	system.
             Understanding	 continuity	 and	 preparedness	 needs,	 along	 with	 the
             necessity	for	establishing	BCM	policy	and	objectives.

            18.	d

Explanation:	Generally,	incidents	are	categorized	as:

             Low	priorities
             Medium	priorities
             High	priorities

            19.	d

Explanation:	Some	of	the	incident	management	tools	are:

             PagerDuty
             VictorOps
             XMatters

Chapter	6:	Legal	and	Compliance

    1.	 b

Explanation:	 The	 U.S	 Department	 of	 Commerce	 developed	 safe	 Harbor
program.

    2.	 c

Explanation:	 The	 Health	 Insurance	 Portability	 and	 Accountability	 Act
(HIPAA)	was	published	in	1996.

    3.	 c

Explanation:	 The	 Securities	 and	 Exchange	 Commission	 (SEC)	 administers
the	Sarbanes-Oxley	Act.

    4.	 c

Explanation:	The	Gramm-Leach-Bliley	Act	(GLBA)	is	a	federal	law	enacted
in	the	US	to	control	the	ways	that	financial	institutions	deal	with	 the	private
information	of	individuals.	It	is	a	Financial	Modernization	Act	of	1999.

    5.	 b

Explanation:	ISO/IEC	27041:2015:	Guide	for	incident	investigations

    6.	 d

Explanation:	ISO/IEC	27050-1:2016	provide	a	principle	for	eDiscovery.

    7.	 a

Explanation:	 Safe	 Harbor	 Program	 deals	 with	 the	 international	 transfer	 of
data.

    8.	 a

Explanation:	Stored	Communications	Act	(SCA)	was	enacted	in	1986	in	the
USA.

    9.	 a

Explanation:	There	are	two	types	of	PII	associated	with	cloud	and	non-cloud
environments.
Contractual	PII	and	Regulated	PII.

            10.	b

Explanation:	There	are	three	types	of	audit	reports.
SAS,	SSAE,	ISAE

            11.	c

Explanation:	The	Statement	on	Auditing	Standards	(SAS)	Number	70,	which
is	 commonly	 known	 as	 SAS	 70,	 is	 a	 standard	 published	 by	 the	 American
Institute	of	Certified	Public	Accounts	(AICPA).

            12.	a

Explanation:	The	Statement	on	Auditing	Standards	(SAS)	Number	70,	which
is	 commonly	 known	 as	 SAS	 70,	 is	 a	 standard	 published	 by	 the	 American
Institute	of	Certified	Public	Accounts	(AICPA).	Typically,	it	is	also	known	as	a
“service	auditor’s	examination.”

          13.	b

Explanation:	 The	 Statements	 on	 Standards	 for	 Attestation	 Engagements
(SSAE)	16	replaced	the	SAS	70	as	of	2011	and	is	the	standard	that	most	in	the
United	 States	 now	 use.	 It	 is	 also	 known	 as	 the	 Service	 Organization	 Control
(SOC)	report.

          14.	a

Explanation:	International	Auditing	and	Assurance	Standard	Board	(IAASB)
issued	 the	 International	 Standard	 on	 Assurance	 Engagements	 (ISAE)	 3402
reports.

       15.	d
Explanation:	There	are	four	phases	of	the	audit	plan.

               Conduct	audit
               Define	objective
               Define	scope
               Lesson	Learned	and	analysis

          16.	c

Explanation:	Generally,	Accepted	Privacy	Principles	(GAPP)	is	the	American
Institute	of	Certified	Public	Accountants	(AICPA)	standard	describing	detailed
to	the	privacy	principles.

          17.	b

Explanation:	European	 Network	 and	 Information	 Security	Agency	(ENISA)
identifies	35	types	of	risks	for	organizations	to	consider,	coupled	with	a	“Top
8”	security	risks	based	on	likelihood	and	impact.

          18.	a
Explanation:	 The	 Common	 Criteria	 (CC)	 framework	 (ISO/IEC	 15408-
1:2009)	 is	 an	 international	 ISO	 standard	 to	 provide	 guidelines	 and
specification	for	evaluating	information	security	products.

         19.	a

Explanation:	The	three	main	aspects	of	security	are	confidentiality,	integrity,
and	availability.	As	more	services	and	data	have	moved	online,	especially	with
the	explosion	of	mobile	computing	and	apps	that	utilize	sensitive	information,
privacy	has	become	a	crucial	fourth	aspect.

         20.	a

Explanation:	These	are	correct	components	of	SLA

          Data	Protection	Requirements
          Disaster	Recovery
          Provider	Liability
          Security	recommendation
          SLA	Penalties
          SLA	Penalty	Exclusions
          Suspension	of	Service
          Uptime	Guarantees
Acronyms:
      3DES					         	Triple	Advanced	Encryption	Standard
      AAA						         	Authentication,	Authorization,	And	Accounting
      AAFS					          	American	Academy	of	Forensic	Sciences

      ACL											       	Access	Control	List

      ACMP			 	Association	of	Change	Management	Professionals
      ACS							 	Access	Control	Server

      ADAM			 	Agent-based	Database	Activity	Monitoring

      AES							 	Advanced	Encryption	Standard
      AICPA					 	American	Institute	of	Certified	Public	Accounts
      ALO						   	Annualized	Loss	Expectancy
      ANSI					   	American	National	Standards	Institute

      AONT-RS			 	All-or-Nothing	Transform	with	Reed-Solomon
      APEC									     	Asia-Pacific	Economic	Cooperation
      API												 	Application	Programming	Interface

      ARO						         	Annualized	Rate	of	Occurrence

      ASHRAE	 	 American	 Society	 of	 Heating,	 Refrigeration,	 and	 Air
      Conditioning	Engineers

      ASP								 	Active	Server	Pages
      AWS										    	Amazon	Web	Services

      BCM						          	Business	Continuity	Management
      BCMS				            	Business	Continuity	Management	Systems

      BCP												     	Business	Continuity	Plan

      BCP							       	Business	Continuity	Plan

      BI															 	Business	Intelligence

      BICSI					        	Building	Industry	Consulting	Service	International	Inc.
BIOS					 	Basic	Input	Output	System
BOOTP	 	Bootstrap	Protocol

BOSS								 	Business	Operation	Support	Services

BPAs					     	Best	Practice	Analyzers
CaaS							 	Communication-as-a-Service
CC											   	Common	Criteria

CCM									 	Cloud	Controls	Matrix
CDN										     	Content	Delivery	Network

CentOS			         	Community	Enterprise	Operating	System
CI														 	Configuration	Item

CIP												   	Critical	Infrastructure	Protection

CIS								 	Center	for	Internet	Security

CISO								       	Chief	Information	Security	Officer

CM											 	Configuration	Management
CMDB							 	Configuration	Management	Database
CMI							 	Change	Management	Institute

CMMS							 	Cloud-based	Maintenance	Management	Systems

CMS									 	Configuration	Management	System

COBIT						 	Control	Objectives	for	Information	and	Related
Technologies
COBOL			        	Common	Business-Oriented	Language
COPPA						 	Children's	Online	Privacy	Protection	Act
CPR								 	Cloud	Provider	Responsibility

CPU						     	Central	Processing	Unit
CRM									 	Customer	Relationship	Management

CSA											   	Cloud	Security	Alliance
CSM									 	Cloud	Security	Models
CSO										      	Chief	Security	Officer
CSP										      	Cloud	Service	Provider

CSP								 	Cloud	Security	Professional

CSRF					     	Cross-Site	Request	Forgery
CTO										    	Chief	Technology	Officer

DaaS									      	Desktop	as	a	Service

DAM						          	Database	Activity	Monitoring
DAR										         	Data	at	Rest
DAST				            	Dynamic	Application	Security	Testing
DB															 	Database
DBMS									          	Database	Management	System
DDoS								 	Distributed	Denial	of	Service

DEFR								 	Digital	Evidence	First	Responder
DHCP							 	Dynamic	Hosting	Control	Protocol

DIM										       	Data	in	Motion
DIU												   	Data	in	Use
DLP										      	Data	Loss	Prevention

DML									 	Definitive	Media	Library
DMZ									 	Demilitarized	Zone
DNS										     	Domain	Name	System
DNSSEC			        	Domain	Name	System	Security
DO												  	Dynamic	Optimization

DoS											    	Denial	of	Service

DPM									 	Distributed	Power	Management

DR														 	Disaster	Recovery
DRM											      	Digital	Rights	Management
DRP											     	Disaster	Recovery	Planning

DRS										      	Distributed	Resource	Scheduling
DSaaS								        	Data	Storage	as	a	Service

ECHR					          	European	Convention	on	Human	Rights
ECPA						        	Electronic	Communications	Privacy	Act

EDRM								 	Enterprise	Digital	Right	Management

EEA								 	European	Economic	Area
EMP								 	Electro	Magnetic	Pulse
ENISA				     	European	Network	and	Information	Security	Agency

ER											       	Enterprise	Responsibility

ESI										     	Electronically	Stored	Information
EU										 	European	Union

FERPA							 	Family	Educational	Rights	and	Privacy
FIPS											 	Federal	Information	Processing	Standard

FTC								 	Federal	Trade	Commission

FTP											      	File	Transfer	Protocol

GAPP				           	Generally	Accepted	Privacy	Principles
GB													     	GigaBit

GCE											 	Google	Compute	Engine
GLBA									    	Gramm-Leach-Bliley	Act
GRC								 	Governance,	Risk,	and	Compliance

HA													    	High	Availability

HIPAA							 	Health	Insurance	Portability	and	Accountability	Act

HIPS										      	Host-based	intrusion	prevention	system

HSM												 	Hardware	Security	Module
HTML			 	Hypertext	Markup	Language
HTTP							 	Hypertext	Transfer	Protocol
HTTPS						 	Hypertext	Transfer	Protocol
HVAC								 	Heating,	ventilation,	and	air	conditioning
HVAC&R	 	 	          	 Heating,	 Ventilation,	 Air	 Conditioning	 and
Refrigeration

IaaS												 	Infrastructure	as	a	Service

IAASB			            	International	Auditing	and	Assurance	Standard	Board

IAM										        	Identity	and	Access	Management

IAQ												     	Indoor	air	quality

IDA												     	International	Development	Association

IDCA									         	International	Data	Center	Authority

IdM										        	Identity	Management

IDS								 	Intrusion	Detection	System

IEC											      	International	Electrotechnical	Commission

IEEE										       	Institute	of	Electrical	and	Electronics	Engineers
IETF										       	Internet	Engineering	Task	Force

ILM												     	Information	Life	cycle	Management

IM														 	Instant	Messaging
IoT									 	Internet	of	Things
IP											     	Internet	Protocol
IPS									 	Intrusion	Prevention	System

IPSec									       	Internet	Protocol	Security

IPSEC				          	Internet	Protocol	Security

IRM													 	Information	Rights	Management
ISACA						 	Information	Systems	Audit	and	Control	Association

ISAE						        	International	Standard	on	Assurance	Engagements
ISAM									        	Indexed	Sequential	Access	Method

ISE									 	Cisco	Identity	Services	Engine
ISMS										     	Information	Security	Management	System

ISO											     	International	Standard	Organization

IT															 	Information	Technology

ITOS									       	Information	Technology	Operation	&	Support

ITSM									        	Information	Technology	Service	Management

J2EE							 	Java	Platform,	Enterprise	Edition
JSON								 	JavaScript	Object	Notation
JSP									 	Java	Server	Pages
KMIP										      	Key	Management	Interoperability	Protocol
KMS												 	Key	Management	System

KPI								 	Key	Performance	Indicator
KVM					       	Kernel-based	Virtual	Machine
LAN							 	Local	Area	Network

LDAP					         	Lightweight	Directory	Access	Protocol

LED							       	Light-Emitting	Diode

LUN										        	Logical	Unit	Number

MDT						         	Microsoft	Deployment	Toolkit

MFA							       	Multi-Factor	Authentication

MSI								 	Management	and	Strategy	Institute
MTBF						 	Mean	Time	between	Failures
MTTR					     	Mean	Time	To	Repair
MVPC				       	Multi-Vendor	Pathway	Connectivity

NaaS										 	Network	as	a	Service
NDAM			 	Network-based	Database	Activity	Monitoring
NERC								 	North	American	Electric	Reliability	Corporation

NFPA					     	National	Fire	Protection	Association
NGFW			 	Next-generation	firewalls
NIC								 	Network	Interface	Card
NIPS						 	Network-based	intrusion	prevention	system

NIST												 	National	Institute	of	Standards	and	Technology

OLAs					        	Operational	Level	Agreements

ORM						       	Object-relational	Mapping
OS										 	Operating	System
OWASP					 	Open	Web	Application	Security	Project
P&DP									       	Privacy	and	Data	Protection
PaaS											 	Platform	as	a	Service
PCI	DSS					 	Payment	Card	Industry	Data	Security	Standard

PDAs					        	Personal	Digital	Assistants

PDU										       	Power	Distribution	Units

PEDs					        	Personal	Electronic	Devices

PHP						          	Hypertext	Preprocessor
PII															     	Personally	Identifiable	Information
PKI/PKO			 	Public	Key	Infrastructure/Operations

PRM						        	Partner	Relationship	Management
QoS						       	Quality	of	Service

RAID									    	Redundant	Array	of	Independent	Disks
RBAC								 	Role-Based	Access	Control
RDM									 	Raw	Device	Mapping

RDP						        	Remote	Desktop	Protocol

REST								 	Representational	State	Transfer

RFP							      	Request	for	proposal
RHEL			 	Red	Hat	Enterprise	Linux

RPO									 	Recovery	Point	Objective
RSL											    	Recovery	Service	Level
RSO								 	Reduced	sign-on
RTO											    	Recovery	Time	Objective
RTO										      	Recovery	Time	Objective
SaaS											 	Software	as	a	Service
SAML					       	Security	Assertion	Markup	Language
SAN										      	Storage	Area	Network

SAS									 	Statement	on	Auditing	Standards	(SAS)

SAST					      	Static	Application	Security	Testing
SCA												 	Stored	Communications	Act

SCCM				            	System	Center	Configuration	Manager
SCM						         	Software	Configuration	Management

SDLC								 	Software	Development	Life	cycle
SDN										     	Software-Defined	Networking

SEC									 	Securities	and	Exchange	Commission

SEM											      	Security	Event	Management

SI											      	Security	Intelligence

SIEM										      	Security	Information	and	Event	Management

SIM							      	Security	Information	Management

SLA												    	Service	Level	Agreement

SLE								 	Single	Loss	Expectancy
SLM							 	Service	Level	Management

SMTP								 	Simple	Mail	Transfer	Protocol
SOA						     	Service-oriented	architecture
SOAP							 	Simple	Object	Access	Protocol
SOX								 	Sarbanes-Oxley	Act
SP											  	Special	Publication

SQL									 	Structured	Query	Language
SR											     	Shared	Responsibility

SSAE						          	Statements	 on	Standards	for	Attestation	Engagements
(SSAE)

SSL												 	Secure	Socket	Layer
SSMS											 	Secret	Sharing	Made	Short
SSO								 	Single	sign-on
STRIDE	 	 	        	 Spoofing,	 Tampering,	 Repudiation,	 Information,
Disclosure,	and	Elevation

TCP							        	Transport	Control	Protocol

TLS									 	Transport	Layer	Security

TPM						          	Trusted	Platform	Module
UCM					            	Unified	Configuration	Management
UDP						          	User	Datagram	Protocol

UN													     	European	Union

USB								 	Universal	Serial	Bus
VCB							 	VMware	Consolidated	Backup
VDI								 	Virtual	Desktop	Infrastructure
VLAN				        	Virtual	Local	Area	Network

VM												       	Virtual	Machine
VMM										          	Virtual	Machine	Monitor

VMM					       	Virtual	Machine	Manager
VoIP							 	Voice	over	IP

VPN										         	Virtual	Private	Network
VPS												      	Virtual	Private	Storage

VUM						          	VMware	Update	Manager
WAF						     	Web	Application	Firewall
WORM					       	Write	Once	Read	Many
WS									 	Web	Services
WSDL				       	Web	Services	Description	Language

WSUS					    	Windows	Server	Update	Service

XML									 	Extensible	Markup	Language
XSS									 	Cross-Site	Scripting
XXE								 	XML	External	Entities
References:
Architectural	Concepts	&	Design	Requirements

         https://www.omicsonline.org/open-access/virtualization-in-cloud-
         computing-2165-7866-1000136.pdf
         https://www.researchgate.net/publication/234166321_Cloud_Computing-
         Storage_as_Service
         https://www.snia.org/sites/default/files/Hibbard_Best-Practices-for-
         Cloud-Security-and-Privacy_V2_Final_0.pdf
         https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/assets/research/security-
         guidance/security-guidance-v4-FINAL.pdf
         http://moriel.smarterthanthat.com/tips/java/java-user-input-validation/
         https://aerohive-www-cdn.aerohive.com/wp-
         content/uploads/Aerohive_Whitepaper_Cloud_Networking.pdf
         http://www.centurylink.com/asset/business/enterprise/brochure/cloud-
         database.pdf
         https://www.cio.com/article/2424886/cloud-computing/cloud-
         computing-definitions-and-solutions.html
         https://www.slideshare.net/biswajitcet13/cloud-computing-73291168
         http://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in/bitstream/10603/160088/8/08_chapter%202.pdf
         https://www.omg.org/cloud/deliverables/CSCC-Interoperability-and-
         Portability-for-Cloud-Computing-A-Guide.pdf
         http://www.di.fc.ul.pt/~nuno/PAPERS/security3.pdf
         https://www.sumologic.com/blog/cloud/cloud-computing-security-
         data-resiliency/
         https://searchmicroservices.techtarget.com/definition/cloud-service-
         governance
         https://digitalguardian.com/blog/what-cloud-encryption
         https://digitalguardian.com/blog/data-protection-data-in-transit-vs-
         data-at-rest
         https://www.ma.rhul.ac.uk/static/techrep/2014/RHUL-MA-2014-
         9.pdf
         https://www.stratoscale.com/blog/networking/security-cloud-
         networking-fw-acls/
         https://www.getkisi.com/blog/move-access-control-cloud-9-benefits-
         cloud-access-control-systems
         https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273950406_Security_Aspects_of_Virtual
         https://ws680.nist.gov/publication/get_pdf.cfm?pub_id=50819
         https://www.hack2secure.com/blogs/owasp-top-10-cloud-security-
         risk
         https://www.researchgate.net/publication/312166397_Data_recovery_and_business
         https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322321070_Cost_benefit_analysis_of_clo
         https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/55330412.pdf
Cloud	Data	Security

          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/the-official-
          isc2/978111920749/c02.xhtml

          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
          cloud/9781259835452/ch03.html#ch03
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/the-official-
          isc2/9781119207498/c02.xhtml
          https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FIPS_140-2
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-isc2-
          certified/9781119277415/c04.xhtml
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
          cloud/9781259835452/ch03.html#ch03
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/the-official-
          isc2/9781119207498/c02.xhtml
          https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/assets/research/security-
          guidance/security-guidance-v4-FINAL.pdf
          https://research.cloudsecurityalliance.org/tci/index.php/explore/
          https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/working-groups/Cloud-controls-
          matrix/#_overview
          https://quizlet.com/299810273/ccsk-domain-01-cloud-computing-
          concepts-and-architectures-flash-cards/
          https://www.iso.org/standard/43757.html
          https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/initiatives/collaborate/safecode/SAFEC
          CSA-cloud-White-Paper.pdf
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/the-official-
          isc2/9781119207498/c02.xhtml
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
          cloud/9781259835452/ch03.html#ch03
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/the-official-
          isc2/9781119207498/c02.xhtml
          https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FIPS_140-2
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-isc2-
certified/9781119277415/c04.xhtml
https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
cloud/9781259835452/ch03.html#ch03
https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/assets/research/security-
guidance/security-guidance-v4-FINAL.pdf
https://research.cloudsecurityalliance.org/tci/index.php/explore/
https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/working-groups/cloud-controls-
matrix/#_overview
https://quizlet.com/299810273/ccsk-domain-01-cloud-computing-
concepts-and-architectures-flash-cards/
https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/the-official-
isc2/9781119207498/c02.xhtml
https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
cloud/9781259835452/ch03.html#ch03
https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/the-official-
isc2/9781119207498/c02.xhtml
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FIPS_140-2
https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-isc2-
certified/9781119277415/c04.xhtml
https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
cloud/9781259835452/ch03.html#ch03
https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/the-official-
isc2/9781119207498/c02.xhtml
https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/assets/research/security-
guidance/security-guidance-v4-FINAL.pdf
https://research.cloudsecurityalliance.org/tci/index.php/explore/
https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/working-groups/cloud-controls-
matrix/#_overview
https://quizlet.com/299810273/ccsk-domain-01-cloud-computing-
concepts-and-architectures-flash-cards/
https://www.iso.org/standard/43757.html
https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/wp-uploads/2011/09/Domain-5.docx
https://www.bmc.com/blogs/saas-vs-paas-vs-iaas-whats-the-
difference-and-how-to-choose/
https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
cloud/9781259835452/ch03.html#ch03
https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/initiatives/collaborate/safecode/SAFEC
CSA-cloud-White-Paper.pdf
https://cromwell-intl.com/cybersecurity/isc2-ccsp/standards-and-
          regulations.html
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
          cloud/9781259835452/ch03.html#ch03

Cloud	Platform	&	Infrastructure	Security

          https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/assets/research/security-
          guidance/csaguide.v3.0.pdf
          https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/assets/research/security-
          guidance/security-guidance-v4-FINAL.pdf
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
          cloud/9781259835452/ch04.html
          https://www.vmware.com/topics/glossary/content/cloud-computing-
          infrastructure
          https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/assets/research/security-
          guidance/security-guidance-v4-FINAL.pdf
          https://www.pingidentity.com/en/resources/client-
          library/articles/authentication-authorization-audit-logging-account-
          management.html

Cloud	Application	Security

          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
          cloud/9781259835452/ch05.html#ch05
          https://dzone.com/articles/what-is-insecure-deserialization
          https://www.symantec.com/content/dam/symantec/docs/other-
          resources/web-application-firewall-owasp-top-10-2017-coverage-
          en.pdf
          https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Category:OWASP_Top_Ten_Project
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
          cloud/9781259835452/ch05.html#ch05
          https://www.apriorit.com/dev-blog/548-cloud-based-testing
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
          cloud/9781259835452/ch05.html#ch05
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-isc2-
          certified/9781119277415/c07.xhtml
          https://www.uacg.bg/filebank/acadstaff/userfiles/publ_bg_397_SDP_activities_and
          https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
          cloud/9781259835452/ch05.html#ch05
         https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
         cloud/9781259835452/ch05.html#ch05
         http://www.softwaretestingandistqb.com/what-is-a-business-
         requirement/
         https://www.owasp.org/index.php/SQL_Injection
         https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Buffer_Overflow
         https://www.whizlabs.com/blog/cloud-security-risks/
         https://www.whizlabs.com/blog/cloud-security-for-beginners/
         https://www.sei.cmu.edu/research-capabilities/all-work/display.cfm?
         customel_datapageid_4050=21232
         https://www.whizlabs.com/blog/cloud-security-for-beginners/
         https://www.safaribooksonline.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
         cloud/9781259835452/ch05.html#ch05
         https://study.com/academy/lesson/stride-threat-model-example-
         overview.html
         https://dzone.com/articles/is-the-stride-approach-still-relevant-for-
         threat-m
         https://www.safaribooksonline.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
         cloud/9781259835452/ch05.html#ch05
         https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/ddos/glossary/web-application-
         firewall-waf/
         https://www.techopedia.com/definition/30937/database-activity-
         monitoring-dam
         https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML_firewall
         https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/SS9H2Y_7.5.0/com.ibm.dp.doc
         https://www.nginx.com/learn/api-gateway/
         https://www.computer.org/csdl/mags/pc/2010/04/mpc2010040013.pdf
         https://hackernoon.com/federated-identities-a-developers-primer-
         655a160d66cb
         https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federated_identity#cite_note-2

Operations

         https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dike_(geology)
         https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Request_for_proposal
         https://www.idc-a.org/
         https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HVAC
         https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_comfort
         https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indoor_air_quality
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_engineering
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermodynamics
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluid_mechanics
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heat_transfer
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASHRAE
https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/resource/trusted-platform-module-
tpm-summary/
https://searchservervirtualization.techtarget.com/tip/Using-VMware-
Distributed-Power-Management
http://techgenix.com/windows-server-nic-teaming/
https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/virtualization/what-is-KVM#
https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/assets/research/collaborative/Security-
Considerations-for-Private-vs-Public-Clouds.pdf
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_machine
https://www.paloaltonetworks.com/products/secure-the-cloud/vm-
series
https://www.ubuntu.com/
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CentOS
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_Hat_Enterprise_Linux
https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/Common-Criteria-CC-for-
Information-Technology-Security-Evaluation
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Light-emitting_diode
http://ijettjournal.org/2015/volume-25/number-4/IJETT-V25P232.pdf
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-
server/networking/technologies/dhcp/dhcp-top
https://www.techopedia.com/definition/31693/dynamic-host-
configuration-protocol-server-dhcp-server
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-
server/networking/technologies/dhcp/dhcp-top
https://blog.cloudsecurityalliance.org/2016/03/31/four-security-
solutions-not-stopping-third-party-data-breaches/
https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/initiatives/secaas/SecaaS_Cat_10_Netw
https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/08/Encryption-SecaaS-Peer-Review-cat8.docx
https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/star/self-
assessment/Hyland-Hyland-Cloud-CCM-3.0.1-2017-10-02.pdf
https://www.techopedia.com/definition/27485/cluster-host
https://searchvmware.techtarget.com/definition/Storage-Distributed-
Resource-Scheduler-DRS
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/system-center/vmm/vm-
optimization?view=sc-vmm-1807
https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/clustered-storage
https://pubs.vmware.com/vsphere-50/index.jsp?
topic=%2Fcom.vmware.vsphere.solutions.doc_50%2FGUID-
68DE940C-C2DC-47D3-B660-D3BA5A8B5A75.html
https://searchdisasterrecovery.techtarget.com/definition/high-
availability-cluster-HA-cluster
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/system-center/vmm/overview?
view=sc-vmm-1807
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backplane
https://searchnetworking.techtarget.com/tip/Cloud-based-remote-
access-Scenarios-for-success
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telecommuting
https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/assets/research/sdp/sdp_for_iaas.pdf
https://searchvirtualdesktop.techtarget.com/definition/desktop-as-a-
service-DaaS
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-
40r3.pdf
https://www.varonis.com/blog/ids-vs-ips/
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intrusion_detection_system
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Honeypot_(computing)
https://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/definition/vulnerability-
assessment-vulnerability-analysis
https://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/definition/security-information-
and-event-management-SIEM
https://searchitoperations.techtarget.com/definition/log-management
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_CIS_Critical_Security_Controls_for_Effective_C
https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/security-intelligence-SI
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X17321519
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1574013718301187
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orchestration_(computing)
https://searchitoperations.techtarget.com/definition/cloud-orchestrator
https://searchservervirtualization.techtarget.com/definition/guest-OS
https://searchdisasterrecovery.techtarget.com/definition/disaster-
recovery-plan
https://searchdisasterrecovery.techtarget.com/definition/business-
continuity-action-plan
https://searchitoperations.techtarget.com/definition/configuration-
management-CM
https://www.techopedia.com/definition/4436/configuration-item-ci
https://searchenterprisedesktop.techtarget.com/definition/Remote-
Desktop-Protocol-RDP
https://searchnetworking.techtarget.com/definition/extranet
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Change_management_(engineering)
https://searchitchannel.techtarget.com/definition/release-management
https://wiki.en.it-
processmaps.com/index.php/Availability_Management
https://searchenterprisedesktop.techtarget.com/definition/patch-
management
https://searchcloudcomputing.techtarget.com/tip/Cloud-performance-
monitoring-tools-have-evolved-but-are-still-lacking
https://searchcio.techtarget.com/definition/change-management
https://searchcio.techtarget.com/definition/business-continuity-
management-BCM
https://searchdisasterrecovery.techtarget.com/definition/ISO-22301-
International-Organization-of-Standardization-standard-22301
https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/information-security-
management-system-ISMS
https://searchitoperations.techtarget.com/definition/continual-service-
improvement
https://searchcio.techtarget.com/definition/ISO-20000
https://searchitoperations.techtarget.com/definition/IT-incident-
management
https://searchwindowsserver.techtarget.com/definition/problem-
management
https://wiki.en.it-
processmaps.com/index.php/Release_and_Deployment_Management
https://searchitoperations.techtarget.com/definition/configuration-
management-CM
https://searchdatacenter.techtarget.com/definition/configuration-
management-database
https://www.helpsystems.com/solutions/it-operations-management-
automation/service-delivery-itil-version-2/service-level-management
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capacity_management
https://www.skillmaker.edu.au/risk-monitoring/
https://www.iso.org/standard/44381.html
         https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283226153_Standard_ISO_270372012_a
         https://rm.coe.int/16806b3058
         https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_forensic_process
         https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/initiatives/imf/Mapping-
         the-Forensic-Standard-ISO-IEC-27037-to-Cloud-Computing.pdf
         https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/Communications-as-a-
         Service-CaaS
         https://searchcrm.techtarget.com/definition/CRM
         https://searchsalesforce.techtarget.com/definition/partner-
         relationship-management-PRM
Legal	&	Compliance

         https://www.zdnet.com/article/cloudflare-how-we-got-caught-in-
         lulzsec-cia-crossfire/
         https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/1149373/in-re-matter-of-
         warrant.pdf
         https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/
         https://www.exterro.com/basics-of-e-discovery/
         https://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=ff831b36-35a7-
         49a5-8e9e-6773a7bf455c
         http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/inalienable-rights.html
         https://searchcompliance.techtarget.com/definition/FTC-Federal-
         Trade-Commission
         https://www.gov.uk/eu-eea
         https://searchcompliance.techtarget.com/definition/Electronic-
         Communications-Privacy-Act-ECPA
         https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en/what-european-convention-
         human-rights
         https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/federated-cloud-cloud-
         federation
         https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/ccsp-certified-
         cloud/9781259835452/ch07.html#ch07
         https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/Confidentiality-integrity-and-
         availability-CIA#
         https://searchcio.techtarget.com/definition/data-privacy-information-
         privacy
         http://www.differencebetween.net/technology/internet/difference-
         between-security-and-privacy/
         https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/auditing-cloud-
computing/9781118116043/chapter02.html
https://www.cio.com/article/3217751/data-management/three-lines-
of-defense-for-data-management.html
https://www.ixiacom.com/products/cloudlens-public
https://www.vmware.com/topics/glossary/content/hypervisor
https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/MTBF-mean-time-between-
failures
https://searchstorage.techtarget.com/definition/mean-time-to-repair-
MTTR
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mean_time_to_recovery
https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/information-security-
management-system-ISMS
https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/ISO-27001
https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso-iec:27001:ed-2:v1:en
https://pmstudycircle.com/2012/06/identify-stakeholders-project-
management/
http://mechanisms.energychange.info/step/5
http://chrguibert.free.fr/cmmi12/cmmi-dev/text/7938cba-6059.php
https://searchcloudsecurity.techtarget.com/tip/How-do-SLAs-factor-
into-cloud-risk-management
https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:31000:ed-2:v1:en
https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:31000:ed-1:v1:en
https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/initiatives/secaas/SecaaS_Cat_2_DLP_
http://www.iso27001security.com/html/27036.html
About	Our	Products
Other	 Network	 and	 Security	 related	 products	 from	 IPSpecialist	 LTD
are:
         CEHv10	2nd	Edition	Technology	Workbook

         CCNA	Security	2nd	Edition	Technology	Workbook

         Certified	BlockChain	Expert	(CBEv2)	Technology	Workbook

         CCNA-CyberOps	SECFND	Technology	Workbook

         CompTIA	Network	+	Technology	Workbook

         CompTIA	Securitty	+	2nd	Edition	Technology	Workbook

         Certified	Information	System	Security	Professional	(CISSP)		Technology	Workbook

         CCNA	Routing	and	Switching	Technology	Workbook

         CCDA	Technology	Workbook

         CCDP	Technology	Workbook

         CCNP	Routing	and	Switching	-	Route	Technology	Workbook

         CCNP		Routing	and	Switching	-	Switch	Technology	Workbook

         CCNP	Routing	and	Switching		-	Troubleshoot	Technology	Workbook

         CCNP	Security	-	SENSS			Technology	Workbook

         CCNP	Security	-	SITCS			Technology	Workbook

         CCNP	Security	-	SIMOS			Technology	Workbook

         CCNP	Security	-	SITCS			Technology	Workboo	k




Upcoming	products	from	IPSpecialist	LTD	are:
       CEHv10	3rd	Edition	Technology	Workbook
CompTIA	A+	220-1001	Technology	Workbook

CompTIA	A+	220-1002	Technology	Workbook

CompTIA	Cloud	Essential	Technology	Workbook

CompTIA	Pentest+	Technology	Workbook
Note	from	the	Author:
Reviews	 are	 gold	 to	 authors!	 If	 you	 have	 enjoyed	 this	 book	 and	 helped	 you
along	certification,	would	you	consider	rating	it	and	reviewing	it?

Link	to	Product	Page	:
