                                                 Data Analytics for Cybersecurity

                 As the world becomes increasingly connected, it is also more exposed to a myriad of
                 cyber threats. We need to use multiple types of tools and techniques to learn and
                 understand the evolving threat landscape. Data are a common thread linking various
                 types of devices and end users. Analyzing data across different segments of
                 cybersecurity domains, particularly data generated during cyber–attacks, can help us
                 understand threats better, prevent future cyber–attacks, and provide insights into the
                 evolving cyber threat landscape. This book takes a data oriented approach to studying
                 cyber threats, showing in depth how traditional methods such as anomaly detection can
                 be extended using data analytics, and also applies data analytics to non–traditional
                 views of cybersecurity, such as multi domain analysis, time series and spatial data
                 analysis, and human-centered cybersecurity.

                 v a n d a n a p . j a n e j a is Professor and Chair of the Information Systems department
                 at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County. Most recently, she also served as an
                 expert at the National Science Foundation supporting data science activities in the
                 Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE)
                 (2018–2021). Her research interests include discovering knowledge in presence of data
                 heterogeneity. Her research projects include anomaly detection in network
                 communication data, human behavior analytics in heterogeneous device environments,
                 geospatial context for IP reputation scoring, spatiotemporal analysis across
                 heterogeneous data, and ethical thinking in data science. She has been funded through
                 state, federal, and private organizations.




Published online by Cambridge University Press
Published online by Cambridge University Press
                              Data Analytics for Cybersecurity

                                          VANDANA P. JANEJA
                               University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC)




Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
                                    One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
                                  477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
                                314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,
                                                   New Delhi – 110025, India
                            103 Penang Road, #05-06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467

                                Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
                        It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
                        education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.

                                                         www.cambridge.org
                                   Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108415279
                                                  DOI: 10.1017/9781108231954
                                                     © Vandana P. Janeja 2022
                                  This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
                                 and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
                                  no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
                                            permission of Cambridge University Press.
                                                       First published 2022
                          A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
                                                 ISBN 978-1-108-41527-9 Hardback

                        Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
                       of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication
                          and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
                                                    accurate or appropriate.




Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                 Contents




                         Preface                                                    page ix
                         Acknowledgment                                                 xii

                 1       Introduction: Data Analytics for Cybersecurity                  1
                         1.1 What Is Cybersecurity?                                      1
                               1.1.1 Assets Affected                                     2
                               1.1.2 Motivation, Risks, and Attaining Security           4
                         1.2 Handling Cyberattacks                                       6
                               1.2.1 Subareas of Cybersecurity                           6
                         1.3 Data Analytics                                              8
                               1.3.1 Why Is Data Analytics Important
                                     for Cybersecurity? A Case Study of Understanding
                                     the Anatomy of an Attack                            9
                               1.3.2 How Can Data Analytics Help?                       12
                 2       Understanding Sources of Cybersecurity Data                    14
                         2.1 End-to-End Opportunities for Data Collection               14
                         2.2 Sources of Cybersecurity Data                              16
                              2.2.1 Log Data                                            17
                              2.2.2 Raw Payload Data                                    20
                              2.2.3 Network Topology Data                               21
                              2.2.4 User System Data                                    23
                              2.2.5 Other Datasets                                      24
                         2.3 Integrated Use of Multiple Datasets                        26
                         2.4 Summary of Sources of Cybersecurity Data                   27




                                                      v


Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  vi                                 Contents


                  3       Introduction to Data Mining: Clustering, Classiﬁcation,
                          and Association Rule Mining                                 29
                          3.1 Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining Process Models      29
                          3.2 Data Preprocessing                                      31
                                3.2.1 Data Cleaning                                   33
                                3.2.2 Data Transformation and Integration             34
                                3.2.3 Data Reduction                                  35
                          3.3 Data Mining                                             36
                                3.3.1 Measures of Similarity                          37
                                3.3.2 Measures of Evaluation                          40
                                3.3.3 Clustering Algorithms                           42
                                3.3.4 Classiﬁcation                                   49
                                3.3.5 Pattern Mining: Association Rule Mining         55
                  4       Big Data Analytics and Its Need
                          for Cybersecurity: Advanced DM and Complex Data Types
                          from Cybersecurity Perspective                              60
                          4.1 What Is Big Data?                                       60
                          4.2 Big Data in Cybersecurity                               61
                          4.3 Landscape of Big Data Technologies                      63
                          4.4 Mahout and Spark Comparative Analysis                   64
                          4.5 Complex Nature of Data                                  66
                                4.5.1 Nature of Data: Spatial Data                    67
                                4.5.2 Nature of Data: Graph Data                      69
                                4.5.3 Nature of Data: Other Types of Complex Data     69
                          4.6 Where Does Analytics Fit in for Cybersecurity?          70
                                4.6.1 Change Detection in Massive Trafﬁc Datasets     70
                                4.6.2 Multipronged Attacks                            73
                          4.7 Privacy and Security Issues in Big Data                 75
                  5       Types of Cyberattacks                                       78
                          5.1 Types of Attacks                                        78
                          5.2 Example: Social Engineering                             80
                                5.2.1 Computational Data Model for Social
                                      Engineering                                     81
                          5.3 Example: Advanced Persistent Threat                     84
                                5.3.1 Attributes of APTs                              85
                                5.3.2 Data Analytics Methods for Persistent Threats   88
                  6       Anomaly Detection for Cybersecurity                         91
                          6.1 What Are Anomalies?                                     91
                          6.2 Context                                                 93




Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Contents                   vii


                         6.3       Motivating Example: BGP Hijacking              95
                         6.4       Challenges in Understanding Anomalies          96
                         6.5       Interpretation                                 98
                         6.6       Treating Anomalies                             99
                 7       Anomaly Detection Methods                               101
                         7.1 Statistical Outlier Detection Tests                 102
                             7.1.1 Discordancy Tests                             103
                             7.1.2 IQR-Based Outlier Detection                   104
                         7.2 Density-Based Outlier Detection:
                             OPTICS-OF Identifying Local
                             Outliers                                            105
                         7.3 Distance-Based Outlier Detection                    108
                         7.4 Outlier Detection through Clustering                110
                 8       Cybersecurity through Time Series and
                         Spatial Data                                            112
                         8.1 Spatial and Temporal Data                           112
                               8.1.1 Spatial Data                                112
                               8.1.2 Spatial Autocorrelation                     113
                               8.1.3 Spatial Heterogeneity                       113
                               8.1.4 Temporal Data                               115
                               8.1.5 Temporal Autocorrelation                    115
                               8.1.6 Temporal Heterogeneity                      116
                         8.2 Some Key Methods for Anomaly Detection in Spatial
                               and Temporal Data                                 116
                               8.2.1 Spatial Anomaly Detection                   117
                               8.2.2 Spatial Outlier Detection                   117
                               8.2.3 Spatial Neighborhood                        119
                               8.2.4 Temporal Anomaly Detection                  121
                               8.2.5 Temporal Neighborhoods                      122
                         8.3 Cybersecurity through Spatiotemporal
                               Analysis                                          123
                               8.3.1 Spatial Anomalies in Cybersecurity          123
                               8.3.2 Neighborhood-Based Anomalies                124
                               8.3.3 Spatio temporally Clustered
                                      Anomalies                                  125
                               8.3.4 Insights through Geo-Origination
                                      of IP Addresses                            126
                         8.4 Temporal Behaviors in Evolving Networks             127




Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  viii                              Contents


                  9       Cybersecurity through Network and Graph Data              128
                          9.1 Graph Properties                                      130
                          9.2 Graphs for Cybersecurity: Understanding Evolving
                               Network Communication                                133
                          9.3 Graphs for Cybersecurity: Similarity-Based
                               Redundancy in Router Connectivity                    134
                  10      Human-Centered Data Analytics for Cybersecurity           137
                          10.1 Human Perspective to Cybersecurity: Phishing         138
                          10.2 Human Perspective to Cybersecurity: Insider Threat   140
                          10.3 User/Employee Viewpoint                              142
                          10.4 Attacker Viewpoint: Anomaly Detection Methods        144
                  11      Future Directions in Data Analytics for Cybersecurity     147
                          11.1 Data Analytics in Cyberphysical Systems              147
                                11.1.1 Cyberphysical Systems                        147
                                11.1.2 Internet-of-Things (IoT)                     149
                          11.2 Multidomain Mining                                   151
                                11.2.1 Integrating Multiple Heterogeneous Data      151
                                11.2.2 Integrated Alerts from Multiple Sources      154
                          11.3 Advanced Machine Learning Models                     157
                                11.3.1 Deep Learning                                157
                                11.3.2 Generative Adversarial Networks              159
                                11.3.3 Model Reuse                                  161
                          11.4 Ethical Thinking in the Data Analytics Process       163

                          References                                                165
                          Index                                                     189




Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              Preface




                 Cybersecurity is a pervasive need in our connected world to counter threats
                 affecting individuals, organizations, and governments. The acceptance and
                 adoption of technology on multiple types of nontraditional devices force
                 cybersecurity solutions to address challenges emerging in the areas of not only
                 computer networks but also sensor networks, industrial control systems, and
                 user devices. Data are the common thread across all these types of devices and
                 end users, especially data generated during cyberattacks. Increasingly, the
                 focus of cybersecurity is shifting to analyzing data in not only a retrospective
                 manner but also a prospective manner across different cybersecurity domains.
                 This data-driven understanding of attacks can potentially prevent future cyber-
                 attacks and provide insights into the evolving cyber threats.
                    Data analytics pushes beyond the traditional themes of security to seam-
                 lessly weave the analysis of threats across several applications. This book
                 applies data analytics concepts and techniques to the domain of cybersecurity,
                 discusses methods to evaluate data sources in cyberattacks, and provides
                 insights into data mining methods that can be utilized for cybersecurity.
                 Finally, this book also looks at nontraditional views of data analytics for
                 cybersecurity in time series and spatial data, discussing the need and applica-
                 tion of big data analytics and offering a human-centered analytics perspective
                 to cybersecurity.
                    Although there are several books on network security, information assur-
                 ance, and forensics and other books on data mining, there is a need to address
                 both cybersecurity and data analytics in a synergistic manner. In addition,
                 I have developed a graduate and undergraduate course on data analytics for
                 cybersecurity. I taught this course for several semesters without a textbook.
                 While developing this course, I reviewed several very good books. However,
                 there was a gap in the material available for the data analytics perspective of
                 cybersecurity in depth. This motivated me to write a book that looks at the

                                                                    ix


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  x                                              Preface


                  different domains affected by cyberattacks, spanning computer networks,
                  industrial control systems, sensor networks, drones, and other connected
                  devices. Data analytics provides a window of learning into such systems by
                  looking at the massive amounts of data being generated that may go untapped.
                  For instance, this book addresses the human-centered perspective to cyberat-
                  tacks, and it addresses the multiple facets of data analytics for cybersecurity,
                  such as anomaly detection across spatial and temporal data.
                     I expect the book will be primarily useful for teaching graduate and under-
                  graduate cybersecurity courses that take a data analytics perspective. It should
                  also be relevant for the industry and government as it discusses the potential
                  avenues of understanding and discovering cyberattacks and additional know-
                  ledge about them to better inform future decision-making.
                     The need for data analytics is also evident from Information Assurance
                  requirements such as those stated in federal frameworks1,2 and security direct-
                  ives for Information Assurance Training, Certiﬁcation, and Workforce
                  Management,3 where various technical cybersecurity positions and their func-
                  tions are outlined in detail. For instance, the Computer Network Defense
                  (CND) Service Provider Incident Responder (IR) position has functions such
                  as (CND-IR.2) – collect, analyze, intrusion artifacts – and (CND-IR.7) –
                  correlate incident data and perform CND trend analysis. Similarly, the CND-
                  Analyst (A) position has functions such as (CND-A.4) – perform analysis of
                  log ﬁles – (CND-A.5) – characterize and analyze network trafﬁc to identify
                  anomalous activity and potential threats to network resources – and (CND-
                  A.8.) – perform event correlation. These and many other security functions,
                  such as forensics, threat hunting, and such clearly indicate the need to incorp-
                  orate an analytics perspective to cybersecurity.



                                                What Does the Book Cover?
                  The book spans from introductory concepts of cybersecurity, foundations of
                  data analytics, and applications of data analytics concepts to cybersecurity
                  applications.


                  1
                      Workforce Framework for Cybersecurity(NICE Framework), NIST Special Publication 800-
                      181 Revision 1, https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-181r1.pdf,
                      Last Accessed May 2021
                  2
                      Workforce Framework for Cybersecurity (NICE Framework), https://niccs.cisa.gov/
                      workforce-development/cyber-security-workforce-framework , Last Accessed May 2021
                  3
                      Information Assurance Workforce Improvement Program, DoD 8570.01-M www.esd.whs.mil/
                      Portals/54/Documents/DD/issuances/dodm/857001m.pdf; 8140.01 reissues and renumbers
                      DoDD 8570.01, Last Accessed May 2021




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                 Preface                       xi


                    Chapter 1 introduces the basic concepts of cybersecurity and the data
                 analytics perspective to cybersecurity. It lays out the areas of study and how
                 data analytics should be a key part of the spectrum of cybersecurity solutions.
                    Chapter 2 focuses on understanding sources of cybersecurity data and the
                 end-to-end opportunities for data collection. It goes onto discuss the sources of
                 cybersecurity data and how multiple datasets can be leveraged in understand-
                 ing cyber threats.
                    Chapter 3 gets into the techniques of data analytics focusing on the three
                 pillars of data mining, namely clustering, classiﬁcation, and association rule
                 mining, and how each can be used for cybersecurity. This chapter can be seen
                 as a crash course in data mining. It begins with an understanding of the overall
                 knowledge discovery and data mining process models and follows the elem-
                 ents of the data life cycle. This chapter outlines foundational elements such as
                 measures of similarity and of evaluation. It outlines the landscape of various
                 algorithms in clustering and classiﬁcation and frequent and rare patterns.
                    Chapter 4 focuses on the big data elements of cybersecurity, looking at the
                 landscape of the big data technologies and the complexities of the different
                 types of data, including spatial and graph data. It outlines examples in these
                 complex data types and how they can be evaluated using data analytics.
                 Chapter 5 highlights the various types of cyberattacks and how data analytics
                 methods can potentially be used to analyze these attacks.
                    Chapter 6 and 7 holistically focus on anomaly detection. Chapter 6 focuses
                 on what anomalies are and more speciﬁcally what anomalies are in the
                 cybersecurity domain, and what some of the features of anomalies are.
                 Chapter 7, on the other hand, focuses on techniques of detecting anomalies
                 starting with some of the basic statistical techniques, going into data
                 analytics techniques.
                    While Chapter 4 introduces the complex types of data, Chapter 8 delves into
                 the speciﬁcs of spatial and temporal analytics with topics such as spatial
                 neighborhood and temporal evolution of large amounts of network trafﬁc data.
                 Chapter 9 extends the ideas of complex data by looking into cybersecurity
                 through network and graph data. Chapter 10 brings in the human-centered data
                 analytics perspective to cybersecurity. Finally, Chapter 11 discusses several
                 key directions, such as data analytics in cyberphysical systems, multidomain
                 mining, machine Learning concepts such as deep Learning, generative adver-
                 sarial networks, and challenges of model reuse. Last but not the least, the
                 chapter closes with thoughts on ethical thinking in the data analytics process.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                 Acknowledgments




                  The views expressed in this book are my own and do not reﬂect those of the
                  organizations I am afﬁliated with.
                     I want to thank Carole Sargent, who planted the seed for this book and
                  helped me learn the ropes of the process. Many thanks to my editor at
                  Cambridge University Press, Lauren Cowles, and the Cambridge University
                  Press team, Amy He, Adam Kratoska, Johnathan Fuentes, Rebecca Grainger,
                  Andy Saff, and Neena S. Maheen, who were patient with the many deadlines
                  and generous in their time reviewing the book and its many facets. Many
                  thanks to the reviewers of this book who helped improve it with their
                  detailed feedback.
                     The work in this book is built on the foundation of my work with many of
                  my students, and the many conversations with them have inspired the writing
                  of this book. I would like to thank my PhD advisees, Josephine Namayanja,
                  Chhaya Kulkarni, Sara Khanjani, Ira Winkler, Faisal Quader, Mohammad
                  Alodadi, Ali Azari , Yanan Sun, Lei Shi, and Mike McGuire; my master’s
                  advisees, Henanksha Sainani, Prathamesh Walkikar, Suraksha Shukla,
                  Vasundhara Misal, Anuja Kench, Akshay Grover, Jay Gholap, Javad Zabihi,
                  Kundala Das, Prerna Mohod, Abdulrahman Alothaim, and Revathi
                  Palanisamy; my graduate students who worked on research projects with me,
                  Yuanyuan Feng, Ruman Tambe, Song Chen, Sandipan Dey, Tania Lobo,
                  Monish Advani, Ahmed Aleroud, Abu Zaher Md Faridee, Sai Pallaprolu,
                  and Justin Stauffer; and my undergraduate research students, Gabrielle
                  Watson, Olisaemeka Okolo, Aminat Alabi, Mackenzie Harwood, Adrian
                  Reyes, Jarrett Early, Alfonso Delayney, David Lewis, and Brian Lewis.
                     My thought process and contributions are also framed by work with
                  advisors, collaborators, colleagues, and industry afﬁliates who have contrib-
                  uted to my research and thinking in the area of security and data analytics,
                  including Lucy Erickson, Carolyn Seaman, Aryya Gangopadhyay, Anupam

                                                       xii


Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                 Acknowledgments                               xiii


                 Joshi, Susan Sterrett, Krishnan Chellakarai, Yatish Joshi, and Raghu
                 Chintalapati. I also want to thank my advisors and mentors: Vijay Atluri,
                 Nabil Adam, Jaideep Vaidya, Erwin Gianchandani, Keith Bowman, Philip
                 Rous, Patrice McDermott, Erin Lavik, and Chaitan Baru. This work is also
                 built through the support of Dr. Freeman A. Hrabowski III, who has always
                 been generous with his time as my mentor.
                    Last but not the least, my heartfelt thanks go to my biggest allies and pillars
                 of support: Neelu, Suhasini, Harish, Deiptii, Nisha, Viraj, and Mukul, and my
                 single most avid cheerleader, Vihan, who kept encouraging me with timeline
                 prompts to complete this book.




Published online by Cambridge University Press
Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                    1
                                                        Introduction
                                      Data Analytics for Cybersecurity




                                             1.1 What Is Cybersecurity?
                 Cybersecurity refers to securing valuable electronic assets and physical assets,
                 which have electronic access, against unauthorized access. These assets may
                 include personal devices, networked devices, information assets, and infra-
                 structural assets, among others.
                    Cybersecurity deals with security against threats also referred to as cyber
                 threats or cyberattacks. Cyberattacks are the mechanism by which security is
                 breached to gain access to assets of value.
                    The ﬁrst aim of cybersecurity is prevention of cyberattacks against critical
                 assets. The second aim of cybersecurity is detection of threats. The third aim is
                 to respond to threats in the event that they penetrate access to critical assets,
                 and, ﬁnally, the fourth aim is to recover and restore the normal state of the
                 system in the event that an attack is successful. Cybersecurity is achieved by
                 addressing each of these three aspects to prevent, detect, and respond to threats
                 against critical assets. Essentially, it deals with securing everything that is in
                 cyberspace so these assets of value are not tampered with.
                    What really are these assets? Are they the data on a hard drive, a contact
                 list on a cell phone, an Excel sheet with sales numbers, or a program to switch
                 on a device?
                    It is all of these and more. With the ever-increasing use of electronics for
                 every possible function of life, cybersecurity is becoming a pervasive problem
                 permeating every individual’s life. If you look around yourself, there are
                 several electronic devices that you may see or use, and each electronic device
                 may in turn be connected to another device physically or virtually. This
                 connectivity enables us to access additional functionalities on the device.

                                                                     1


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  2                    Introduction: Data Analytics for Cybersecurity


                  However, this also makes the device vulnerable since it has external connect-
                  ivity and access is fragmented through multiple external applications.
                     Now the obvious question is, does cybersecurity apply to connected devices
                  only? Although a big part of cybersecurity is a result of the high level of
                  connectivity, it also includes threats resulting from compromised physical
                  security. For instance, a highly secure desktop in a secure room, which is
                  not accessible via the traditional internet but only through a biometric authen-
                  tication or a card swipe, is also at risk. An unauthorized access to the secure
                  room poses a cybersecurity threat due to the electronic assets at risk and
                  potential risk to the systems providing access to the room. This is primarily
                  because some form of connectivity is always possible in this highly connected
                  world. Another example is that of an insider threat where an authorized user
                  accesses materials with a malicious intent.



                                                      1.1.1 Assets Affected
                  Cybersecurity is a major challenge due to the potential of damage. An empty
                  hard drive that is stolen is a theft, but a hard drive with data accessed in an
                  unauthorized manner poses a much bigger threat due to the value of the
                  information stored on it. A sensor controlling a chemical ﬂow into a vat that
                  breaks down accidentally may lead to a hazmat accident, but an authorized
                  access leading to tampering of the program controlling the sensor is a cyber-
                  security risk. This is because the intent and extent of the tampering are
                  uncontrolled and may be much more catastrophic than a sensor breakdown.
                  Thus, cybersecurity aims to prevent unauthorized access to electronic assets
                  and physical assets with electronic access.
                     Let us look at some types of assets – personal, public, and corporate – that
                  can be impacted by cybersecurity risks, summarized in Figure 1.1. We are now
                  referring to the electronic access to physical assets or electronic assets. This list
                  is a small sample of such assets in the highly connected world that we live in.
                  These include the following.
                  • Personal assets (mostly used for personal needs): Phones (home and
                    mobile), tablets, personal computers (desktop and laptops), external physical
                    hard drive, cloud drive, email accounts, ﬁtness trackers, smart watches,
                    smart glasses, media devices (TiVo, Apple TV, cable box), bank accounts,
                    credit cards, personal gaming systems, blogs, vlogs, photos, and videos.
                  • Public assets (for managing public utilities and services): Smart meters, power
                    grid, sewage controls, nuclear power plant, rail lines, air trafﬁc, trafﬁc lights,
                    citizen databases, websites (county, state and federal), space travel programs.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                   1.1 What Is Cybersecurity?                   3




                       Figure 1.1 Sample assets at risk due to cyberattacks.


                 • Corporate assets (for managing business needs): Customer database,
                   websites, business applications, business network, emails, software,
                   intellectual property.
                    Some overlap may occur as corporate assets may link to public assets or
                 personal assets may be connected to corporate assets or public assets. As such,
                 these assets should be clearly separated through well-deﬁned security policies.
                 However, with the level of connectivity through multiple devices, it is becom-
                 ing more and more difﬁcult to keep assets completely discrete
                 and disconnected.
                    Thus, cybersecurity is securing everything of value that exists in cyberspace,
                 which includes computer networks, mobile devices, cloud data storage, sensor
                 networks, industrial control systems, emergency devices, railway lines, and air
                 trafﬁc controls, to name a few. It is not simply limited to our own private data
                 or banking information but goes beyond to critical infrastructure and corporate
                 assets.
                    Certain geological regions are more prone to attacks than others due to the
                 availability and richness of such assets. Many tools are available to depict
                 attack maps of popular cyberattacks. Examples include ThreatCloud showing
                 real-time attacks based on monitoring sensors across the world (Check Point




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  4                    Introduction: Data Analytics for Cybersecurity


                  2020), Digital Attack Map depicting top distributed denial of service (DDoS)
                  attacks worldwide (Netscout 2020), and Kaspersky Lab’s 3D interactive map
                  of cyberattacks (Kaspersky 2020). These are helpful in visualizing the spread
                  of types of attacks and level of activity in a region.



                                 1.1.2 Motivation, Risks, and Attaining Security
                  What is the motivation behind such attacks? An unauthorized access to secured
                  resources may be due to various factors. Some such factors are summarized in
                  Figure 1.2 and listed as follows:
                  • Stealing intellectual property: The majority of corporate product develop-
                    ment strategies are stored on highly secure infrastructure. Small companies
                    and large corporations alike devise novel products, and their intellectual
                    property holds the key to revenue in the future. Loss of such information
                    could be devastating for the sales and proﬁts for an organization.
                  • Gaining access to customer data: Banks and retailers are constantly at the
                    receiving end of cyberattacks due to valuable customer data, which can then
                    be sold. Recent notable examples include Target (Washington Post 2013).

                                                                                            Risks
                                    Motivation
                                                                        lnternet protocol that is inherently not
                       To steal Intellectual property
                                                                        secure
                       To damage reputation
                                                                        Applications with several dependencies
                       To gain access to data, which can
                                                                        Logical errors in software code (ex.
                       then be sold
                                                                        Heartbleed)
                       To gain access to information, which
                                                                        Organizational risks (multiple partners ex.
                       is not generally available
                                                                        Target, PNNL)
                       To make a political statement
                                                                        Lack of user awareness of cybersecurity risks
                       To impede access to critical data and
                                                                        (ex. social engineering, phishing)
                       applications
                                                                        Personality traits of individuals using the
                       To make a splash/ for fun
                                                                        systems


                                                          Attaining security

                                                        Protecting resources
                                                        Hardening defenses
                                                        Capturing data logs
                                                        Monitoring systems
                                                        Tracing the attacks
                                                        Predicting risks
                                                        Predicting attacks
                                                        Identifying vulnerabilities


                        Figure 1.2 Unauthorized access motivations, risks and attaining security.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                   1.1 What Is Cybersecurity?                   5


                 • Making a political statement: Hacktivism, or hacking for activism (Samuel
                   2004), is an act carried out primarily to send a political message. An example
                   included the cyber war in Estonia in 2007 (CSMonitor–Estonia 2007), where
                   a series of DDoS attacks were directed toward ofﬁcial websites and even
                   mobile phone networks. Estonia has several e-government initiatives, which
                   had to be shut down for access from foreign locations due to the massive
                   scale of the attacks. The Estonian foreign minister has also been quoted
                   blaming the Russian government for facilitating these attacks.
                 • Performing cyber espionage: These attacks originate from government-
                   supported cells, which target state secrets. Unlike theft of intellectual prop-
                   erty, cyber espionage is geared toward gaining access to sensitive infor-
                   mation. An example is the Titan Rain attack (Lewis 2005, Chi 2014), a type
                   of advanced persistent threat (APT), believed to have been initiated by
                   government-coordinated cells in China targeting US defense networks and
                   contractors such as Lockheed Martin, Sandia National Laboratories, and
                   NASA, among others. The SolarWinds hack led to a massive impact for
                   federal systems believed to be directed by the Russian government (Stubbs
                   et al. 2020). In some cases, this becomes a global supply chain attack, where
                   the hack from a trusted vendor leads to a major attack, such as in the case of
                   FireEye, which was impacted by the SolarWinds attack (Geenans 2020)
                 • In addition to the aforementioned motivations, cyberattacks may be aimed at
                   damaging reputation (Townsend et al. 2014), which can lead to substantial
                   losses; making a splash for fun (Gesenhues 2014), such as a traditional
                   search example using Google dorking; and impeding access to data and
                   applications (Risk Based Security 2014). Most of these scenarios are carried
                   out to gain unauthorized access to information.

                                  1.1.2.1 Why Do We Have Security Risks?
                 Security risks arise due to various factors, which include the following:
                 applications with several dependencies, logical errors in software code (such
                 as Heartbleed), organizational risks (multiple partners, such as in cyber-attacks
                 at Target and the Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratories [PNNL]), lack of
                 user awareness of cybersecurity risks (such as in social engineering and
                 phishing), personality traits of individuals using the systems (phishing), and
                 inherent issues in the Internet protocol being used.

                          1.1.2.2 What Is the Level of Damage That Can Occur?
                 According to a McAfee report, the monetary loss resulting from cybercrime
                 costs about $600 billion, which is about 0.8% of the world Gross Domestic
                 Product (GDP) (McAfee–Cybercrime Impact 2018), with malicious actors




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  6                    Introduction: Data Analytics for Cybersecurity


                  becoming more and more sophisticated. Such large numbers are difﬁcult to
                  estimate, and the report outlines a sound strategy for reaching the
                  estimated loss.
                     The loss due to cyberattacks is not simply based on direct ﬁnancial loss but
                  also based on several indirect factors that may lead to a major ﬁnancial impact.
                  As an example, let us consider the Target cyberattack. According to a Reuters
                  news article (Skariachan and Finkle 2014), Target reported $61 million in
                  expenses related to the cyberattack out of which $44 million was covered by
                  insurance. Thus, the direct ﬁnancial impact to Target was $17 million. Now let
                  us consider some other factors that led to the indirect loss for Target: there was
                  a 46% drop in net proﬁt in the holiday quarter and a 5.5% drop in transactions
                  during the quarter, share price ﬂuctuations led to further losses, cards had to be
                  reissued to several customers, and Target had to offer identity protection to
                  affected customers. All these losses amount to much more than the total $61
                  million loss. In addition, the trust of the customers was lost, which is not a
                  quantiﬁable loss and has long-term impacts.



                                               1.2 Handling Cyberattacks
                  Now the key question is how one secures the resources against unauthorized
                  accesses. Understanding and preventing such risks can be done in several
                  ways, including protecting resources, hardening defenses, capturing data logs,
                  monitoring systems, tracing the attacks, predicting risks, predicting attacks,
                  and identifying vulnerabilities.
                    Several subdisciplines of cybersecurity deal with these aspects.

                                        1.2.1 Subareas of Cybersecurity
                  Various areas of cybersecurity have developed techniques to prevent and
                  respond to cyberattacks. There are several overlaps in these areas of cyberse-
                  curity. These include the following (shown in Figure 1.3):
                      Application security: This area deals with incorporating security in the
                        software development process. This includes following best practices
                        for code development, designing strong and comprehensive test cases,
                        and following rigorous maintenance practices.
                      Data and information security: Increasingly with the advent of cloud data
                        storage and remote access to data warehouses, data and information are
                        at a risk of unauthorized access and misuse. Data and information
                        security deals with securing data from such threats.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                    1.2 Handling Cyberattacks                  7




                       Figure 1.3 Areas of cybersecurity.


                     Network security: This deals with the challenges faced in securing the
                       traditional computer networks and security measures adopted to secure,
                       prevent unauthorized access and misuse of either the public or the
                       private network.
                     Cyberphysical security: This focuses on the emerging challenges due to the
                       coupling of the cyber systems with the physical systems. For example,
                       the power plants being controlled by a cyber system present new security
                       challenges that can arise due to the risk of disruption of the cyber
                       component or risk of unauthorized control of the cyber system, thus
                       gaining control of the physical systems.
                     Data analytics: This crosscutting theme can apply to each of these areas to
                       learn from existing threats and develop solutions for novel and unknown
                       threats toward networks, infrastructure, data, and information. Threat
                       hunting (Sadhwani 2020), which proactively looks for malicious players
                       across the myriad data sources in an organization, is a direct application
                       of using data analytics on the various types of security data produced
                       from the various types of security streams. However, this does not
                       necessarily have to be a completely machine-driven process and should
                       account for user behaviors as well (Shashanka et al. 2016), looking at the
                       operational context. Data analytics can provide security analysts a much
                       focused ﬁeld of vision to zero in on solutions for potential threats.
                    Cybersecurity affects many different types of devices, networks, and organ-
                 izations. Each poses different types of challenges to secure. It is important to
                 understand and differentiate between these challenges due to the changing
                 hardware and software landscape across each type of cybersecurity domain.
                 While hardware conﬁgurations and types of connectivity are out of scope for
                 this book, it is important to understand some of the fundamental challenges to
                 study their impact and how they can be addressed using techniques such as




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  8                    Introduction: Data Analytics for Cybersecurity


                  data analytics, which is crosscutting across the many different types of con-
                  nectivity since data are ubiquitous across all these domains. In the current
                  connected environment, multiple types of networks and devices are used, such
                  as computer networks, cyberphysical systems (CPS), Internet of Things (IoT),
                  sensor networks, smart grids, and wired or wireless networks. To some extent,
                  IoT and sensor networks can be seen as specialized cases of CPS systems. We
                  can consider these systems to study how data analytics can contribute to
                  cybersecurity since any of these types of systems will generate data, which
                  can be evaluated to understand their functioning and any potential benign or
                  nonbenign malfunctions.
                     Computer networks are the most traditional type of networks where groups
                  of computers are connected in prespeciﬁed conﬁgurations. These conﬁgur-
                  ations can be designed using security policy deciding who has access to what
                  areas of networks. Another way networks form is by determining patterns of
                  use over a period of time. In both cases, zones can be created for access and
                  connectivity where each computer in the network and subnetworks can
                  be monitored.
                     Cyberphysical systems are an amalgamation of two interacting subsystems,
                  cyber and physical, that are used to monitor a function. cyberphysical systems
                  are used to monitor and perform the day-to-day functions of the many auto-
                  mated systems that we rely on, including power stations, chemical factories,
                  and nuclear power plants, to name a few.
                     With the ubiquitous advent of connected technology, many “smart” things
                  are being introduced into our connected environment. A connected network of
                  such smart things has led to the evolution of Internet of Things. IoT has
                  become excessively pervasive and prevalent from our smart homes to hos-
                  pitals. These new types of connected systems bring about new challenges in
                  securing them from attacks with malicious intent to disrupt their day-to-
                  day functioning.
                     Throughout this book, we will use examples from various types of such
                  connected systems to illustrate how data analytics can facilitate cybersecurity.




                                                      1.3 Data Analytics
                  Data analytics deals with analyzing large amounts of data from disparate
                  sources to discover actionable information leading to gains for an organization.
                  Data analytics includes techniques from data mining, statistics, and business
                  management, among other ﬁelds.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                         1.3 Data Analytics                      9


                    The large amount of data collected has led to the “big data” revolution. This
                 is also the case in the domain of cybersecurity. Big data (Manyika et al. 2011,
                 Chen et al. 2014) refers to not only massive datasets (volume) but also data that
                 are generated at a rapid rate (velocity) and have a heterogeneous nature
                 (variety), and that can provide valid ﬁndings or patterns in this complex
                 environment (veracity). These data can also change by location (venue).
                 Thus, big data encompasses the truly complex nature of data particularly in
                 the domain of cybersecurity.
                    Every device, action, transaction, and event generates data. Cyber threats
                 leave a series of such data pieces in different environments and domains.
                 Sifting through these data can lead to novel insight into why a certain event
                 occurred and potentially allow the identiﬁcation of the responsible parties and
                 lead to knowledge for preventing such attacks in the future.
                    Let us next understand how data analytics plays a key role in
                 understanding cyberattacks.



                 1.3.1 Why Is Data Analytics Important for Cybersecurity? A Case
                        Study of Understanding the Anatomy of an Attack
                 Cyberattacks evolve very fast. Let us consider a vulnerability in software code.
                 A software patch can be developed to address the vulnerability; however, a
                 slight modiﬁcation may lead to a new vulnerability. There is a constant back
                 and forth between the conspirators and the legitimate users. In several cases,
                 the more serious attacks are not just a one-stop exploit that breaches a system
                 through a single vulnerability, but a multipronged attack that uses several
                 different channels to gain access to the secured systems.
                    To understand the intricacies of such a complex attack, let us consider the
                 anatomy of an attack based on a scenario motivated from a recent attack on a
                 federal lab (Dark Reading 2011). This example demonstrates the challenges
                 posed by multiple aspects of cyberattacks coming from multiple sources and
                 spread over time. Similar patterns of threat propagation have been seen in other
                 attacks (such as Skariachan and Finkle 2014, FireEye 2020).
                    Figure 1.4 shows the ﬂow of a multipronged attack. Despite the lab’s well-
                 protected information technology (IT) security perimeter, the attacks made it
                 through in a very coordinated and prolonged process. Similar to a global
                 supply chain attack (FireEye 2020), in the PNNL case, ﬁrst there is an attack
                 on the organization, and second, there is an attack on a partner that shares key
                 resources. In the ﬁrst part of the attack, intruders take advantage of vulnerabil-
                 ities in public-facing web servers. In addition, hackers secretively scout the




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  10                   Introduction: Data Analytics for Cybersecurity




                        Figure 1.4 Anatomy of a multilevel attack.


                  network from compromised workstations that have already been targeted
                  beforehand as part of a coordinated prolonged attack. The second part of the
                  attack starts with spear phishing. Instead of casting out thousands of emails
                  randomly, spear phishers target select groups of people with something in
                  common, such as a common employer, a similar banking or ﬁnancial institution,
                  the same college, etc. So potentially a second group of hackers institutes a spear-
                  phishing attack on the organization’s major business partners with which it shares
                  network resources. The hackers are able to obtain a privileged account and
                  compromise a root domain controller that is shared by the organization and its
                  partner. When the intruders try to recreate and assign privileges, it triggers an
                  alarm, alerting the organization’s cybersecurity team.
                     This scenario clearly demonstrates that simply looking at one dimension of
                  the attack is not enough in such prolonged attacks. For such multipronged
                  attacks, a multifaceted approach is required. Events of interest can be identiﬁed
                  using a combination of factors such as proximity of events in time, in terms of
                  series of communications, and even in terms of the geographic origin or
                  destination of the communication, as shown in Figure 1.4.
                     For this speciﬁc example, we can evaluate three important aspects of
                  analysis of the cyber trafﬁc data, which can potentially generate new insights




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                         1.3 Data Analytics                     11


                 in detecting unusual events of interest. The three aspects are temporal, spatial,
                 and data-driven understanding of human behavioral aspects (particularly of
                 attackers):
                 • Firstly, computer networks evolve over time, and communication patterns
                   change over time. Can we identify these key changes, which deviate from
                   the normal changes in a communication pattern, and associate them with
                   anomalies in the network trafﬁc?
                 • Secondly, attacks may have a spatial pattern. Sources and destinations in
                   certain key geolocations are more important for monitoring and preventing
                   an attack. Can key geolocations, which are sources or destinations of attacks,
                   be identiﬁed?
                 • Thirdly, any type of an attack has common underpinnings of how it is carried
                   out; this has not changed from physical security breaches to computer
                   security breaches. Can this knowledge be leveraged to identify anomalies
                   in the data where we can see certain patterns of misuse?
                 Utilizing the temporal, spatial, and human behavioral aspects of learning new
                 knowledge from the vast amount of cyber data can lead to new insights of
                 understanding the challenges faced in this important domain of cybersecurity.
                    Thus, simply looking at one dimension of the data is not enough in such
                 prolonged attack scenarios. For such a multipronged attacks, we need a
                 multilevel framework that brings together data from several different data-
                 bases. Events of interest can be identiﬁed using a combination of factors such
                 as proximity of events in time, in terms of series of communications and even
                 in terms of the geographic origin or destination of the communication, as
                 shown in Figure 1.5. Some example tasks that can be performed to glean
                 actionable information are the following:
                 (a) Clustering based on feature combinations: One important piece of data
                     collected in most organizations is Intruder Detection System (IDS) logs
                     such as SNORT. These can be leveraged, and a keyword matrix and a
                     word frequency matrix can be extracted to use for various analytical tasks.
                     For example, the keyword matrix can be used to perform alarm clustering
                     and alarm data fusion to identify critical alerts that may have been missed.
                     Instead of clustering the entire set of features seen in a snort alarm, we can
                     perform clustering based on a combination of features.
                 (b) Collusions and associations: Using the keyword matrix, we also extract
                     associations to identify potentially repeated or targeted communications. This
                     information in conjunction with network mapping can also be used to deter-
                     mine which attacks are consistently targeted to speciﬁc types of machines.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  12                   Introduction: Data Analytics for Cybersecurity


                                                                Events become relevant when they occur
                                                               together
                                                               These events become relevant with proximities
                                                               rather than causation
                                                                The two events are In close proximity , based on
                                                               • Source proximity
                                                               • Destination proximity
                                                               • Temporal proximity or delay
                    Spatial distance


                                                     N1

                                                                                           N12
                                           N2
                                                                  N8




                                                     N5                                    N4
                                 N3

                                                N6
                            N4                            N9           N10     N11         N3


                        0              4                  8             12           16
                                                                                                  Time
                   Goal : to identify potential “collusions” among the entities responsible for related events

                        Figure 1.5 Multidimensional view of threats.



                  (c) Time proximity and network evolution: Clustering can be performed
                      after creating time intervals that accounts for time proximity. This not only
                      allows mining the data in proximity of time but also evaluating how the
                      networks evolve over time and which time interval may be critical. For
                      instance, we might want to identify if there are repeated events of interest
                      in certain time periods. Lastly, looking at the clustering in different
                      segments of time, we can look at mining for possible attack paths based
                      on variations in cluster content and cluster cohesion.



                                           1.3.2 How Can Data Analytics Help?
                  The attack case study shows the potential of data analytics and how data from
                  multiple sources can be used to glean novel information. Data analytics can
                  help in several ways to support the defense of cyber systems: mining system
                  logs, monitoring systems, tracing the attacks, predicting risks by identifying
                  critical systems in a network ﬂow, predicting attacks based on prior or similar
                  attacks, identifying vulnerabilities by mining software code, understanding
                  user behavior by mining network logs, and creating robust access control rules
                  by evaluating prior usage and security policies.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                         1.3 Data Analytics                  13


                    What this book is not about: This book does not address the traditional
                 views of security conﬁgurations and shoring up defenses, including setting up
                 computer networks, setting up ﬁrewalls, web server management, and patching
                 of vulnerabilities.
                    What this book is about: This book addresses the challenges in cybersecurity
                 that data analytics can help address, including analytics for threat hunting or
                 threat detection, discovering knowledge for attack prevention or mitigation,
                 discovering knowledge about vulnerabilities, and performing retrospective and
                 prospective analysis for understanding the mechanics of attacks to help prevent
                 them in the future.
                    This book will provide multiple examples across different types of networks
                 and connected systems where data can be captured and analyzed to derive
                 actionable knowledge fulﬁlling one of the several aims of cybersecurity,
                 namely prevention, detection, response, and recovery.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     2
                     Understanding Sources of Cybersecurity Data




                  Cyber threats often lead to loss of assets. This chapter discusses the multitude
                  of datasets that can be harvested and used to track these losses and origins of
                  the attack. This chapter is not about the data lost during cyberattacks but the
                  data that organizations can scour from their networks to understand threats
                  better so that they can potentially prevent or even predict future attacks.



                           2.1 End-to-End Opportunities for Data Collection
                  The information systems used to perform business functions have a well-
                  deﬁned process spanning over connected systems. In a typical client server
                  scenario, as shown in Figure 2.1, a user connects to a system via an internet
                  pipeline. The system has built-in application functionality important to run the
                  business function. A return pipeline sends a response back to the user. The
                  functionality of the system allows the delivery of the information commodity
                  requested by the user.
                     As the example layout in Figure 2.1a shows, the logical view of the user
                  requesting access to a business application can appear to be fairly straightfor-
                  ward. However, within this pipeline there could be several points through
                  which the request and response pass, as shown in Figure 2.1b, leading to
                  several opportunities in the end-to-end process for data collection to help
                  understand when a cyber threat may occur in this process.
                     As we can see in Figure 2.1b, when the user requests a resource, it has to go
                  through a complex networking pipeline. The user may have a ﬁrewall on their
                  own system and the router through which they send out the request. This
                  request can be ﬁltered through the internet service provider, lookups can be
                  performed in the domain name system (DNS) and the data can be routed
                  through multiple paths of routers, which are linked through the routing table.

                                                                    14


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                    2.1 End-to-End Opportunities for Data Collection                     15




                       Figure 2.1 Logical and physical view of user request and response in a network-
                       based environment.


                 The request on the other side may again have to pass through the routers and
                 ﬁrewalls at multiple points in the system being accessed by the user. There
                 may be multiple intrusion detection systems (IDS) posted throughout the
                 systems to monitor the network ﬂow for malicious activity. This is just one
                 example scenario; different network layouts will result in different types of
                 intermediate steps in this process of request and response, particularly based on
                 the type of response, the type of network being used, the type of organization
                 of business applications, the cloud infrastructure being used, to name a few
                 factors. However, certain key components are always present that allow for
                 multiple opportunities to glean and scour for data related to potential cyber
                 threats.
                    There can be several opportunities to collect data to understand potential
                 threats. Data collection can begin at a user access point, system functionality
                 level, and commodity level (particularly if the data is being delivered). For
                 example, at the user level, we can utilize data such as the following: (a) Who is
                 the user? The psychology of the user, personality types, etc., can inﬂuence




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  16                   Understanding Sources of Cybersecurity Data




                        Figure 2.2 Common types of cybersecurity data.


                  whether a user will click on a link or give access to information to others. (b)
                  What type of interface is being used by the user? Is there clear information about
                  what is acceptable or not acceptable in the interface? (c) What type of access
                  system is being used? Is there access control for users? (d) What data are available
                  about the access pipeline, such as the type of network or cloud being used.
                     Several common types of datasets can be collected and evaluated, as shown
                  in Figure 2.2, including various types of log data such as key stroke logs, web
                  server logs, and intrusion detection logs, to name a few. We next discuss
                  several types of such datasets.


                                        2.2 Sources of Cybersecurity Data
                  Cybersecurity-related data collection will vary across the type of networks,
                  including computer networks, sensor networks, or cyberphysical systems. The
                  method and level of data collection will also vary based on the application
                  domains for which the networks are being used and the important assets being
                  protected. For example: (a) social media businesses, such Facebook, are
                  primarily user data driven, where the revenue is based on providing access
                  to user data and monitoring usage data; (b) e-commerce businesses, such as
                  Amazon, are usage and product delivery based; (c) portals, such as Yahoo, are
                  again user data driven but more heavily reliant on advertisements, which can
                  target users based on what they see and use most often; (d) cyberphysical
                  systems, such as systems for monitoring and managing power grids, are based
                  on accurate functioning of physical systems and delivery of services to users
                  over these physical infrastructural elements.



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                              2.2 Sources of Cybersecurity Data                 17


                    In each of these types of systems, the underlying infrastructure has to be
                 monitored to ensure accurate functioning and prevention, detection, and recov-
                 ery from cyber threats. The level of monitoring and management of such data
                 will vary with the level of prevention, detection, or recovery expected in the
                 domain. Some domains have a high emphasis on prevention; others may have
                 a high level of emphasis on detection or recovery. In all such cases, multiple
                 types of datasets can be collected to provide intelligence on the cyber threats,
                 and user behaviors can be evaluated to prevent future threats or even identify
                 an insider propagating the threats.
                    In the following discussion for each dataset, we examine the following: (a)
                 What is the data? (b) What is an example of its use in literature? (c) What type
                 of detection can it be used for? In the chapters throughout this book, we will
                 discuss how some of these datasets can be leveraged to discover anomalies
                 identifying potential threats using data analytics methods.


                                                          2.2.1 Log Data
                 The nature of electronic communication and activities allows for several types
                 of datasets to be logged. Some examples include the following: (1) intrusion
                 detection system (IDS) logs including alarms raised by IDS; (2) key stroke
                 logs; (3) router connectivity data/ router logs; (4) web server logs; and (5)
                 ﬁrewall logs. This is not an exhaustive list but includes some of the major
                 types of logs that can be collected.

                                             2.2.1.1 Keystroke Logs
                 Keystroke logging or key logging is a mechanism to capture every key being
                 pressed on a keyboard, but can also go beyond key presses to actions such as
                 copying materials to the clipboard or other interactions with the user system.
                 Key logging has been extensively studied for many applications, from writing
                 to cognitive analysis to security threats. A survey on key logging (Heron 2007)
                 outlines mechanisms, including hardware installation, kernel-level, system
                 hook, and function-based methods, for key logging.
                    Key logging has also been studied for smart phones (Gupta et al. 2016, Cai and
                 Chen 2011). A recent survey (Hussain et al. 2016) extensively outlines motion-
                 based key logging and inference attacks that can result from smart phone key
                 logging. This survey classiﬁes key logging as in-band logging through the main
                 channels of the keystrokes and out-of-band logging using side channels such as
                 acoustics, power consumption, etc. Thus, key logging is not necessarily limited to
                 keyboard-based data collection but can get quite sophisticated.
                    This type of data collection allows studying user behaviors but may also
                 be used to maliciously detect user credentials, user preferences, or other



https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  18                   Understanding Sources of Cybersecurity Data


                  sensitive information. Thus, it is also essential to understand the capabilities
                  of key loggers to create any type of defense against threats utilizing
                  key loggers.

                                      2.2.1.2 Intrusion Detection System Logs
                  Intrusion detection system (IDS) log data (e.g., from Snort) provide data about
                  alerts that are raised by matching any known signatures of malicious activities
                  in the header and payload data. Generally, IDS will also provide an alert level
                  of low, medium, or high. IDS logs analyze the packets based on malicious
                  signatures and provide information on time stamp, service used, protocol,
                  source, and destination. IDS can be placed at various points in a network,
                  and multiple such datasets can be collected and correlated (Deokar and
                  Hazarnis 2012). IDS logs are also commonly used for anomaly detection
                  methods, which are utilized to detect threats beyond signature matching.
                  Here anomalous packets indicate an unusual behavior with respect to the
                  normal, where the normal can be discovered and predeﬁned through various
                  analytics methods.
                     IDS log data lends itself well to secondary analysis such as through data
                  mining methods including association rule mining (such as Vaarandi and
                  Podiņš 2010 and Quader et al. 2015), human behavior modeling (such as
                  Quader and Janeja 2014 and Chen et al. 2014), and prediction of attacks, to
                  name a few examples. Multiple IDS and other types of logs are also correlated
                  to detect signiﬁcant anomalies, which are not otherwise detectable (such as
                  illustrated in Janeja et al. 2014 and Abad et al. 2003). Visualization of logs
                  (such as in Koike and Ohno 2004) has been explored to facilitate the analysis
                  of the logs by looking at the information selectively, slicing and dicing the data
                  by certain features, such as by time or by event.

                                   2.2.1.3 Router Connectivity and Log Data
                  The internet is a network of networks or subnetworks. The networks at each
                  level are connected by routers. A router connects computer networks and
                  forwarding data across computer networks. Each of these routers is connected
                  for data transmission. This can range from a simple home router to corporate
                  routers that connect to the internet backbone. A routing table stores infor-
                  mation about the paths to take for forwarding and transmitting the data. The
                  routing table stores the routes of all reachable destinations, including routers,
                  from it. Various algorithms devise an efﬁcient path through these connected
                  routers (such as Sklower 1991 and Tsuchiya 1988).
                     A router provides not only route information but also all the raw IP
                  addresses that pass through the router. These IP addresses can be mapped to




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                              2.2 Sources of Cybersecurity Data                 19


                 identify possible malware activity when data are sent to suspicious
                 geolocations in an unauthorized manner (Geocoding-Infosec 2013).
                 However, care must be taken in using the IP addresses in isolation as they
                 can be subject to IP spooﬁng, which hides the identity of the sender. Router
                 data can also be utilized to study and possibly identify trafﬁc hijacking (Kim
                 Zetter Security 2013) and bogus routes by looking at historic route data stored
                 in a knowledge base (Qiu et al. 2007).

                                            2.2.1.4 Firewall Log Data
                 Firewalls act as a ﬁrst line of defense that can stop certain types of trafﬁc
                 based on ﬁrewall security policies. In addition, these policies also have to be
                 maintained to stay up to date with the changing landscape of the network
                 usage. Essentially every access entry can be logged as it has to pass through
                 the ﬁrewall. Some threats can be directly identiﬁed and blocked based on a
                 clearly deﬁned ﬁrewall policy or rule. For instance, if there is a clearly
                 unauthorized access to an internal server, a well-conﬁgured ﬁrewall can
                 block it to prevent access to the system. Major threat-related activities such
                 as port scans, malware, and unauthorized access can easily be ﬁltered
                 through robust ﬁrewall rules. It essentially ﬁlters trafﬁc based on the conﬁg-
                 uration of access to the systems protected by the ﬁrewall. Firewalls are
                 typically designed to look at the header information in the data packets to
                 match against prespeciﬁed rule sets. Firewalls can be host based or network
                 based depending on whether they are deployed at an individual user’s system
                 or at a network interface.
                    Firewalls differ from IDS since they are generally limited to header infor-
                 mation screening, whereas IDS can look at the payload data as well and block
                 connections with malicious signatures. However, there has been a convergence
                 in these functionalities in more recent times.
                    Firewall policy rules are one area where data mining may beneﬁt by
                 allowing the creation of a dynamic set of rules based on the trafﬁc passing
                 through the ﬁrewall. Analysis of policy rules and network trafﬁc is used
                 (Golnabi et al. 2006) to generate efﬁcient rule sets based on the network trafﬁc
                 trends and potentially identify misconﬁgurations in the policy rules. This
                 particular work uses association rule mining (ARM) and simple frequency
                 counting of rules to generate ﬁrewall policy rules. In addition, it also identiﬁes
                 different types of policy anomalies, including blocking of legitimate trafﬁc,
                 allowing trafﬁc to nonexisting services or redundant policy anomalies.
                    Similarly, Abedin et al. (2010) regenerates ﬁrewall policy rules and com-
                 pares them with existing policies to discover anomalies.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  20                   Understanding Sources of Cybersecurity Data


                                                   2.2.2 Raw Payload Data
                  Any data sent over the network are divided into multiple parts. Two key parts
                  include (a) the header information, which stores data about source and destin-
                  ation among other things; and (b) the actual content being transmitted, referred
                  to as the payload. There are several privacy concerns in accessing these
                  payload data since these data are the actual content that is being sent, which
                  may be under strict access control. Such payload data can be accessed only
                  where legally allowed and users have provided permissions to access the data.
                  Additionally, the data may be encrypted, so its usefulness as raw data to be
                  mined is limited.
                     Payload data are accessible through packet sniffers such as Wireshark,1
                  where the data dump of the trafﬁc can be retrieved. Payload data can be
                  massive even for a few minutes of data capture. Thus, it provides a strong
                  motivation for using big data technologies to collect and mine such data where
                  permissible. In addition, for web-based trafﬁc the browser cache is another
                  way to access the payload data from the client or end user’s side.
                     Payload data have been shown (Wang and Stolfo 2004, Kim et al. 2014,
                  Limmer and Dressler 2010) to be effective in identifying anomalous threats in
                  network intrusion detection systems. For example, one recent study (Limmer
                  and Dressler 2010) selectively analyzed parts of the payload, thus reducing the
                  challenges in high-speed network intrusion detection systems. Parekh et al.
                  (2006) utilize suspicious payload sharing in a privacy-preserving manner to
                  identify threats across multiple sites.
                     Payload data can be used in multiple ways, such as to discover an individual
                  user’s behavior, the presence of malwares in the payloads, and other security
                  threats that can be detected based on the actual content of the payload. One
                  common use of payload data is to identify threats based on signatures of
                  malware that may be present in the payloads. For example, if a virus is
                  embedded in a packet and this virus has a known signature, then this can be
                  captured by traditional intrusion detection system rules. One such open-source
                  network intrusion detection system is Snort, which provides Snort rules (Snort
                  2020). Snort can also be used as a packet sniffer, like Wireshark, but can also
                  be used as an IDS. Packets with malware embedded in them can be detected
                  using multiple mechanisms such as simple keyword searches or complex
                  regular expression matches and ﬂagged. The trafﬁc can be blocked or marked
                  for further analysis, such as using Snort alarms or Wireshark coloring rules
                  (Cheok 2014).


                  1
                      www.wireshark.org.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                              2.2 Sources of Cybersecurity Data                       21




                        Figure 2.3 Example extraction of a communication graph from network trafﬁc.




                                              2.2.3 Network Topology Data
                 A computer network can be represented as a graph in terms of the structure of
                 the network and in terms of the communication taking place over the network.
                 Network trafﬁc data dump can be used to generate the communication graph of
                 all exchanges taking place over the network. As shown in Figure 2.3, for
                 example, header data collected from a trafﬁc dump ﬁle through Wireshark can
                 be utilized to plot the communication between the source and destination IP
                 addresses, which become the vertices, and the exchange between the two
                 vertices forms the edge in the graph. In this example, NodeXL2 is used to plot
                 the graph data.
                    Once the communication data are in the graph form, graph metrics (for
                 example, as discussed in Nicosia et al. 2013) can be computed, such as node-
                 level metrics, including centrality, page rank, etc.; and network-level metrics,
                 such as diameter, density, etc. In addition, based on the network properties,
                 predictions can also be made about future network evolution. The example in
                 Figure 2.4 illustrates one such task in a sample trafﬁc data.


                 2
                     www.smrfoundation.org/nodexl/.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  22                   Understanding Sources of Cybersecurity Data




                       Figure 2.4 Exploratory analysis using Degree Centralities.



                     Data from network trafﬁc is collected through packet sniffers such as
                  Wireshark. To ﬁnd communication behaviors of IP addresses along with
                  anomalous ﬂuctuations, exploratory analysis is performed on these data. The
                  data from the network trafﬁc need to be preprocessed, and this preprocessing
                  will change with the task being performed. For instance, if in this example we
                  wish to perform analysis by day of the week, the trafﬁc data are sorted by the
                  day of the week to get patterns by day, such as all Mondays or all Tuesdays.
                  We can then compute the degree (i.e., number of edges incident on a vertex) of
                  each node by day of the week. This can be performed for speciﬁc dates also;
                  however, in this particular example we are interested to see behavior on certain
                  days of the week by each of the IP addresses. We can sort the IP addresses by
                  their degrees across days of the week, and the top ones appear to be consist-
                  ently present in the trafﬁc. Similarly, nodes with low degrees can also be
                  identiﬁed. In such a scenario, it would be interesting to ﬁnd a node, which is
                  generally highly consistent as a high-degree node, to appear in the list of nodes
                  with a lower degree, indicating a shift in the trafﬁc pattern. Now let us consider
                  the bar chart of the degrees for each IP address across each day of the week.
                  We can observe that some IP addresses are consistently higher degree across
                  all days of the week, which is further illustrated by the plot for IP1, IP2, and




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                              2.2 Sources of Cybersecurity Data                23


                 IP3 across all days of the week. We can also see that the degrees of IP9 and IP7
                 seem to be higher on some days but lower on other days. This is further
                 clariﬁed by the plot for IP9, which shows Wednesday as a day where IP9 has
                 inconsistent behavior.
                    Thus, through such exploratory analysis it is not only possible to identify
                 nodes that are inconsistent but also time points where the behavior is inconsist-
                 ent. Alternatively, this method can also be used to identify highly connected
                 nodes (such as nodes receiving higher than normal connections during a
                 breach) or least connected nodes (perhaps nodes that are impacted by a breach
                 and lose connectivity). This type of consistency and inconsistency can be
                 identiﬁed at the node level and at the graph level as discussed in Namayanja
                 and Janeja (2015 and 2017)
                    Another study (Massicotte et al. 2003) introduces a prototype network
                 mapping framework that uses freely available network scanners (nmap,
                 Xprobe) on built-in network protocols (ICMP, ARP, NetBIOS, DNS,
                 SNMP, etc.) to create a real-time network topology mapping with the help of
                 intelligence databases. It must be used in tandem with an intrusion detection
                 system. Studies discussed earlier for graph metrics can be applied to such
                 works as well after the topology is discovered.



                                                   2.2.4 User System Data
                 Figure 2.5 outlines several key features that can be extracted to monitor
                 unusual activities at the individual system level. Example features include
                 active process resident memory usage, which is available for all operating
                 systems (OS) and allows for building a proﬁle on the normal memory usage
                 of a process over time. As an example, an abnormal spike in memory usage
                 can be attributed to processing a large volume of data. This might be useful
                 in detecting a potential insider threat, especially when integrated with other
                 user behavioral data from sensors monitoring user stress levels or integrat-
                 ing with other log datasets. Similarly, CPU time utilization can be used for
                 measuring system usage. Several OS-speciﬁc features, such as kernel
                 modules and changes in registry values, are also identiﬁed in Figure 2.5.
                 However, it is important to use multiple signatures over time from several
                 of the features to eliminate the regular spikes of day-to-day operations. This
                 is the key differentiator for a robust analysis where we do not simply rely
                 on one or two features but multiple features and their stable signatures (as
                 compared to historical data) to distinguish alerts. Tools such as OSQuery




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  24                   Understanding Sources of Cybersecurity Data


                  Feature name                                                        OS specific
                  Active process name, active process filesystem path, active process All OS
                  ports and sockets, active process file access, active process
                  resident memory usage, active process CPU time utilization, active
                  process system calls, active process priority value, active process
                  owner and group information, loaded peripherals drivers, key-
                  store access patterns
                  Loaded kernel modules                                                    Linux/Unix
                  Loaded kernel extensions                                                 Mac OSX
                  Change in registry values                                                Windows
                  File system journaling (metadata) information                            All major file systems (NTFS,
                                                                                           ext4, HFS+)
                  Network routing tables                                                   All major OS
                  Network firewall rules                                                   All major firewall
                                                                                           implementations
                  System-level sensors (current, voltage in different bus inside PC,       Almost all peripherals
                  CPU/GPU fan speed, etc.)

                        Figure 2.5 OS-speciﬁc variables for CPU processing.


                  (OSQuery 2016) and Snare (SNARE 2016) can facilitate capture of
                  these features.
                     Stephens and Maloof (2014) provide a very general framework for insider
                  threat detection by gathering information from ﬁle read/write activities,
                  printing, emailing, and search queries, then building a probabilistic Bayesian
                  belief network from the sensor and context data, such as a user behavior proﬁle
                  from past actions. Van Meigham (2016) focuses on macOS malware detection
                  using a kernel module to intercept system calls and generating a heat map
                  analysis on the results.


                                                      2.2.5 Other Datasets
                  In addition to the datasets discussed, there are additional datasets that can be
                  utilized to leverage knowledge about cyberattacks.
                     Access control data: These data can help better understand usage of the
                  assets that need to be protected. Role mining (Vaidya et al. 2007, Mitra et al.
                  2016) from access control data can help shape and create better and more
                  robust roles.
                     Eye tracker data: A user’s behavior can be judged by the interactions of
                  the user with the system being used. One such mode of input is the screen.
                  Data collected from the user’s eye gaze, captured through an eye tracker, can
                  help analyze the user’s level of engagement with a system and user preferences
                  or positioning important items on the screen (such as those discussed in




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                              2.2 Sources of Cybersecurity Data                        25


                 Darwish and Bataineh 2012) to evaluate browser security indicators. The data
                 collected through the eye tracker can be mined for patterns such as associations
                 between security cue locations on the screen and number of views or clicks.
                 Clustering can be performed on eye gaze data to identify presence or absence
                 of clusters around security cues. Associations can be analyzed between user’s
                 perception of security, backgrounds, and demographics to different zones of
                 eye gaze foci in a stratiﬁed manner. If users perceive disclosing important
                 information through emails as a low-risk activity, they are less likely to see the
                 security cues. Similarly, if they see the security cues, their perceived risk of
                 responding will be high. Studies have hypothesized that user education can
                 change user’s perception of security and help them to better see these security
                 cues, increasing the likelihood of threat detection or identifying threats through
                 visual cues such as in the case of phishing.
                    Vulnerability data: Software vulnerability is a defect in the system (such as
                 a software bug) that allows an attacker to exploit the system and potentially
                 pose a security threat. Vulnerabilities can be investigated, and trends can be
                 discovered in various operating systems to determine levels of strength or
                 defense against cyberattacks (Frei et al. 2006). Using the National
                 Vulnerability Database from the National Institute of Standards and
                 Technology (NIST) (NIST 2017), trends can be analyzed for several years
                 and across major releases for operating systems to reinforce knowledge of
                 choices for critical infrastructural or network projects.
                    NVD is built on the concept of Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures
                 (CVE),3 which is a dictionary of publicly known vulnerabilities and exposures.
                 CVEs allow the standardization of vulnerabilities across products around the
                 world. NVD scores every vulnerability using the Common Vulnerability
                 Scoring System (CVSS).4 CVSS is comprised of several submetrics, including
                 (a) base, (b) temporal, and (c) environmental metrics. Each of these metrics
                 quantiﬁes some type of feature of a vulnerability. For example, base metrics
                 capture characteristics of a vulnerability constant across time and user environ-
                 ments, such as complexity, privilege required, etc. The environmental metrics,
                 on the other hand, are the modiﬁed base metrics reevaluated based on organ-
                 ization infrastructure. NVD allows searches based on subcomponents of these
                 metrics and also based on the basic security policies of conﬁdentiality, integ-
                 rity, and availability. These searches can provide data for analysis to identify
                 trends and behaviors of vulnerabilities across operating systems or other
                 software for different types of industries.


                 3                             4
                     http://cve.mitre.org/.        https://nvd.nist.gov/cvss.cfm; www.ﬁrst.org/cvss.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  26                                Understanding Sources of Cybersecurity Data


                                   Windows    Mac_OS_X     Linux    Android

                  14


                  12


                  10


                      8
                                                                                                               Buffer       XSS
                      6                                                                       50

                                                                                              45
                      4
                                                                                              40

                                                                                              35
                      2




                                                                                     Number
                                                                                              30

                      0                                                                       25
                            2006     2007    2008   2009     2010     2011    2012            20

                                                                                              15

                                                                                              10

                                                                                               5

                                                                                               0
                                                                                                   2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
                                                                                                                            Year



                             Figure 2.6 Comparison of vulnerabilities over operating systems.


                     Let us consider cross-site scripting vulnerability.5 When data regarding the
                  number of vulnerabilities are pulled from NVD across 2006 to 2012, we can
                  see the trends of operating systems that are most impacted by this vulnerabil-
                  ity, as shown in Figure 2.6. In addition, we can also compare the occurrences
                  of different types of vulnerabilities such as cross-site scripting and buffer
                  overﬂow. While this is a straightforward plotting of number of vulnerabilities
                  across years, it provides insights into the robustness of operating systems
                  for different types of vulnerabilities and across different CVSS metrics.
                  Such analyses can be an important feed into decision making before choices
                  for adopting software are made from a security point of view in
                  organizational applications.




                                               2.3 Integrated Use of Multiple Datasets
                  Let us consider a scenario where multiple datasets can be utilized to study
                  potential cyberattacks. Cyberattacks are rare compared to the day-to-day trafﬁc
                  in a computer network; therefore, they appear in datasets as anomalies.
                  Anomalies are essentially data points or patterns that are unusual with respect
                  to the normal. It is clear that there needs to be a frame of reference that is

                  5
                          https://tools.cisco.com/security/center/viewAlert.x?alertId=35601, Adobe Flash Player Cross-
                          Site Scripting Vulnerability.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                     2.4 Summary of Sources of Cybersecurity Data               27


                 “normal” compared to which something is deemed an “anomaly.” A single
                 dataset such as any of the ones discussed so far can be used for anomaly
                 detection, but it is important to note that if multiple datasets result in similar
                 types of anomalies, then the credibility of labeling an anomaly is higher.
                    One such integrated evaluation would be to discover anomalies in
                 network trafﬁc data with a temporal, spatial, and human behavioral per-
                 spective. Studying how network trafﬁc changes over time, which locations
                 are the sources, where is it headed, and how are people generating this
                 trafﬁc – all these aspects become very critical in distinguishing the normal
                 from the abnormal in the domain of cybersecurity. This requires shifting
                 gears to view cybersecurity as a holistic people problem rather than a
                 hardened defense problem. By utilizing some of the datasets discussed in
                 this chapter, we can answer the following important questions in studying
                 these aspects:
                    Firstly, computer networks evolve over time, and communication patterns
                 change over time. Can we identify these key changes that are deviant from the
                 normal changes in a communication pattern and associate them with anomalies
                 in the network trafﬁc?
                    Secondly, as attacks may have a spatial pattern, sources and destinations in
                 certain geolocations can be more important for monitoring and preventing an
                 attack. Therefore, can key geolocations that are sources of attacks, or key
                 geolocations that are destinations of attacks, be identiﬁed? Moreover, can IP
                 spooﬁng be mitigated by looking at multiple data sources to supplement the
                 knowledge of a geospatial trafﬁc pattern?
                    Thirdly, any type of an attack has common underpinnings of how it is
                 carried out; this has not changed from physical security breaches to computer
                 security breaches. Can this knowledge be leveraged to identify behavioral
                 models of anomalies where we can see patterns of misuse?
                    Recent work highlights some of these questions in discovering anomalies
                 utilizing network data to study human behavioral models such as Chen et al.)
                 2014) and Quader and Janeja (2014). These will be discussed further in
                 Chapter 10.



                            2.4 Summary of Sources of Cybersecurity Data
                 Through this chapter, multiple types of sources of cybersecurity data have
                 been discussed. Table 2.1 summarizes these data under the following: (a) data
                 source, (b) literature study examples, and (c) type of detection it can be
                 used for.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  28                   Understanding Sources of Cybersecurity Data


                  Table 2.1 Summary of sources of cybersecurity data

                  Source of
                  cybersecurity                                                    Type of detection it can be
                  data                 Literature study examples                   used for
                  Keystroke            Heron 2007, Cai and Hao 2011,               User behavior, malicious use to
                  logging              Gupta et al. 2016, Hussain et al.           detect user credentials
                                       2016
                  IDS log data         Abad et al. 2003, Koike and                 Association rule mining, human
                                       Ohno 2004, Vaarandi and Podiņš              behavior modeling, log
                                       2010, Deokar and Hazarnis 2012,             visualization, temporal analysis,
                                       Chen et al. 2014, Janeja et al.             anomaly detection
                                       2014, Quader and Janeja 2014,
                                       2015
                  Router               Tsuchiya 1988, Sklower 1991,                Suspicious rerouting, trafﬁc
                  connectivity         Qiu 2007, Geocoding Infosec                 hijacking, bogus routes
                  and log data         2013, Kim Zetter Security 2013
                  Firewall log         Golnabi et al. 2006, Abedin et al.          Generate efﬁcient rule sets,
                  data                 2010                                        anomaly detection in policy
                                                                                   rules
                  Raw payload          Wang and Stolfo 2004, Parekh                Malware detection, embedded
                  data                 et al. 2006, Limmer and Dressler            malware, user behavior
                                       2010, Kim et al. 2014, Roy 2014
                  Network              Massicotte et al. 2003, Nicosia             Consistent and inconsistent
                  topology             2013, Namayanja and Janeja                  nodes, time points
                                       2015, 2017                                  corresponding to anomalous
                                                                                   activity
                  User system          Stephens and Maloof 2014, Van               User proﬁles, user behavior
                  data                 Meigham 2016                                data, insider threats
                  Access               Vaidya et al. 2007, Mitra et al.            Generate efﬁcient access control
                  control data         2016                                        roles
                  Eye tracker          Darwish and Bataineh 2012                   Browser security indicators,
                  data                                                             security cues, user behavior
                  Vulnerability        Frei et al. 2006                            Vulnerability trend discovery
                  data




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                    3
                                       Introduction to Data Mining
                 Clustering, Classiﬁcation, and Association Rule Mining




                                3.1 Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
                                            Process Models
                 Data mining (DM) is the discovery of hidden and nontrivial patterns in very
                 large datasets. The discovered patterns are potentially actionable and beneﬁcial
                 to study the problem at hand.
                    There are several steps involved in this process as proposed initially by
                 Fayyad and Shapiro (1996). Figure 3.1 depicts the goals of knowledge discov-
                 ery (KD) and components of data mining methods they discussed. These goals
                 of KD include the discovery of new patterns or verifying a hypothesis that the
                 users generally accept or are interested in evaluating, such as prediction of
                 future events or explanation to the user in the form of understandable and
                 intuitive knowledge discovered. Increasingly, as data are becoming very large,
                 data mining ﬁts into the core analytics of any big data solution. In such
                 scenarios, the core functionality of the mining algorithms does not change
                 drastically; however, the infrastructure managing the parallelization is a key
                 distinguishing factor in a big data environment. We further discuss the big data
                 perspective to data mining in Chapter 4.
                    A data mining method that is used for the knowledge discovery will
                 generally comprise multiple components, including the following:
                 (a) The model being used and its representation. This refers to the language
                     used to describe the patterns along with any representational assumptions.
                 (b) A method to evaluate the model. DM algorithms have an expected output,
                     and quality of results based on this can be quantiﬁed through an evaluation
                     metric (such as accuracy and error metrics).


                                                                    29


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  30                                   Introduction to Data Mining


                                  Goals of
                                 knowledge
                                  discovery


                    Discover new              Verify user
                       patterns               hypothesis
                                                                                      Components of
                                                                                       data mining
                                                                                        methods
                           Prediction
                                                                      Model
                                                                                     Model evaluation        Search
                                                                  representation
                          Description
                        /presentation to
                              user

                        Figure 3.1 Goals          of    knowledge    discovery     and     components   of   data
                        mining methods.


                                     DM method                          Example evaluation criteria


                                     Classification                     Accuracy, precision, recall,
                                                                        F-measure

                                     Clustering                         Sum of Squared Error,
                                                                        silhouette coefficient

                                     Association rule mining            Confidence, support, lift



                        Figure 3.2 DM method example evaluation criteria.



                  (c) A search component. This involves a parameter search and model search.
                      This component allows for ﬁnding the optimal ﬁt of both the model and
                      parameter to use based on maximizing the evaluation criteria.
                  Some example methods and their evaluation criteria are shown in Figure 3.2.
                  These will be discussed further in the following sections.
                     Figure 3.3 summarizes the steps for a standard knowledge discovery pro-
                  cess. The process starts with large and potentially heterogeneous data sources.
                  Through user input, data need to be identiﬁed and selected based on the task
                  being addressed. As discussed in some models (such as Cross Industry
                  Standard Process for DM [CRISP-DM]; see Chapman et al. 2000, Shearer
                  2000), it is important to have user input at this stage to clearly understand the
                  business or user requirements that can facilitate better and more targeted data
                  selection. Once the right data sources are identiﬁed, integrated data




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      3.2 Data Preprocessing                               31




                   Heterogeneous data
                         sources




                                Data integration               Data                   Data     Pattern
                                 and selection             preprocessing             mining   evaluation



                                                                                              Actionable
                                                                                              knowledge



                       Figure 3.3 KDD process.


                 preprocessing is performed on these data sources. Data preprocessing tasks can
                 include ﬁlling missing values, semantic mapping, removing redundancy in the
                 data through correlation, noise removal, smoothing of the data, data volume
                 reduction, and feature selection, among others. A large amount of preproces-
                 sing can done while integrating the data to resolve data inconsistencies. Data
                 preprocessing generally takes up a majority of time, up to 80%, in any data
                 mining project. A good preprocessing leads to good data mining. Data that
                 have not been sufﬁciently preprocessed may lead to frivolous and random
                 results. Thus, sufﬁcient time should be allocated to the preprocessing tasks.
                    Once the data have been processed, then the relevant data mining task can be
                 applied. Then the results need to be evaluated, and once this evaluation is
                 quantiﬁed any patterns found can become actionable knowledge. It is clearly
                 possible that any stage can send the process back to any of the preceding steps.
                 In addition, once actionable patterns have been tested or examined by the end
                 users, changes can be made to how and what data are collected for better
                 knowledge discovery. All these steps are further described in the following
                 sections. A detailed comparison of multiple DM process models is provided
                 by Kurgan and Musilek (2006), which discusses a step-by-step comparison of
                 over six such models.


                                                   3.2 Data Preprocessing
                 Data in the real world tend to be messy. This can be caused by device
                 malfunction, data entry errors, or data integration from heterogeneous sources.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  32                                      Introduction to Data Mining


                                    Attribute data              Example
                                    type
                                    Numeric                     Number of bytes sent
                                    Categorical                 Type of attack
                                    Binary                      Presence or absence of virus
                                    Ordinal                     Severity of alert (low, medium, high)
                                    Text                        Intrusion alarm text
                                    Complex Types of Datasets   Example

                                    Unstructured                Spam email
                                    text                        Intrusion log data
                                    Spatial data                Geographical server locations
                                                                Locations of cyberphysical sensors
                                                                Locations of spam origination
                                    Graph data                  IP communication graph
                                                                Routing paths for communication


                        Figure 3.4 Examples of some data types.



                  To get high-quality mining results that are actionable and beneﬁcial, it is
                  important to clean up the messy data. Data can be very large in terms of size
                  and number of attributes, meaning that important patterns get hidden in the
                  subspaces. It is important to focus on the right portions of the data both in
                  terms of the volume and the attributes. Data preprocessing such as data
                  cleaning, data transformation, and data reduction, as well as careful data
                  integration, prepares the data for mining.
                     These tasks will vary based on the data types and the complexity of the data.
                  Data can be of different types, including text, numeric (discrete or continuous),
                  ordinal (order or ranked data, such as severity scores, which have an inherent
                  order to them), binary data (with only two possible outcomes), and categorical
                  data (with multiple categories). Various data types and types of complex
                  datasets are shown in Figure 3.4, along with brief descriptions and examples
                  of relevant datasets of these types. Some complex datasets may consists of
                  multiple types of attributes in them; for example, intrusion log data will consist
                  of text, categorical, and numeric data attributes.
                     The preprocessing tasks to apply are selected based on the complexity of the
                  data and the attribute types. For example, similarity in the data is deﬁned
                  differently for numeric attributes versus binary valued attributes. Similarly, for
                  complexity of the data, for example, spatial data, would require additional
                  steps such as discovering spatial proximity, such that the mining task can be
                  separated by spatial neighborhoods.
                     Data preprocessing includes several tasks as discussed in the
                  following subsections.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      3.2 Data Preprocessing               33


                                                      3.2.1 Data Cleaning
                 Many times in network trafﬁc data we might see missing data values
                 due to dropped packets, trafﬁc ﬂuctuations over different time periods,
                 and generally redundancies in network communication data. This step
                 addresses the general cleanup of messy data, including (a) missing data
                 values, (b) ﬂuctuations in the data, and (c) inconsistencies and redundancies
                 in the data.
                    Missing data: To address the missing values, the mean of the attribute
                 (a) if numerical or mode if categorical, can be used to replace the missing
                 values (see Figure 3.5). However, if the dataset is large or has multiple
                 classes/groups, a fairly simple way to deal with missing values is to use
                 the mean of the group to replace the missing values in that particular
                 group (Luengo et al. 2012). This is a fairly intuitive and simple way to
                 deal with missing values. Other more involved methods can be used
                 to predict the missing values by training based on the records that have
                 the complete data.
                    How much missing data can be replaced? A rule of thumb is that if roughly
                 5% of the data are missing, then it is feasible to replace it. One could also




                       Figure 3.5 Example data preprocessing.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  34                               Introduction to Data Mining


                  consult with a domain expert or utilize domain heuristics to decide if data
                  should be discarded or ﬁlled in to impute the missing data.
                     Noisy data: Fluctuations in the data, when taken together in similarity or
                  distance-based methods, can cause results to be messy. Thus, it is useful to
                  clean the noise by smoothing out the data to provide simpler and more reﬁned
                  representations. If the data can be divided into small groups and the mean
                  behavior of the groups can be used to represent all the data in the group, then
                  the data will be much smoother.
                     Small groups can be created by creating small bins or buckets in the data,
                  and the mean or mode of the data can replace all the values in each bin.
                  Binning is essentially an unsupervised splitting-based discretization method of
                  the data. Several discretization techniques are discussed in by Liu et al. (2002)
                  and Garcia et al. (2013). Equal frequency binning roughly deposits an equal
                  number of points are across a ﬁxed number of bins as shown in Figure 3.5b.
                  Similarly, equal distance binning distributes an equal distance across a ﬁxed
                  number of bins (Figure 3.5b).
                     Clustering where similar data points are grouped together and the mean or
                  centroid of the cluster can be used to replace the other values can also create a
                  smooth dataset. In both of binning and clustering, a relatively large number of
                  groups should be used to preserve the data patterns.
                     Outliers: Outliers in the data can drastically alter data mining
                  output, especially in distance-based methods. It is important to decide before-
                  hand through discussions with end users whether outliers need to be accom-
                  modated or eliminated (Kauffman and Rousseeuw 1990). This will also be
                  determined by the types of patterns being discovered. If the main task of the
                  mining is to ﬁnd anomalies, in that case outliers might be kept in the data;
                  however, if the mining task is ﬁnding the normal behavior, such as the baseline
                  network signatures, then it might be more practical to remove outliers. For
                  univariate data, several statistical methods such as interquartile range (IQR)–
                  based outlier detection, discordancy tests, and standard deviation–based tests
                  can be used. For multivariate data, distance-based outlier detection methods
                  can be utilized. Outlier detection as part of the anomaly detection tasks is
                  further discussed in Chapters 6 and 7.


                                    3.2.2 Data Transformation and Integration
                  When data are merged from multiple sources, the resolution of the data may
                  be different; for example, it could be years rather than days. In addition, the
                  attribute ranges may vary, and these ranges may be very large. In these and
                  other scenarios, the data will need to be transformed such that the




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      3.2 Data Preprocessing                    35


                 traditional data mining algorithms can be uniformly applied. Other data
                 integration steps such as mapping the structure and content also need to
                 be performed.
                    Normalization: Many normalization methods have been presented in the
                 traditional statistical literature. One common method of normalization is the
                 min–max normalization (as shown in 3.1) or feature scaling such that d0 is the
                 transformed value and d is the original value in an attribute ‘D’. An example is
                 shown in Figure 3.5c:
                                          d  minD
                                  d0 ¼               ðnewmaxD  newminD Þ þ newminD           (3.1)
                                         maxD  minD

                    In this method, a new range, for example 0–1, is created for the data such
                 that the old min becomes 0 and the old max becomes 1 so that all the data are
                 within this range. This allows for a rescaling of the data to a new well-deﬁned
                 range. Other measures such as z-score normalization work well when the data
                 are normally distributed and the mean is well deﬁned. A comparison of
                 normalization methods, including min–max, z-score, and decimal scaling, is
                 provided by al Shalabi et al. (2006).


                                                     3.2.3 Data Reduction
                 Data mining is inherently useful when patterns need to be discovered in very
                 large amounts of data. For example, network trafﬁc data from Wireshark can
                 become terabytes of data even within a few seconds depending on the network
                 size. Similarly, source and destination-based communication graph can be a
                 massive dataset. In such cases data reduction is an important strategy to help
                 reduce the volume and attribute set of the data.
                    One important step in performing data mining on such massive datasets is
                 reducing the dimensions that may not have sufﬁcient data to begin with or may
                 not be representative of the patterns to be found. For example, in the Wireshark
                 data capture, we might mainly be interested in looking at just the source and
                 destination to generate a communication graph and annotate the graph with
                 packet size. In such scenarios, it is useful to reduce the volume and dimen-
                 sionality of the data. Moreover, in sparse datasets, data reduction helps identify
                 the key subspaces of the data. Data reduction, particularly volume reduction, is
                 also related to the smoothing techniques mentioned in the previous sections,
                 because the central measures of the smoothed data can be used instead of all
                 the data points.
                    Methods such as feature selection can be used to identify the relevant
                 features for performing data mining (Molina et al. 2002, Chandrashekar and




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  36                               Introduction to Data Mining


                  Sahin 2014). Feature selection methods can be ranking-based methods that use
                  entropy measures to quantify how much data are useful in each of the
                  attributes. Methods such as singular-value decomposition and principal com-
                  ponent analysis (Fodor 2002 and Wall et al. 2003) work on the common
                  principal to transform the data such that a combination of the features can be
                  used as transformed features.




                                                        3.3 Data Mining
                  Data in security applications are heterogeneous, high-dimensional, and often
                  complex. In this section, we consider three key groups of methods, namely
                  clustering, classiﬁcation, and association rule mining. The supervised methods
                  are also referred to as machine learning, where historic data help train the
                  algorithm to make predictions. Additional methods such as deep learning are
                  discussed in Chapter 11.
                     Each of these methods also feeds into the discovery of anomalies or unusual
                  patterns, which is particularly relevant to cybersecurity (see Figure 3.6). In
                  particular, anomaly detection deals with ﬁnding individual objects and rare




                        Figure 3.6 Data mining methods.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              3.3 Data Mining                                                   37


                 combinations of objects that are unusual (anomalous) with respect to other
                 “normal” data points. Often the normal is a cluster or a set of clusters and the
                 anomalies are the outlier data points.
                    We start by introducing measures of similarity, which are essential for
                 clustering and various metrics for evaluation of the results of data mining.



                                                 3.3.1 Measures of Similarity
                                           3.3.1.1 Distance Measures
                 If we want to identify a network trafﬁc data point that looks deviant compared
                 to others, the fundamental way to do that is to see how similar or dissimilar it is
                 to other data points in the network trafﬁc. We use these measures when we
                 identify clusters as discussed later in this chapter and also when we identify
                 distance-based outliers, discussed in Chapter 7.
                    The similarity or dissimilarity between two objects can be interpreted as the
                 distance between them. A nonnegative function d(x,y), measuring distance
                 between objects x and y is a metric if it satisﬁes the following:
                 • The identity property, d(x,x) = 0
                 • The symmetry property, d(x,y) = d(y,x)
                 • The triangle inequality, g(x,y) + g(y,z)  g(x,z)
                 Euclidean distance, the straight-line distance between two points in Euclidean
                 space in terms of the attributes of each data point, is one of the most commonly
                 used distance metrics.
                 Euclidean distance (ED) is computed given two n-dimensional data points
                 X(x1, x2, . . . , xn) and Y(y1, y2, . . . , yn), as shown in (3.2):
                                           qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                            EDðX,YÞ ¼ ðx1  y1 Þ2 þ ðx2  y2 Þ2 þ . . . þ ðxn  yn Þ2                                          (3.2)

                 Manhattan distance (MD) is the “city block” distance or the distance measured
                 on each axis. MD is computed as shown in (3.3):
                                  MDðX,YÞ ¼ ðjx1  y1 j þ jx2  y2 j þ . . . þ j xn  yn j Þ                                 (3.3)
                   The Minkowski distance (MnD) is the generalizable distance from which
                 both Euclidean and Manhattan distance are derived. MnD is computed as
                 shown in (3.4):
                                    qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                       MnDðX,YÞ ¼ ðx1  y1 Þp þ ðx2  y2 Þp þ . . . þ ðxn  yn Þp
                                     p
                                                                                                                        (3.4)

                    For p = 2, the Minkowski distance generalizes to Euclidean distance.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  38                               Introduction to Data Mining




                        Figure 3.7 Example distance metrics.


                  Hausdorff distance (HD) is the maximum distance of a set to the nearest
                  point in the other set. Hausdorff distance is a distance metric that ﬁnds the
                  distances between two points considering the contribution of each dimension.
                  It is deﬁned as follows: Given two n-dimensional objects X(x1, x2, . . . , xn) and
                  Y(y1, y2, . . . , yn),

                                     HDðX,YÞ ¼ Max fhðX,YÞ, hðY, XÞg,
                                                       where hðX,YÞ ¼ max ðmin ðxi  yi Þ
                                                       and hðY,XÞ ¼ max ðmin ðyi  xi Þ:
                    This distance takes each dimension into account while calculating the distance
                  between two points, thus bringing out the stark differences between the speciﬁc
                  dimensions. HD has been used in image processing literature to discover
                  difference between images. As deep fakes in video and imaging data become
                  prevalent, distance measures such as Hausdorff distance can be quite useful.
                     Some of the distance measures are summarized in Figure 3.7.


                                  3.3.1.2 Similarity in Binary-Valued Variables
                  Consider two vulnerabilities where you are trying to identify vulnerabilities
                  that are similar to each other. We can extract keywords from all vulnerability
                  descriptions and produce a binary feature vector for each vulnerability with a
                  presence of a keyword (1) or absence of a keyword (0). We can use similarity
                  measures on these binary-valued feature vectors to ﬁnd vulnerabilities that are
                  similar to each other.
                     When computing a similarity coefﬁcient matrix for binary-valued attributes,
                  such as in the preceding example and as illustrated in Figure 3.8, we start with
                  the data matrix comprised of feature vectors for each object. The data matrix is
                  thus an n  m matrix consisting of n objects each with a feature vector of m
                  features. The ﬁrst step is to determine the contingency matrix of this data
                  matrix, which essentially is the values of a, b, c, and d. Here, a is the number
                  of positive matches for each object pair where objects oi and oj both have a
                  value of 1, b is the number of mismatches where oi has a value of 1 and oj has a
                  value of 0, c is the number of mismatches such that oi has a value of 0 and oj




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          3.3 Data Mining                   39




                       Figure 3.8 Process of similarity computation.




                 has a value of 1, and d equals the number of negative matches such that oi
                 and oj both have a value of 0. Once these values are computed, they can be
                 used to compute the similarity using different types of similarity coefﬁcients
                 such as the Jaccard coefﬁcient (a/a + b + c). The output is a n  n triangular
                 matrix with the computed similarity between each object pair.
                    The Jaccard coefﬁcient is an asymmetric coefﬁcient that ignores negative
                 matches. Asymmetric coefﬁcients should be applied to data where absences
                 (0s) are thought to carry no information. For example, if we would like to
                 study attacks, then a system that did not have a set of attacks is not a
                 relevant question so features with a 0–0 match (i.e., the system has not had
                 an attack) is not relevant. Therefore, asymmetric coefﬁcient is useful to
                 employ. Symmetric coefﬁcients acknowledge negative matches and should
                 therefore be applied to data where absences are thought to carry information.
                 An example is the simple matching coefﬁcient (SMC). For example, if we
                 are studying impact of a vulnerability patch on a software, then if in two
                 types of applications there was no impact of the patch, then this is pertinent
                 information we want to capture. Thus, in this scenario we would use a
                 symmetric coefﬁcient. There are some other types of coefﬁcients, called
                 hybrids, that include the 0–0 match in either the numerator or denominator
                 but not both. Several different types of similarity coefﬁcients are proposed
                 and evaluated (Lewis and Janeja 2011), and some examples are shown in
                 Figure 3.9.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  40                               Introduction to Data Mining


                    Asymmetric


                    Coefficient                                                 Expression


                    Anderberg (range 0–1)
                                                                                    + 2( + )

                    Jaccard–Tanimoto (range 0–1)
                                                                                    +   +

                    Kulczynski (range 0–1)                                      1
                                                                                            +
                                                                                2       +       +
                    Ochiai–Cosine (range 0–1)
                                                                                √( + )( + )
                    Sorensen–Dice (range 0–1)                                     2
                                                                                2 + +
                    Symmetric


                    Baulieu (range –1 to 1)                                       4( − )
                                                                                ( + + + )2
                    Simple matching (range 0–1)                                         +
                                                                                    +   + +
                    Russel–Rao (hybrid, range 0–1)
                                                                                    +   + +

                        Figure 3.9 Example types of similarity coefﬁcients.




                                               3.3.2 Measures of Evaluation
                  Every data mining method needs to have a way to evaluate the results to ensure
                  quality of results from an algorithmic perspective as well as usefulness, ground
                  truth evaluation, and business evaluation.
                     For classiﬁcation approaches where the accuracy of predicted labels is
                  being evaluated, measures such as accuracy, precision, recall, and F-measure
                  are used. These are based on validating the results against real-world or known
                  class labels. We compare the experimental ﬁnding with the labeled ground
                  truth for class 1 and class 2, for example anomaly or not an anomaly, to
                  measure the accuracy of the approach. These measures are based on true
                  positive (TP), which indicates that the label is classiﬁed correctly as an
                  anomaly; the true negative (TN), which indicates if the label is classiﬁed
                  correctly as not an anomaly; false positive (FP), which indicates that the node
                  is misclassiﬁed as an anomaly; and false negative (FN), which indicates that




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          3.3 Data Mining                                                   41



                   DM method                         Example evaluation criteria
                   Classification                    Accuracy =
                                                     Precision =
                                                     Recall =
                                                     F-Measure =

                                                                                           K
                   Clustering                        Sum of squared error =            ¦  ¦
                                                                                       i 1      x  Ci
                                                                                                         dist 2 (mi , x )



                                                     Silhouette coefficient =
                                                                                                               ao bo

                   Association rule mining                                                     P(X U Y )
                                                     Confidence XoY = P(Y|X) =
                                                                                                 P(X)
                                                                                  P(X U Y )
                                                     Support = XoY =
                                                              P(X U Y )
                                                     Lift =
                                                              P(X) P(Y)




                       Figure 3.10 Example measures of evaluation.


                 the anomaly is misclassiﬁed as not an anomaly. There are several performance
                 measures that can be calculated based on the labeled anomalies as shown in
                 Figure 3.10.
                    There are additional measures that can be used, such as (1) true positive
                 rate = TP/(TP + FN), which shows the percentage of positive instances
                 correctly classiﬁed; (2) true negative rate = TN/(TN + FP), which shows the
                 percentage of the negative instances correctly classiﬁed; (3) false positive
                 rate = FP/(TN + FP); and (4) false negative rate = FN/(FN + TP). Overall
                 accuracy is a commonly accepted performance measure for classiﬁcation
                 performance. However, accuracy alone can be misleading, for example in a
                 setting where anomalies are small percentage in the data. In such instances, a
                 combination of precision and recall in the form of F-measure can be used. The
                 additional measures allow us to validate the results from multiple perspectives.
                    In case of association rule mining, measures such as lift, conﬁdence, and
                 support are used to measure the quality of results of association rules of the
                 form X!Y.
                    Lift is a correlation measure that assesses the degree to which the
                 occurrences of one lifts the occurrences of the other. The lift between the
                 occurrences of X and Y items in a transaction can be measured as lift(X!Y) =
                 P(X∪Y)/P(X)P(Y), where numerator deﬁnes the occurrences of the X and




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  42                               Introduction to Data Mining


                  Y instances together and the denominator indicates the occurrences of the
                  instances independently. The preceding equation can be extended to more than
                  two domains.
                     If lift > 1, then X and Y are positively correlated, and if it is less than 1, then
                  they are negatively correlated. If the lift = 1, then X and Y are independent and
                  there is no correlation between them.
                     The support of the rule is the probability of P(X∪Y)/total number of tuples.
                     Conﬁdence of the rule is the conditional probability of Y given
                  X (i.e., P(Y|X)) = P(X∪Y)/P(X). Each rule is associated with a conﬁdence
                  that measures the degree of association.
                     Clustering quality can be measured through the sum of squared error (SSE),
                  which measures the deviation of every point in the cluster from its mean. The
                  SSE of all clusters together gives a measure of the quality of the clustering.
                     Another commonly used measure is the silhouette coefﬁcient, which meas-
                  ures the shadow of a cluster over another cluster by measuring the distance
                  between each point of a cluster to its neighboring clusters.
                     These measures are shown in Figure 3.10.


                                                3.3.3 Clustering Algorithms
                  Clustering is a technique used for ﬁnding similarly behaving groups in data or
                  to identify preexisting structure in the data. Ideally, a clustering method should
                  lead to a crisp demarcation of the data such that objects in the same group are
                  highly similar to each other and objects in different groups are very dissimilar
                  to each other, that is, intercluster distance should be maximized and
                  intracluster distance should be minimized.
                     In addition to distinguishing between various types of objects, clustering can
                  be used as an exploratory process and as a precursor to another mining task
                  such as anomaly detection. When a cluster is discovered, the objects outside of
                  this structure could be of interest (e.g., anomaly detection). In other cases, the
                  cluster itself could be of interest.
                     Clustering has been a well-studied problem in the statistical literature, and
                  there exist several well-developed algorithms already tried and tested
                  (Kotsiantis and Pintelas 2004, Jain 2010). Clustering approaches can be
                  roughly divided into several subclasses of algorithms, as shown in
                  Figure 3.11. Partitioning approaches divide the data into partitions with
                  optimal partitions being deﬁned based on some heuristics as in the case of
                  K-Means. Hierarchical algorithms divide the data into a hierarchy starting
                  from all data points into one cluster and dividing up the data points such that
                  each data point is in its own cluster. Density-based approaches divide the data




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                   3.3 Data Mining                                                                              43


                                                          K-means (MacQuffn, 1967)

                                                          PAM: Partioning around medoids/K-medoids (Kaufman & Rousseeuw 1987)
                                     Partitioning
                                                           CLARA: Clustering large applications (Kaufman & Rousseeuw, 1990)
                                                           CLARANS: CLARA based on randomized search (Ng & Han 1994)

                                                                                    AGNES: Agglomerative nesting(Kaufman & Rousseeuw, 1990)
                                                                                        DIANA: Divisive analysis (Kaufman & Rousseeuw, 1990)

                                                    Hierarchical                      BIRCH: Balanced iterative reducing and clustering using hierarchies (Zhang et al. 1996)

                                                                                          CURE: Clustering using representatives ((Guha et al. 1998)
                                                                                                   CHAMELEON (Karyphis et al. 1999)

                                                                    DBSCAN: Density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise (Ester et al. 1996)

                                                                            OPTICS: Ordering points to identify clustering structure (Ankerst et al. 1999)
                    Clustering




                                                                                 DENCLUE: Density-based clustering (Hinnenberg & Keim 1998)
                                                                                       GDBSCAN: Generalized DBSCAN (Sander et al. 1998)
                                         Density based
                                                                                  PDBSCAN: Parallel DBSCAN (Xu et al. 1999)

                                                                     DBCLASD: Distribution-based clustering of large spatial databases (Xu et al. 1998)

                                                                                       Jarvis Patrick algorithm (Jarvis & Patrick 1973)

                                                                                FDC: Fast density-based clustering (Zhou et al. 1999)

                                                                                                                CLASSIT (Gennari et al. 1989)

                                                                                                           AutoClass (Stutz & Cheeseman 1996)
                                                              Model based
                                                                                                              EM: Expectation maximization (Dempster et al. 1977)

                                                                                                                 RBMN: Recursive Bayesian multinets (Peña et al. 2002)

                                                                       STING: Statistical information grid (Wang et al. 1997)

                                          Grid based                            CLIQUE: clustering In Quest (Agrawal et al. 1998)

                                                                                ROCK: Robust clustering using links (Guha et al. 2000)




                                 Figure 3.11 Clustering approaches.



                 into groups based on density of the data points in a user-deﬁned neighborhood
                 range, such as density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise
                 (DBSCAN). We focus on a few selected and well-used algorithms to illustrate
                 the concepts of clustering across some of these types of approaches.


                                   3.3.3.1 Partitioning Algorithms: K-Means
                 The primary approach of partitioning algorithms, such as K-means, is to form
                 subgroups of the entire set of data, by making K partitions, based on a
                 similarity criterion. The data in the subgroups are grouped around a central
                 object such as a mean or medoid. However, they differ in the way that they
                 deﬁne the similarity criterion, central object, and convergence of clusters.
                 K-means (MacQueen 1967) is based on ﬁnding partitions in the data by
                 evaluating the distance of objects in the cluster to the centroid, which is the
                 mean of the data in the cluster. The algorithm, depicted in the example in
                 Figure 3.12, starts with a set of points and a K value for number of clusters to
                 form and seed centroids that can be selected from the data or randomly
                 generated. The algorithm begins by partitioning points around the seed cen-
                 troids such that the point is allocated to the centroid to which its distance is




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  44                               Introduction to Data Mining




                        Figure 3.12 K-means clustering.


                  smallest. At the end of the ﬁrst round, we have K clusters partitioned around
                  the seed centroids. Now the means or centroids of the newly formed clusters are
                  computed and the process is repeated to align the points to the newly computed
                  centroids. This process is iterated until there is no more reassignment of the
                  points moving from one cluster to the other. Thus, K-means works on a
                  heuristic-based partitioning rather than an optimal partitioning. The quality of
                  clusters can be evaluated using the sum of squared errors (Figure 3.10), which
                  computes the distance of every point in the cluster to its centroid. Intuitively, the
                  bigger the error, the more spread out the points are around the mean. However, if
                  we plot the SSE for K ¼ 1 to K ¼ n (n number of points), then SSE ranges from
                  a very large value (all points in one cluster) to 0 (every point in its own cluster).
                  The elbow of this plot provides an ideal value of K.
                     K-means has been a well-used and well-accepted clustering algorithm due to
                  its intuitive approach and interpretable output. However, K-means does not
                  work very well in the presence of outliers and does not form nonspherical or
                  free-form clusters.

                                  3.3.3.2 Partitioning Algorithms: CLARANS
                  Clustering large applications with randomized search (CLARANS), proposed
                  by Ng and Han (1994), is a type of partitioning approach. It extends the ideas
                  proposed in partitioning around medoids (PAM-K-medoid) and clustering
                  large applications (CLARA) proposed by Kaufman and Rousseeuw (1987,
                  1990). This algorithm draws samples with randomness at each step of the




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          3.3 Data Mining                           45




                       Figure 3.13 CLARANS process.


                 process. The quality of clustering is dependent on the sampling technique being
                 used. Similar to other partitioning techniques, K is ﬁxed. Each cluster is
                 represented as a graph node containing the solution of clustering in terms of
                 medoids or the central representative object around which other objects are
                 clustered. The neighboring node differs by one object from its neighbor, and
                 they are connected by an edge. For example, a node with objects 2, 3, and 4 and
                 a node with objects 3, 4, and 5 differ in only one object so they are neighbors
                 and are joined by an edge. It selects a sample of neighbors unlike CLARA,
                 which selects a sample of the original data. For each node selected, the squared
                 error is calculated. CLARANS also uses the technique to determine the natural
                 clustering using the silhouette coefﬁcient (Kauffman and Rousseeuw 1990).
                    The algorithm works as shown in Figure 3.13.
                    The edge graph looks as shown in Figure 3.13a. It starts by setting parameter
                 Current to an arbitrary node and set S to a random neighbor of Current. It ﬁnds the
                 cost difference between Current and S. If S has a lower cost, then it sets Current to
                 S and resets j ¼ 1. Now if S has cost more than Current, then a counter is
                 incremented. If J is less than the parameter maxneighbors, then the algorithm
                 ﬁnds a new random neighbor of Current; otherwise, it compares the cost of current
                 with minCost threshold; if it is less than mincost, then it sets a ﬂag for bestnode to
                 current. If threshold for number of iterations is met, then bestnode is output;
                 otherwise, a new random current node is selected to repeat the process.


                 Silhouette Coefﬁcient CLARANS uses the silhouette coefﬁcient (proposed in
                 Kaufman and Rousseuw 1987) to identify the quality of clustering results in
                 terms of structure and its silhouette or shadow on other clusters.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  46                               Introduction to Data Mining


                     Given object o in a cluster A, then a(o) is the average distance between the
                  object o and the objects in cluster A. b(o) is the average distance between the
                  object o and the objects in the second-closest cluster B. The silhouette of o is
                  then deﬁned as
                                                                 bð oÞ  að oÞ
                                                     SðoÞ ¼
                                                                max faðoÞ, bðoÞg
                  where
                       SðoÞ = –1: not well assigned, on average closer to members of B
                       SðoÞ = 0: in between A and B
                       SðoÞ = 1: good assignment of “o” to its cluster A
                  The silhouette coefﬁcient of a clustering is thus the average silhouette of all the
                  objects in the cluster.
                    CLARANS provides an efﬁcient way to deal with the issues related to PAM
                  (K-Medoids) that involves a large number of swapping operations, leading to
                  very high complexity. It also improves upon CLARA. CLARANS is similar to
                  CLARA in terms of sampling, but here the sampling is done at every step.
                  However, objects are stored in main memory and the focus on representative
                  objects is missing. This issue has been addressed using spatial data structures
                  such as R* trees and focusing techniques. Although CLARANS enables outlier
                  detection, it is not primarily geared toward the process of detecting anomalies.

                                  3.3.3.3 Density-Based Algorithms: DBSCAN
                  Density-based algorithms can be useful for traditional cybersecurity data, such
                  as network trafﬁc data, to identify dense clusters in Euclidean space. In
                  addition, they are also very useful for geospatial datasets. For example, in
                  studying threats over a geospatial region, this could be a useful method.
                  Similarly, for sensor networks that rely a lot on the spatial layouts, it may be
                  useful to identify similarly behaving dense clusters and potential anomalies
                  that stand apart from sensors in proximity.
                     Density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases
                  with noise, proposed by Ester et al. (1996), is the foundation of several other
                  density-based clustering algorithms. The basic idea is that we see clusters as
                  dense or sparse regions based on the number of points in the neighborhood
                  region of a point under consideration. They formalize these ideas with a certain
                  radius and a minimum number of points in the region (parameters: ε, MinPts).
                  The minimum number of points in a radius of ε facilitates the measurement of
                  density in that neighborhood. ε Neighborhood (in Euclidean point space) is the
                  neighborhood of a point that contains the (minPts) points. Variations of




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                               3.3 Data Mining                                  47


                                                                   Example: MinPts=3, ε=1              (b)
                                                                   Core Points: p2, p4, p6, and p7
                                         p10                       p1 is directly density reachable from p2
                                                    p6             p3 is directly density reachable from p4
                        p1          p4
                                                                   p5 is directly density reachable from p6
                                                          p7
                                               p8                  p6 is directly density reachable from p7
                               p3
                          p2        p5                   p9
                                                                   p8 is indirectly density reachable from p7 as p8
                                                                   DDR from p6 and p6 DDR from p7 so by
                                                                   transivity p8 is indirectly density reachable
                 (a)
                                                                   from p7
                                                                   p1, p3, and p5 are all density connected points
                                                                   p10 is an outlier

                       Figure 3.14 DBSCAN process.


                 DBSCAN identify ε through computing K distance for every point, i.e., if
                 k = 2, the distance between the point and its second-nearest neighbor, and
                 sort this in descending order. The K-Distance is plotted and a valley or dip in
                 the K-distance plot along with a user input of the expected noise determines
                 the ε neighborhood. The algorithm deﬁnes density in terms of core points.
                 A core point is an object that has the minimum points in its neighborhood
                 deﬁned by ε.
                    The algorithm works as shown in Figure 3.14. The algorithm begins by
                 identifying core points and forming clusters through directly density reachable
                 points from this core point. It then merges the cluster with such points. The
                 process terminates when no new point can be added.
                    Thus, a density-based cluster is a set of density-connected objects. Every
                 object not contained in any cluster is considered to be noise.
                    This approach identiﬁes connected cluster structures, which can identify
                 arbitrarily shaped clusters unlike the other partitioning algorithms. It takes into
                 consideration a neighborhood of an object based on the distance and count of
                 the objects in the neighborhood. The initial ε distance is calculated using the
                 K nearest neighbor (K-NN) query with some level of user input. Once the
                 clusters start emerging, they can be merged using the concepts of density
                 connectivity and density reachability. However, this may lead to forming of
                 big global clusters (single link effect) without identifying local cluster struc-
                 tures. This does not truly reﬂect the density of the cluster in terms of the local
                 density structure. This algorithm is also sensitive to input parameters such as
                 the minimum objects in the neighborhood and the value of K for the K-NN
                 query. Moreover, this is approach is not well suited to high-dimensional
                 datasets since the density connectedness is not directly applicable and intuitive




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  48                               Introduction to Data Mining


                  for all the dimensions. It could be possible that objects in some dimensions are
                  similar, but very dissimilar in some other dimensions. Several variations of
                  DBSCAN, as shown in Figure 3.11, have been proposed addressing these
                  limitations.

                                  3.3.3.4 Density-Based Algorithms: OPTICS
                  Ordering points to identify the clustering structure (OPTICS), proposed by
                  Ankerst et al. (1999), is a density-based algorithm. Many real-time datasets
                  cannot be characterized by global density parameters. Different local densities
                  may be needed to identify clusters in different regions of the data space.
                  Mostly the clusters that are formed are large without any segregation of smaller
                  clusters that may be contained in these.
                     Density-based clustering may miss detecting these smaller structures within
                  a dense cluster as there can be several possible parameter values that can be
                  used. For a constant MinPts value, density-based clusters with respect to
                  higher density (or low radius) are completely contained in density-connected
                  sets with respect to a lower density (or high radius).
                     OPTICS extends the DBSCAN algorithm to generate clusters with multiple
                  densities simultaneously. Moreover, a speciﬁc order is followed in which
                  objects are processed. More dense clusters (low radius) are processed ﬁrst. It
                  does not assign cluster memberships but just stores the order in which objects
                  are processed. This information is later used to assign memberships and is
                  provided as two values: core distance and reachability distance. Core distance
                  is the smallest distance ε0 between a point p and an object in its ε-neighbor-
                  hood, such that p would be a core object with respect to ε0 . In Figure 3.15,
                  distance core (o) makes o a core object. This distance in the example is less
                  than the ε neighborhood. Reachability distance of an object p with respect to
                  another object o is the smallest distance such that p is directly density reach-
                  able from o if o is a core object. The reachability distance cannot be smaller




                        Figure 3.15 Core and reachability distance.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          3.3 Data Mining                        49


                 than the core distance of ‘o’. The reachability distance of p depends on the core
                 object with respect to which it is calculated.
                    A low reachability indicates an object within a cluster; high reachability
                 indicates a noise object or a jump from one cluster to another. Ankerst et al.
                 (1999) propose a technique to view the cluster structure graphically using the
                 reachability plot. This is a graph of the reachability distances for each object in
                 the cluster ordering. This cluster ordering is facilitated by a data structure,
                 namely the access control list. An object p1 is selected and the core distance is
                 selected around p1. This leads to the identiﬁcation of objects in this neighbor-
                 hood, and their reachability distances are measured and stored in the access
                 control list. This process is performed iteratively in the neighboring objects as
                 well. Subsequently, the distance is plotted on the reachability plot.
                    OPTICS addresses the issue of not only traditional clustering but also
                 intrinsic clustering structure, which other clustering techniques ignore
                 (single-link effect). Many clustering techniques have global parameters produ-
                 cing uniform structures, and many times the smaller clusters are merged in the
                 nearby clusters connected by few points into one big cluster. Thus, OPTICS
                 addresses this issue of intrinsic clusters that helps in identifying dispersion of
                 data and correlation of the data. However, this approach is still somewhat
                 sensitive to input parameters such as minpts in a neighborhood K value for the
                 KNN query. There could be a scenario when a small cluster itself could be
                 outlying with respect to a global structure. This book does not address such
                 a scenario.


                                                       3.3.4 Classiﬁcation
                 Given a collection of records, the goal of classiﬁcation is to derive a model that
                 can assign a record to a class as accurately as possible. A class is often referred
                 to as a label; for example, a data point is anomaly or not. For example,
                 Anomaly and Not an anomaly can be two classes. Objects can also be
                 classiﬁed as belonging to multiple classes. Classiﬁcation is a supervised
                 method that is based on a well-formed training set, i.e., prelabeled data with
                 samples of both classes, to create a classiﬁer model that identiﬁes previously
                 unseen observations in the test set for labeling each instance with a label based
                 on the model’s prediction. The overall process of classiﬁcation is shown in
                 Figure 3.16. In general, the labeled data, which is a set of database tuples with
                 their corresponding class labels, can be divided into training and test data. In
                 the training phase, a classiﬁcation algorithm builds a classiﬁer (set of rules) for
                 each class using features or attributes in the data. In the testing phase, a set of
                 data tuples that are not overlapping with the training tuples is selected. Each




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  50                               Introduction to Data Mining




                                                               Labeled data


                                     Training
                                       data

                                        Classification
                                                                                           Accuracy
                                                                        Test                metrics
                                        Model                           data
                                      generation




                                          Expert                  Real-time prediction
                                         systems

                        Figure 3.16 Classiﬁcation process.


                  test tuple is compared with the classiﬁcation rules to determine its class. The
                  labels of the test tuples are reported along with percentage of correctly
                  classiﬁed labels to evaluate the accuracy of the model in previously unseen
                  (labels in the) data. As the model accuracy is evaluated and rules are perfected
                  for labeling previously unseen instances, these rules can be used for future
                  predictions. One way to do that is to maintain a knowledge base or expert
                  system with these discovered rules, and as incoming data are observed to
                  match these rules, the labels for them are predicted.
                     Several classiﬁcation algorithms have been proposed that approach the
                  classiﬁcation modeling using different mechanisms (see Figure 3.17 and
                  Kotsiantis et al. 2006). For example, the decision tree algorithms provide a
                  set of rules in the form of a decision tree to provide labels based on conditions
                  in the tree branches. Bayesian models provide a probability value of an
                  instance belonging to a class. Function-based methods provide functions for
                  demarcations in the data such that the data are clearly divided between classes.
                  In addition to some of the basic methods there are also classiﬁer combinations,
                  namely ensemble methods, which combine the classiﬁers across multiple
                  samples of the training data. These methods are designed to increase the
                  accuracy of the classiﬁcation task by training several different classiﬁers and
                  combining their results to output a class label. A good analogy is when humans
                  seek the input of several experts before making an important decision. There
                  are several studies suggesting that diversity among classiﬁer models is a
                  required condition for having a good ensemble classiﬁer (Li 2008, Garcia-
                  Teodoro et al. 2009). These studies also suggest that the base classiﬁer in the




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                     3.3 Data Mining                                                                   51


                                                                                             ID3 (Quinlan 1979)
                                             Decision tree based
                                                                                          C4.5 (Quinlan 1993)


                                                                            Naïve Bayes (Maron and Kuhns 1960)
                                          Bayesian
                                                            Bayesian Network (Cooper & Herskovits 1992)


                                                                                            RIPPER K ( Cohen 1995)
                                                      Rule based
                   Classification




                                                                                            PART: partial decision trees (Frank & Witten 1998)


                                                                          Support vector machine (Cortes & Vapnik 1995)
                                          Funcon based
                                                                           Logistic regression (Press & Wilson 1978)


                                                                                                       K-nearest neighbors (Cover & Hart 1967)
                                          Lazy learning/ instance-based algorithms
                                                                                                K* (Cleary & Trigg 1995)


                                                                                      Bagging (Breiman, 1996)

                                                                   Boosting: ADA boost (Freund & Schapire, 1996)
                                      Classifier combinations
                                       (ensemble methods)                  Random forest (Beriman 2001)

                                                                   MILES: multiclass imbalanced learning in ensembles through selective sampling (Azari et al. 2017)



                                    Figure 3.17 Classiﬁcation techniques.


                 ensemble should be a weak learner in order to get the best results out of an
                 ensemble. A classiﬁcation algorithm is called a weak learner if a small change
                 in the training data produces big difference in the induced classiﬁer mapping.
                    We next discuss a few relevant classiﬁcation methods.


                                        3.3.4.1 Decision Tree Based: C4.5
                 Proposed by Quinlan (1993), C4.5 is a well-accepted classiﬁcation method that
                 provides an intuitive model in the form of a decision tree based on the
                 training set.
                    Let us consider a small internet trace data, shown in Figure 3.18a, including
                 attributes such as day of the week, average size of packets, and average size of
                 the ﬂows, and labeled with attack information as to whether such traces
                 contained attacks or not. The task would be to classify whether there will be
                 an attack or not given the type of trace data.
                    The C4.5 decision tree algorithm starts by evaluating attributes to identify
                 the attribute that gives the most information for making a decision for labeling
                 with the class. The decision tree provides a series of rules to identify which
                 attribute should be evaluated to come up with the label for a record where the




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  52                               Introduction to Data Mining




                        Figure 3.18 Example C4.5 execution.



                  label is unknown. These rules form the branches in the decision tree. The
                  purity of the attributes to make a decision split in the tree is computed using
                  measures such as entropy. The entropy of a particular node, InfoA (correspond-
                  ing to an attribute), in a tree is the sum, over all classes represented in the node,
                  of the proportion of records belonging to a particular class. The entropy
                  computation of the data, InfoD and attribute, InfoA (e.g., Info (packets)) is
                  shown in Figure 3.19. When entropy reduction is chosen as a splitting criter-
                  ion, the algorithm searches for the split that reduces entropy or equivalently the
                  split that increases information, learned from that attribute, by the greatest
                  amount. If a leaf in a decision tree is entirely pure, then classes in the leaf can
                  be clearly described, that is, they all fall in the same class. If a leaf is highly
                  impure, then describing it is much more complex. Entropy helps us quantify
                  the concept of purity of the node. The best split is one that does the best job of
                  separating the records into groups where a single class predominates the group
                  of records in that branch.
                     The attribute that reduces the entropy or maximizes the gain (GainA =
                  InfoD – InfoA) is selected as a splitting attribute. Once the ﬁrst splitting
                  attribute is decided, then recursively the process is repeated in all the attributes
                  of the subset of the data remaining, resulting in a decision tree such as is shown




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          3.3 Data Mining                        53




                       Figure 3.19 Entropy computation for a data set and attributes.


                 in Figure 3.18d. Several other measures for attribute selection measures can be
                 used (such as evaluated by Dash and Liu 1997).


                                   3.3.4.2 Classiﬁer Combinations: MILES
                 In massive datasets, patterns can often be hidden and hard to discern with
                 individual classiﬁers. Moreover, if different parts of the data can contribute to a
                 different aspect of the pattern, a single classiﬁer may not be useful. Let us
                 consider an example of phishing detection (Azari et al. 2020). If we look at
                 email messages to predict whether an email could be phishing or not, we can
                 look at the header information or the body of the email to get different
                 elements of potential phishing. Moreover, the data may have imbalance in
                 terms of phishing emails and normal emails. In this case, using an ensemble-
                 based method, which can handle class imbalance, can be very useful to
                 consider different parts of the email to ﬂag a phishing message.
                    Multiclass imbalanced learning in ensembles through selective sampling
                 (MILES) (Azari and Janeja 2017) is an approach that comprises the following
                 three components: (i) creating training sets using clustering-based selective
                 sampling, (ii) rebalancing the training sets, and (iii) combining the classiﬁers
                 and forming the ensemble. In ensemble learning, it is important to form




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  54                               Introduction to Data Mining




                        Figure 3.20 Selection of training sets in MILES.


                  learning sets from different regions in the feature space. This is particularly
                  important if the data are imbalanced and have distribution of multiple classes
                  with some majority and minority classes in the feature space. Learning sets that
                  are dissimilar can produce more diverse results. MILES adopts clustering as a
                  stratiﬁed sampling approach to form a set of learning sets that are different
                  from each other, and at the same time each one of them is representative of the
                  original learning set D. It uses K cluster sets to selectively choose the training
                  samples. It utilizes the concept of split ratio (SR) to split the examples in
                  clusters into three strata (near, far, and mid) around the cluster centroids as
                  shown in Figure 3.20.
                     First, a base classiﬁer H is selected. Here H can be decision tree classiﬁer
                  such as C4.5, described earlier. Next, the base classiﬁer is trained with training
                  sets N, F, and M in order to form a set of learned classiﬁers
                   π ¼ fH N , H M , H F g. Then the maximum vote rule is used to combine the
                  votes of the classiﬁers and build the ensemble H.     H
                                                                          is the original ensemble
                  MILES, which is created by combining the votes that come from
                                           Under is the variation of MILES combined with random
                  fH N , H M , H F g. The H
                                                                                         Over is the
                  undersampling, where fN Under , M Under , F Under g are utilized, and H
                  variation of MILES combined with random oversampling, where
                  fN over , M over , F over g are utilized. Undersampling is useful when there are too
                  many instances of a class, and oversampling is useful when there are too few
                  samples of the class.
                     The training examples could potentially be selected into more than three
                  training sets, however: (1) If the number of splits is increased to very highly
                  granular demarcations, then there will be splitting of already identiﬁed similar
                  groups so the diversity of the training set will go down. (2) An ensemble




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          3.3 Data Mining                       55


                 requires at least three classiﬁers to form a maximum vote combination rule, so
                 a minimum of three sets can be sufﬁcient. (3) A smaller ensemble is faster and
                 more efﬁcient because there are fewer classiﬁers to train. Results with MILES
                 have shown a size of three produces the highest diversity in terms of a diversity
                 statistic (Q statistic) and also the best classiﬁcation performance for the
                 proposed ensemble.

                                             3.3.4.3 Other Approaches
                 Bayesian methods, such as naive Bayes (Maron and Kuhns 1960), provide a
                 probabilistic label for a tuple of the test data based on the training set. The
                 naïve Bayes classiﬁer considers each attribute and class as a random variable.
                 Now given a tuple with attribute values, the goal is to predict probability of
                 class label C. Speciﬁcally, it is based on ﬁnding the class probability given the
                 attribute values that can be framed as a conditional probability P(C|Attributes).
                 The naïve Bayes algorithm assumes independence of attributes such that the
                 P(C|Attributes) becomes P(C|A1) * P(C|A2) * . . . * P(C|An). The idea is to
                 ﬁnd class C, which maximizes this probability. While this is a relatively
                 intuitive method, it relies on the independence assumption. Bayesian networks,
                 on the other hand, represents dependency among attributes.
                    Another popular function-based method is support vector machines (SVM)
                 (Cortes and Vapnik 1995). SVM relies on the identiﬁcation of support vectors
                 that linearly partition the data based on the class labels. It looks for a maximal
                 marginal hyperplane, which maximizes this separation. If the data are not
                 linearly separable, such that the decision boundary is not clearly deﬁned, it
                 uses a nonlinear mapping of attributes to transform the original training data
                 attributes to a higher dimensional space for a well-deﬁned classiﬁcation.


                                3.3.5 Pattern Mining: Association Rule Mining
                 Pattern essentially refers to occurrence of multiple objects in a certain combin-
                 ation that could lead to discovery of an implicit interaction. A frequent pattern
                 refers to frequently co-occurring objects. A rare pattern essentially refers to a
                 combination of objects not normally occurring and that could lead to identiﬁ-
                 cation of a possible unusual interaction between the objects.
                    Events become relevant when they occur together in a sequence or as
                 groups. Some approaches deal with this as a causal problem and therefore rely
                 on conditional probability of events to determine the occurrence. If events are
                 seen as itemsets in transactions, focus has been put on ﬁnding conditional
                 relationships such that presence of A causes B with a certain probability.
                 However, there might be events where there might be no implied causal




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  56                                           Introduction to Data Mining


                                                                                                              Multilevel Apriori (Han & Fu 1995)

                                                                                                             Multidimensional Apriori (Srikant and Agrawal 1994)
                                                               Apriori (Agrawal & Srikant 1994)
                                                                                                             Apriori TID, hybrid (Agrawal and Srikant 1994)

                                     Frequent pattern mining                                                   Constraint based (Ng et al. 1998, Pei & Han 2000)

                                                                                         FP tree based (Han et al. 2000)
                                                               Tree based
                                                                                         Rapid association rule mining (Das et al. 2001)

                                                                             Actionable patterns in events data (Ma & Hellerstein, 2002)

                                                                              Mutually dependent patterns (Ma & Hellerstein 2001a)
                  Pattern mining




                                                                         Partially periodic event pattern (Ma & Hellerstein 2001b)

                                                                                                           Weighted ARM (Tao et al. 2003)

                                         Rare pattern mining                                                      Relative support (RSAA) (Yao et al. 2003)

                                                                     Variable support based                 Apriori inverse (Koh & Rountree 2005)

                                                                                                         Multi support (MSAPriori) (Liu et al. 1999)

                                                                                                               Adaptive Apriori (Wang et al. 2003)

                                                                                              Min hashing (Cohen et al. 2001)
                                                                   Without support
                                                                                                   Confidence-based pruning (Wang et al. 2001)

                                                                   Rare event sequences (Hu et al. 2014)

                                          Sequence mining         Structural paerns (Lee et al. 2015)

                                                                  Spaal colocaons (Huang et al. 2006)



                                   Figure 3.21 Pattern mining approaches.


                  relationships between them, but the relationship is based purely on co-occur-
                  rence. For example, events might have no implied or evident causal relation-
                  ship but a co-occurrence relationship based on frequency of occurrence
                  (Agrawal et al. 1994) based on a certain degree of support or conﬁdence
                  deﬁning the probability of one event given the other. A categorization of the
                  various pattern mining approaches is shown in Figure 3.21. Several surveys of
                  patterns such as associations (Zhao and Bhowmick 2003) and rare patterns
                  (Koh and Ravana 2016) provide an overview of these approaches.
                     We discuss two approaches to show a contrast between the discovery of
                  patterns based on frequency of occurrence versus the discovery of patterns
                  where the frequency of events is very less and thus will require other infor-
                  mation for discovery of the rare pattern.

                                   3.3.5.1 Frequent Pattern Mining: Apriori
                  The Apriori algorithm (Agarwal and Srikant 1994) is one of the most well-
                  established data mining algorithms and the basis for the work of several
                  frequent pattern mining approaches. It provides the approach to discover
                  association rules. It is used to identify relationships among a set of items in a




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          3.3 Data Mining                    57




                        Figure 3.22 Example run for the Apriori algorithm.



                 database. An example is shown in Figure 3.22, with a set of transactions
                 containing IP addresses and levels of alerts raised in an IDS (high, med, and
                 low). Now given a set of transactions in the database, if IP1 and high are two
                 items, the association rule IP1 ! high means that whenever an item IP1 occurs
                 in a transaction, then high also occurs with a quantiﬁed probability. The
                 probability or conﬁdence threshold can be deﬁned as the percentage of trans-
                 actions containing high and IP1 with respect to the percentage of transactions
                 containing just IP1. This can be seen in terms of conditional probability where
                                       S
                 P(high|IP1) = P(IP1 high) / P(IP1).
                    The strength of the rule can also be quantiﬁed in terms of support, where
                 support is the number of transactions that contain a certain item; therefore,
                 support of X is the percentage of transactions containing X in the entire set
                                                                               S
                 of transactions. Conﬁdence is determined as Support (IP1 high) / Support
                 (IP1), which gives the conﬁdence and support for the rule for IP1 ! high.
                 The rule IP1 ! high is not the same as high ! IP1 as the conﬁdence
                 will change.
                    The Apriori algorithm is based on ﬁnding frequent itemsets and then
                 discovering and quantifying the association rules. One major contribution of
                 the Apriori algorithm is that it provides an efﬁcient mechanism of discovering




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  58                               Introduction to Data Mining


                  frequent itemsets. A subset of a frequent itemset must also be a frequent
                  itemset, i.e., if {IP1, high} is a frequent itemset, both {IP1} and {high} should
                  be a frequent itemset. It iteratively ﬁnds frequent itemsets with cardinality from
                  1 to k (k-itemset).
                     Apriori generates the candidate itemsets by joining the itemsets with large
                  support from the previous pass and deleting the subsets that have small support
                  from the previous pass. By only considering the itemsets with large support,
                  the number of candidate itemsets is signiﬁcantly reduced. In the ﬁrst pass,
                  itemsets with only one item are counted. The itemsets with higher support are
                  used to generate the candidate sets of the second pass. Once the candidate
                  itemsets are found, their supports are calculated to discover the items sets of
                  size two with large support, and so on. This process terminates when no new
                  itemsets are found with large support. Here min support is predetermined as a
                  user-deﬁned threshold. Similarly, a conﬁdence threshold is predetermined by
                  the user. For example, in Figure 3.22, the min support is 0.25, and min
                  conﬁdence is 0.6. The rule IP1 ! high has conﬁdence 1 and support 0.38
                  and is thus a strong rule.
                     The Apriori algorithm proposes a highly intuitive technique for identifying
                  association rules. Several variations, as shown in Figure 3.21, with efﬁcient
                  versions are proposed, such as FP tree and Rapid ARM. For example, multi-
                  level associations (Han and Fu 1995) deal with levels of items (such as the
                  alert level high may have subtypes), and multidimensional associations
                  (Srikant and Agarwal 1996) discover rules in multidimensional datasets with
                  different types of discretization for the attributes. Constraint-based rules (Ng
                  et al. 1998) discuss imposing constraints through user input on the rules and
                  pruning-based rules on constraints. Spatial colocations (Huang et al. 2006)
                  discovers rules in spatial datasets that identify colocations of different itemsets
                  in space
                     Apriori does not address discovery of rare patterns. If we wish to identify the
                  rare patterns, they would be ones with very low support, leading to an
                  extremely large number of meaningless rules. There is a whole class of
                  algorithms proposed for rare pattern mining (as shown in Figure 3.21) that
                  devise variations of the support constraints for rare pattern mining.

                     3.3.5.2 Rare Pattern Mining: Mining Mutually Dependent Patterns
                  Mining mutually dependent patterns (proposed by Ma and Hellerstein 2001a)
                  introduces data mining for event bursts, periodicities, and mutually dependent
                  events based on event management used in computer and communication
                  systems. The main focus is on the mutually dependent patterns. Mutual
                  dependencies are discovered as M-patterns or mutually dependent patterns




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          3.3 Data Mining                          59




                       Figure 3.23 M-pattern example.


                 for mining events that occur together and are mutually dependent. Thus,
                 occurrence of one event is also an indication of the occurrence of the other
                 event by a certain probability. The detection of M-patterns can be illustrated
                 using the example shown in Figure 3.23. Let us say we have event dataset
                 (transactional data) from IDS logs indicating IP address and alarm text (high,
                 med, and low).
                    The algorithm IsMPattern is initiated with the value for minimum depend-
                 ence threshold, such that 0  minp  1. An expression E (such as IP1, high) is
                 evaluated in terms of individual supports of both directional rules
                 ðIP1 ! high and high ! IP1Þ. M-pattern relies on a strong bidirectional
                 dependence; thus it enables the algorithm to discover items even if the supports
                 are low. However, when generalized for larger minp, the algorithm also
                 discovers frequent patterns similar to association rule mining. The itemsets
                 considered for mining for such event sets or patterns do not eliminate low-
                 support items (nonzero). However, they do eliminate itemsets that may not be
                 m-patterns, as shown in Figure 3.23. Now, given the itemsets, let us consider
                 E = IP1 & high, then PðIP1 ! highÞ ¼ 1 and ðhigh ! IP1Þ ¼ 0:6. If the minp
                 threshold is 0.5, this set is an m-pattern. Similar to the example shown in
                 Figure 3.22 (min support threshold = 0.25, and min conﬁdence = 0.6), this is
                 also a strong conﬁdence rule. However, when we look at E = (IP6, med), then
                 this is an m-pattern but not a strong conﬁdence rule.
                    The process of identiﬁcation of rare patterns is based on a probability level.
                 Thus, even if the supports are low it can identify the rarity of the pattern. It also
                 discovers rare patterns such that if an expression is an m-pattern, then the
                 subsets of the expressions are also m-patterns.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     4
                                   Big Data Analytics and Its Need
                                          for Cybersecurity
                                Advanced DM and Complex Data Types
                                    from Cybersecurity Perspective




                                                  4.1 What Is Big Data?
                  The global internet population has grown from 2.1 billion in 2012 to 4.6 billion
                  in 2021 (Statista 2021). These users are generating myriad datasets along with
                  the network trafﬁc to move these data on the internet. We produce 2.5
                  quintillion of data every day (Domo 2017), and $2 trillion is projected to be
                  spent in e-commerce is 2020 (Statista 2020). The nature of big data comes
                  from the complexity of the data and the mechanisms required to bus, analyze,
                  and ﬁnd insights from the data. Several initiatives have been established to
                  deﬁne what we mean by big data (such as Bayer and Laney 2012, Ward and
                  Barker 2013, and NIST 2015). Based on the different types of deﬁnitions, there
                  are three or more of the qualities of the big data also referred to as V’s, as
                  shown in Figure 4.1. The most known qualities of big data are the volume,
                  velocity, and variety of the data.
                     One thing that is clear that big data does not just refer to the volume or size
                  of the data. Data can be complex and have the following qualities:
                  •   Velocity: data generated at a rapid pace
                  •   Variety: data consisting of multiple types of heterogeneous data
                  •   Veracity: data that provide trustworthy insights into the domain function
                  •   Value: data that may be able to generate revenue or provide other beneﬁts
                  •   Venue: data that are dynamic with respect to the location
                  •   Volume: large amounts of data being generated
                  •   Variability: some aspect of data changing over time
                    Big data are the dataset that has a combination of these qualities. In some cases,
                  data that may not be particularly large but has many of these other qualities, such

                                                                    60


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                 4.2 Big Data in Cybersecurity                   61




                       Figure 4.1 The V’s of big data.


                 as variability, variety, and value, may also be considered big data. The term “big”
                 may refer to the big aspect of the overall complexity of the data. If a dataset is
                 highly unusual in terms of its complexity, it may qualify as big data under one of
                 the big data qualities.
                    In the cybersecurity domain, there are several applications that qualify as big
                 data. If we consider network data trafﬁc, it is massive; for example, in a midsize
                 organization, it can range into petabytes per second. If we consider Internet of
                 Things (IoT), the complexity of data is based on the velocity and variety and in
                 some cases also the volume. A wireless sensor network or a network of IoT
                 monitored through distributed IDS (Otoum et al. 2019) can generate a constant
                 stream of data originating from multiple sensors over time, producing high
                 variability in the data. This provides a complex and rich dataset.
                    The value from these big datasets can be derived by sifting through these
                 complex datasets to derive insightful patterns.


                                           4.2 Big Data in Cybersecurity
                 According to the World Fact Book maintained by the CIA (2021), the number
                 of internet users is now in the billions. Figure 4.2 shows the top 25 countries in
                 terms of internet users.
                    It is clear that a vast number of users on the internet are generating trafﬁc
                 from computers, mobile devices, and other things or devices. If we try to
                 quantify this network trafﬁc data, it is truly complex in terms of the variety of
                 the data generated, volume of the data, and velocity at which it is generated. In
                 addition to the individual users, there are also organizations generating the data
                 and network trafﬁc.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  62                Big Data Analytics and Its Need for Cybersecurity


                                                                   Internet users
                       800,000,000

                       700,000,000

                       600,000,000

                       500,000,000

                       400,000,000

                       300,000,000

                       200,000,000

                       100,000,000

                                   0
                                                  es




                                                                                         ria
                                                                                         sia
                                        na


                                                    a




                                                                               n
                                                                              a




                                                                                                         o

                                                                                                         y
                                                                il




                                                                                                    an
                                                 di




                                                                            pa
                                                                        si




                                                                                                      ic
                                                              az




                                                                                       ge
                                                at
                                       hi




                                                                                      ne
                                                                      us




                                                                                                   ex
                                             In




                                                                                                   m
                                                            Br




                                                                         Ja
                                              St
                                    C




                                                                                     Ni
                                                                                    do




                                                                                               M
                                                                     R




                                                                                                er
                                                     d




                                                                                  In




                                                                                               G
                                                  te
                                               ni
                                              U




                        Figure 4.2 Number of internet users by country est. 2018.



                     Interestingly, the number of attacks (for example, the web attacks discussed
                  in Akamai 2016) sourced worldwide paints a slightly different picture, as
                  shown in Figure 4.3.
                     While majority of the attackers may come from countries with more internet
                  users, in addition they may also come from the countries with fewer internet
                  users. For example, the number of internet users in Lithuania in 2018 was a
                  fraction of that of the United States and is 116th in the list of countries ranked
                  by the number of internet users. Despite this, Lithuania was placed eighth in
                  terms of the countries sourcing web application attacks. Similarly, more recent
                  reports (Akamai 2019) have listed other countries in the top sources of web
                  attacks even as they do not appear to be a country with highest number of
                  internet users.
                     The amount of internet trafﬁc generated may not be an indicator of attack
                  trafﬁc. There are other factors at play in identifying cyberattacks on the larger
                  world stage taking into account not only the number of internet users but
                  sociopolitical factors, crime rates, and other cyberattacks. For example, a
                  simple search of Lithuania and cyberattacks reveals that Lithuania is also at
                  the receiving end of many major cyberattacks. Lithuania led a cyber shield




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                          4.3 Landscape of Big Data Technologies                 63


                 12,00,00,000
                 10,00,00,000
                   8,00,00,000
                   6,00,00,000
                   4,00,00,000                                                               Aacks
                   2,00,00,000
                                0
                                    US




                                                                             UK
                       Figure 4.3 Sources of web attacks from countries (2016).


                 exercise to practice procedures for protecting the cyber infrastructure (L24,
                 2016). Thus, it is not clear whether the sourced attacks, where Lithuania
                 ranked eighth across countries in the fourth quarter of 2016, are more defen-
                 sive or offensive.
                    It is clear that a deeper dive can reveal many more insights into the real state
                 of affairs on the internet. If we consider an organization and study trends of
                 usage and simple rules to analyze trafﬁc, we may miss insights of potential
                 advanced persistent threats. Such threats can be evaluated by not just looking
                 at data in isolation but in combination with user behaviors, sociopolitical
                 factors, context of time, and potentially many other contextual features. This
                 is truly a big data problem as it brings in the volume, velocity, variety,
                 variability, and venue and can lead to great value with high veracity of the
                 results. Here testing the veracity is equally important to generating value.
                    The challenge is to sift through the internet trafﬁc and identify attacks. This
                 can be at the device level, user level, or the network level at large.



                                    4.3 Landscape of Big Data Technologies
                 Big data technologies can be selected based on criteria that ﬁt a business need
                 (as highlighted in Cloud Security Alliance 2014). The set of criteria is shown
                 in Figure 4.4.
                    These criteria include the latency in response time, whether the data are
                 structured, if a SQL-like environment is required, types of analytics required,
                 speciﬁc types of visualizations that may be needed, and the security and




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  64                 Big Data Analytics and Its Need for Cybersecurity


                                                                                             Real time
                                                      Latency                             Near real time
                                                                                         Batch processing
                                                                                            Structured
                                                     Structure                            Semistructured
                                                                                           Unstructured

                                                                                                          Batch
                                                   Compute infrastructure
                                                                                                       streaming

                                                                                                    Relational
                  Factors affecng big data        Storage infrastructure                            No SQL
                    technology selecon                                                             New SQL

                                                     Analytics              Supervised unsupervised semisupervised


                                                                                             Spatial
                                                   Visualization
                                                                                 Interactive abstract/summary

                                                                                           Data privacy
                                                    Security and                      Security infrastructure
                                                      privacy                           Data management
                                                                                  Integrity and reactive security

                        Figure 4.4 Factors affecting big data technology selection.


                  privacy needs of the business. Several big data technologies can be selected
                  based on these criteria. A pictorial representation of some of these technologies
                  is shown in Figure 4.5 (Grover et al. 2015 and Roman 2017). For example, if
                  the need of the business is low latency and SQL-like processing, then the
                  business can select tools that have a quick turnaround time for queries in
                  massive datasets. Of the several big data analytics frameworks present in the
                  market, the business can select the tools that provide massively parallel
                  processing (MPP), such as engines on top of Hadoop that have high SQL-
                  like functionality and portability, such as Apache Hive, Facebook Presto,
                  Apache Drill, and Apache Spark. Out of these, Presto and Spark have been
                  shown (Grover et al. 2015) to produce better outcomes for SQL-
                  like processing.




                               4.4 Mahout and Spark Comparative Analysis
                  Of the big data technologies, Mahout, which powered several machine learn-
                  ing applications,1 and Spark have been identiﬁed as a major big data technolo-
                  gies (Meng et al. 2016). For massive cybersecurity datasets such as trafﬁc data

                  1
                      https://mahout.apache.org/general/powered-by-mahout.html.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                       4.4 Mahout and Spark Comparative Analysis             65




                        Figure 4.5 The big data technology ecosystem.


                 or sensor network data, even small differences in speedup can mean the
                 difference in millions of dollars. Thus, in selecting a big data technology, it
                 is also essential to study the scale-ups with the type of technology used.
                    Let us consider these two big data technologies, which are used for machine
                 learning and data mining. Apache Mahout2 works on top of the Hadoop map
                 reduce framework to provide a data analytics library. Spark provides its own
                 map reduce framework and provides an integrated Spark machine learning
                 library (MLLib) for machine learning and analytics tasks.
                    Hadoop is an open-source mechanism for parallel computation in massive
                 datasets. It provides the Hadoop File System (HDFS) and the map reduce
                 framework, which provides the mechanism for parallel processing, as will be
                 discussed in an example case study for change detection. The key steps require
                 breaking down the data and processing the data in parallel through mappers
                 that work on key and value pairs. The pairs are then reduced and the


                 2
                     http://mahout.apache.org/.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  66                Big Data Analytics and Its Need for Cybersecurity


                  Table 4.1 Sample comparisons of speedup between Spark and Mahout

                                                                                                          Spark over
                                                                                                          Mahout
                                                                                                          speedup
                  Data size           Nodes      Method                                    Citation       achieved
                  62 MB–              1–2        K-means                                   Gopalani       2 times
                  1,240 MB                                                                 and Arora
                                                                                           2015
                  200–1,000           16         Logistic regression, ridge                Meng et al.    3 times
                  mil data                       regression, decision tree, ALS            2016
                  points                         K-means
                  50K–50 mil          10         C4.5 K-means                              Wang et al.    2–5 times
                  points                                                                   2014
                  Upto 7.5 GB         1          Word count                                               3–5 times
                  0.5–4 GB            4          K-means                                   Misal et al.   2 times
                                                                                           2016

                  aggregated information is produced as a ﬁnal result. Spark provides its own
                  implementation of the map reduce processing but also additional inbuilt SQL
                  and machine learning library (MLLib). For Hadoop to perform the machine
                  learning, Mahout can work on top of Hadoop. The key speedup in Spark is due
                  to the resilient distributed datasets (RDD), which are stored in memory; they
                  are also resilient to loss, as they can rebuild lost data based on where they
                  originate from. Spark also allows for machine learning algorithms to retrieve
                  the data from memory iteratively.
                     Comparative performance of data mining and machine learning algorithms on
                  Spark and Mahout with Spark have shown several orders in speedup. For example
                  (Gopalani and Arora 2015), Spark has been shown to have roughly two times
                  greater speedup over Mahout. Table 4.1 outlines some comparative analysis found
                  in the literature. In general, Spark achieved a speed up of about two times greater
                  than Mahout across various datasets and techniques. This is just one type of
                  comparison when low latency and speedup are desired; there may be other
                  comparisons that need to be evaluated when other analysis attributes are relevant,
                  as shown in Figure 4.4. In mission-critical systems where dependable real-time
                  responses are needed, these speedups can translate to real-world impacts in
                  analyzing anomalies in massive network trafﬁc datasets (Kato and Klyuev 2017).


                                              4.5 Complex Nature of Data
                  The premise of achieving a high level of analysis and mining in big data is a
                  good understanding of the nature and complexity of the data. The mining in




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                  4.5 Complex Nature of Data                        67


                 large heterogeneous data is increasingly becoming challenging due to the
                 complexity of the data. Many data mining algorithms have been proposed
                 for traditional (numeric, categorical) datasets. However, the nature of the data
                 itself renders a challenge to the data mining. Mainly such problems can be
                 exempliﬁed in the mining of high-dimensional datasets. The quality of the
                 mining results is affected adversely as the number of dimensions increases.
                 Here dimension refers to the attributes of an object. This is especially true in
                 outlier detection, i.e., the identiﬁcation of anomalous objects. In higher dimen-
                 sions, data become sparse, and points tend to become equidistant. This
                 adversely affects the methods based on density of points, unless data follow
                 certain simple distributions. Thus, the outliers could be hidden in high dimen-
                 sions. Another fact is that for outlier detection a subset of the entire attribute set
                 could be used to detect or indicate the outliers. In addition, the nature of the
                 data – whether it is spatial, temporal, graph, or unstructured data – can also
                 make the mining process fairly complex. In each of these types of complex
                 datasets, the data preprocessing, which is already the most intensive part of any
                 data mining project, can become even more involved and challenging.


                                          4.5.1 Nature of Data: Spatial Data
                 Spatial data mining deals with identiﬁcation of nontrivial and useful know-
                 ledge discovery in a spatial database, where spatial (point, lines, polygons,
                 location, pixel data) and nonspatial data (e.g., population count) are stored.
                 Unlike traditional data mining, it is important to address the nature of spatial
                 data, which renders new challenges in the inherent spatial autocorrelation and
                 heterogeneity in the data. Spatial data are seen in the cybersecurity domain in
                 sensor networks placed in a region. These are particularly relevant to cyber-
                 physical systems (Tan et al. 2009), which have interactions with several
                 physical sensors that are impacted by the regional variables and also nonspatial
                 elements, such as the computer networks involved in the communication and
                 analysis of the data. CPS provides a very comprehensive example of how the
                 cyber elements interact with the physical elements such that to perform any
                 type of knowledge discovery, the physical elements along with the environ-
                 mental variables impacting the physical locations need to be
                 modeled correctly.
                    Thus, understanding the nature of data is even more important for spatial
                 data mining because of the inherent complexities of the spatial data them-
                 selves. Spatial data consist pixel data, data pertaining to space-
                 multidimensional points, lines, rectangles, polygons, cubes, and other geomet-
                 ric objects. The data are in very large volumes; it would essentially take an




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  68                Big Data Analytics and Its Need for Cybersecurity


                  inﬁnitely large database to capture the real world precisely. Spatial data pose
                  more of a challenge due to the type of data, volume of data, and the fact that
                  there is a correlation between the objects and their neighbor or neighborhood.
                  There can be relationships between spatial objects such as topological rela-
                  tionships, direction relationships, metric relationships, or complex relation-
                  ships, which are based on these basic relationships. Moreover, the data could
                  depict temporal changes, which is inherent in the data themselves. The same
                  spatial data can also be represented in different ways, i.e., raster and vector
                  format. For example, georeferenced data include spatial location in terms of
                  latitude, longitude and other information about spatial and nonspatial attri-
                  butes. This essentially means that there is some preprocessing on the raw data
                  such as satellite imagery or tiger ﬁles to extract the georeferenced attributes
                  and some other nonspatial attributes such as vegetation type, land-use
                  type, etc.
                     Another view where spatial data can beneﬁt cybersecurity applications is
                  in characterization of the region with socioeconomic data and cybercrime
                  data. The approach proposed by Keivan and Koochakzadeh (2012) ﬁrst
                  creates a characterization to determine which cities, areas, or countries may
                  be more likely to send a malicious request. This is based on the number of
                  complaints received at each location for different types of cybercrimes.
                  Locations with a number of complaints above the median are classiﬁed as
                  “critical,” while locations with a number of complaints below the median
                  are classiﬁed as “safe.” In addition, demographic data such as housing
                  (occupied, vacant, owned/rented, etc.), population (gender, age, etc.) are
                  also used in the characterization. Based on the complaints by location and
                  the demographic information, they predict the potential of a location as a
                  cybercrime origin.
                     Ferebee et al. (2012) utilize spatial data to produce a cybersecurity storm
                  map that combines several data streams and provides a geospatial interface to
                  visualize the location of cyber activity. This concept has been studied at length
                  in other types of disaster recovery domains but not so much in cybersecurity.
                     Banerjee et al. (2012) highlights the importance of looking at the
                  cyberattacks and their impact and interaction with the physical environment.
                  Since CPS is not limited to sophisticated users, usability is also a big consider-
                  ation, and this can impact the value of the system and eventually the veracity of
                  the ﬁndings if the usability and interpretability of the systems is low. This work
                  builds on the cyberphysical security (CypSec) concepts that discuss the map-
                  ping of the cyber and physical components to provide an environmentally
                  coupled solution (Venkatasubramanian et al. 2011). Additional examples of
                  using spatial data are described in Chapter 11.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                  4.5 Complex Nature of Data                   69


                                              4.5.2 Nature of Data: Graph Data
                 Graphs represent a set of nodes and links between the nodes. Here nodes can
                 be IP addresses (source and destination) and the links can be the packets or
                 communication sent between the two IP addresses. Another type of graph
                 could be a router network, where the nodes are routers, and links are the
                 possible paths from the router table. Graphs have been a well-studied area.
                 With the proliferation of computer network data, graphs are becoming massive
                 in size and are constantly evolving. This is an example where big data
                 techniques can facilitate the discovery of novel insights. For example, how
                 does a graph for computer network trafﬁc change over time in terms of node
                 level? How can graph-level properties (Namayanja and Janeja 2014) help
                 determine potential events? Thus, if a node is highly connected, it is an
                 important node. Similarly, we can study the behavior of the network data
                 whether it increases the diameter of a graph or density of the graph (Leskovec
                 et al. 2005). These properties have direct implications on managing the
                 networks, identifying critical events such as cyberattacks, and evaluating the
                 impact of events on the graphs.



                             4.5.3 Nature of Data: Other Types of Complex Data
                 Cybersecurity data such as network trafﬁc data also has a temporal element.
                 Later in this chapter, we discuss how trafﬁc data evolving over time can
                 provide novel insights. Each data point has a time stamp, and if considered
                 sequentially, the patterns can have additional meaning in terms of the
                 evolving patterns, such as periodicity or recurrence of patterns over time.
                 This is particularly useful in studying advanced persistent threats (APT).
                 Spatial and temporal data analysis for cybersecurity is further discussed in
                 Chapter 8.
                    Another complex dataset is unstructured data such as text (for example,
                 vulnerability descriptions in the NVD3). There is a lot of rich knowledge about
                 vulnerabilities in this text description. To analyze these data, a lot of prepro-
                 cessing is required to be able to discover patterns in the text within and across
                 vulnerabilities. One example is to break down the text into keywords and
                 translate each vulnerability into a binary-valued feature vector based on the
                 presence or absence of the keywords. This can help identify similar or dissimi-
                 lar vulnerabilities (as discussed in similarity matching in Chapter 3).


                 3
                     https://nvd.nist.gov/.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  70                Big Data Analytics and Its Need for Cybersecurity


                     Other types of complex datasets include audio, video, and image datasets,
                  which are increasingly becoming a key data source of anomaly detection due
                  to propagation of deep fakes (Agarwal et al. 2019).



                         4.6 Where Does Analytics Fit in for Cybersecurity?
                  Traditional cybersecurity methods looking at network trafﬁc data focus on
                  Intrusion detection, which aims at identifying threats of unauthorized access
                  using signatures of unauthorized access or attacks. Data analytics can go
                  beyond this signature-based discovery to identify complex types of attacks
                  that may be hidden in massive datasets or may be spread out over time and
                  multiple networks (similar to threat hunting, as mentioned in Chapter 1). Here
                  we highlight two examples that show the need of using big data analytics in
                  cybersecurity:
                  (1) Sampling based change discovery in massive networks (Namayanja and
                      Janeja 2015)
                  (2) Big distributed intrusion detection system (Janeja et al. 2014)
                  We focus on these examples to illustrate the need for big data technologies and
                  the complexities of the datasets involved.


                             4.6.1 Change Detection in Massive Trafﬁc Datasets
                  Computer networks can be seen as graphs of communications between nodes,
                  where each node is represented by an IP address. If we consider a snapshot of
                  network trafﬁc data, we can generate a communication graph from it. Studying
                  these snapshots through time, we can evaluate whether there have been node-
                  level or network-level changes in the graphs indicating potential cyberattacks,
                  as shown in Figure 4.6 (adapted from Namayanja and Janeja 2015). Such
                  detection of unusual time periods can be used to identify major network trafﬁc
                  changes due to cyber threats. Moreover, this can also help identify nodes that
                  may have been targeted since their node connectivity changed over time.
                  Lastly, this type of analysis can also feed into a predictive model to predict
                  temporal patterns where periodic changes in the network may impact
                  network performance.
                     Given that network communication can be massive, it is important to
                  identify a subset of this trafﬁc to evaluate. This can be done by targeted
                  sampling. One way is to select the top central nodes where nodes with a very
                  high degree of connectivity represent the major communication in the trafﬁc data.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                  4.6 Where Does Analytics Fit in for Cybersecurity?            71




                        Figure 4.6 Multilevel change detection.
                        Source: Namayanja and Janeja (2015).



                 If we see these central nodes are consistent through time, represented by bins or
                 intervals of time, then we can say that these nodes are consistent nodes. On the
                 other hand, if these nodes are not present in all time periods, then they are
                 inconsistent nodes.
                    If there are time periods where several of the central nodes become incon-
                 sistent, then this time period is a potential time point where an event affected
                 these nodes and may require further investigation. The subgraphs for the time
                 intervals can also be studied to evaluate graph-level properties. Thus, if the
                 densiﬁcation or diameter does not follow the network properties during time
                 periods, it can again be an indicator of a network-level event at the time points.
                 Cybersecurity through network and graph data is further discussed in
                 Chapter 9.


                                                   Example
                 Let us consider the graphs across three time periods where the degrees of the
                 nodes are shown in the Figure 4.7. Each graph represents a set of communi-
                 cation lines between the IP nodes. Note that here the degree is based on the




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  72                Big Data Analytics and Its Need for Cybersecurity




                       Figure 4.7 Example walkthrough for evaluating central nodes over time.



                  nonduplicate edges. This can be modiﬁed to a weighted degree to count for
                  multiple times the nodes communicate with each other, for accommodating
                  duplicate edges. Alternatively, edge weight can be added for the number of
                  times the nodes are communicating. Here, for simplicity we only consider the
                  nonduplicate communications. We can see that certain nodes (a, d, e) are
                  consistently central if the degree threshold for centrality is greater than or
                  equal to two. On the other hand, we see that node f is consistently low degree.
                  Node b starts as a high degree but is dropped in time period T2 and again
                  comes back as a low node degree in T3. The consistent nodes a, d, and e can be
                  seen as the regularly used nodes if they are consistently central. If such
                  consistent nodes get dropped after being consistent in several time periods,
                  then this can prompt further analysis. If several nodes lose their degree in a
                  time period, then we can also label that time period to prompt further
                  evaluation. This process helps identify central nodes over time to evaluate
                  any unusual changes in the communications.
                     Let us consider the graph analysis in parallel, through big data technologies.
                  We depict the map reduce process for a single time period. Here the split of the
                  data can be done within a single time period. Alternatively, the split could be




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                  4.6 Where Does Analytics Fit in for Cybersecurity?          73




                        Figure 4.8 Map reduce for degree computation.


                 done by time period. Figure 4.8 shows the process where within a time period
                 we split the data, and the degree count is done within those chunks where the
                 key is the node name and the value is the degree, thus forming the key–value
                 pair. The data are computed for each node in the shufﬂing and ﬁnally the
                 values are tallied for each node in the reduce phase, producing the ﬁnal result.
                 This mechanism of map reduce is common across several big data tools. The
                 internal workings of how the data are split and the map reduce is performed
                 may vary.



                                                4.6.2 Multipronged Attacks
                 Multipronged attacks are attacks that are spread out over time and several
                 points in the network. Discovering such attacks becomes a challenging task
                 particularly because the datasets become massive and heterogeneous.
                    A distributed intrusion detection system (dIDS) provides the infrastructure
                 for the detection of a coordinated attack against an organization and its
                 partners’ distributed network resources. However, given the complexity of
                 multiple attack sources and the massive amounts of data generated for such a
                 multipronged attack, a multilevel mining framework in the form of a big
                 distributed IDS (B-dIDS) can be utilized (as proposed in Janeja et al. 2014),
                 as shown in Figure 4.9. This architecture utilizes IDS logs to sift through




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  74                Big Data Analytics and Its Need for Cybersecurity




                       Figure 4.9 Distributed processing of IDS alerts.



                  alarms that may look benign individually but may indicate a critical alert in
                  combination with other alerts.
                     In this distributed environment, within each subnet a dIDS agent performs
                  local intrusion detection and generates IDS log data, as shown in the ﬁgure as
                  IDS1. . . IDSn. Log data from each dIDS agent are sent to a control center,
                  employing big data tools, where it is stored for aggregated analysis. Each
                  signature-based agent generates a priority level associated with the alarm when
                  an attack against a known threat is detected, and generates high, medium, and
                  low priority alarms for “anomalous” behavior. High-priority alarms can be
                  clearly labeled; however, the low and medium priority alarm data are very
                  large, making it difﬁcult for an administrator to perform manual analysis. In
                  such a scenario, several alarms that are part of a coordinated attack will be
                  missed. However, if we can show that the high-level alarms have similarities
                  with low-level alarms, we can propagate the labels to the low-level alarms.
                  Once we label them as similar to high-level alarms, we can try and study them
                  carefully for possible breaches that are part of a coordinated attack.
                     There may be several alarms generated at multiple sources from multiple
                  sensors (IDS monitors) across networks. These alarms may range from abnor-
                  mal trafﬁc, unusual port access, and unusual sources. The key idea here is to
                  connect the anomalies using co-occurrence of alarms at speciﬁc time periods,
                  speciﬁc location (node/computer), or similar abnormal behavior. This essen-
                  tially identiﬁes which have overlaps or similarities in terms of some of the
                  features as shown in Figure 4.10.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                        4.7 Privacy and Security Issues in Big Data           75




                                                          Alarms
                                     Business             from
                                     firewall             IDS sensors
                                     alarms


                                                Alarms
                                                originating at
                                                business partners




                       Figure 4.10 Overlapping alarms.


                    How do we ﬁnd similarities? This can be done through clustering (as
                 discussed in Chapter 3) the alarms together, and if alarms fall in the same
                 cluster, then the labels from a higher-level alarm can be propagated to a lower-
                 level alarm. Once we have these propagated labels, after domain user valid-
                 ation, we can use this data for future predictions as well.
                    Let us consider each agent to provide a training set that is generated after
                 preprocessing the data through a clustering algorithm. Then classiﬁcation in
                 these data can be seen as a class-imbalanced learning problem. This approach
                 uses an ensemble classiﬁcation technique to automatically classify the large
                 volume of aggregated alarm data and to alert a system administrator to a
                 potential coordinated attack.


                                4.7 Privacy and Security Issues in Big Data
                 “Big data” has become a buzzword and a new direction for business avenues
                 and scientiﬁc research. However, there is a trade-off to enjoying the beneﬁts of
                 big data.
                    As Figure 4.11 shows, there is a set of pros and cons to adopting big data.
                 Big data allows the combination of several datasets in a scalable and efﬁcient
                 manner. It also is able to provide high value since the knowledge discovery is
                 across multiple datasets, bringing in novel insights. However, because the data
                 are being merged from multiple distinct datasets possibly from different
                 domains, domain insight becomes a key to getting the value out of the big
                 data. This can be highly subjective based on the domain experts, and as a result
                 the interpretation of the data will have direct impact on how the data are
                 analyzed and the results discovered. This can reduce or increase the value
                 depending on the individual domain experts’ insights and collaborative under-
                 standing in creating a combined solution.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  76                Big Data Analytics and Its Need for Cybersecurity




                        Figure 4.11 Pros and cons of big data.



                     Now given that a lot of data are combined in a big data solution, this can
                  lead to novel insights, but on the other hand can also lead to loss of privacy. In
                  today’s day and age, when massive amounts of data are being collected,
                  privacy guarantees are not possible; however, utilizing multiple datasets actu-
                  ally decreases the privacy. So in essence we can say that there is an inverse
                  relationship between the utilization of big data technologies and users’ auton-
                  omy over personal data.
                     Big data technologies are highly scalable and efﬁcient as the data storage
                  and processing is distributed across several nodes in a cluster computing
                  environment. As a result such an infrastructure potentially opens up multiple
                  access points to the data be it the network or cloud environment. This can
                  directly impact the security of the data.
                     While several big data technologies are available, there is a lack of stand-
                  ardization in technologies, with new technologies evolving every day. As a
                  result, portability, standardization, and adoption can be impacted.
                     While it is clear that big data technologies can beneﬁt business applications,
                  if not used appropriately they can also negatively impact the end users’
                  experience. So is a frictionless environment, where there are no restrictions
                  on data integration and knowledge discovery, good? Probably not. Some
                  friction is good for getting the right information to the right people at the right
                  time. Big data helps breach information silos; however, some balance is
                  required to prevent privacy and security breaches. Privacy has a new challenge




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                        4.7 Privacy and Security Issues in Big Data           77


                 in big data: we might share something without realizing how it will be linked
                 with other data, leading to privacy and security breaches somewhere in the
                 future. The privacy concerns are also geospatial to some extent and should be
                 evaluated as such. For example, in Norway the tax return of every individual is
                 public (The Guardian 2016); however, the same situation would not be
                 acceptable in the United States, where individual tax returns are private except
                 when shared with authorization by the individual.
                    There is also a recent push for open data. Big data in the public domain can
                 only be of value if more and more datasets are openly available. Thus, open
                 data initiatives may lead to big data. However, again security and privacy must
                 be balanced in this environment. There is indeed a high risk if open data is
                 merged with some restrictive closed data, leading to security breaches. For
                 example, if the social background of an individual is posted on networking
                 sites (for example, a picture that is geo tagged or the geo history in iPhone),
                 this when combined with other knowledge from LinkedIn and other social
                 media sites can lead to social engineering attacks.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     5
                                              Types of Cyberattacks




                  This chapter summarizes a taxonomy of the different types of cyberattacks and
                  the mechanism by which some of these attacks take place. Some of the attacks
                  will be described in terms of the attack vector, exploit, datasets generated
                  during the attack, and potential countermeasures for the attack. There are
                  several types of systems and networks impacted by cyberattacks, as discussed
                  in Chapter 1. The taxonomy described here focuses on some of the well-known
                  types of attacks and how they relate to each other.



                                                    5.1 Types of Attacks
                  Several threat taxonomies are proposed, including the European Union
                  Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) threat taxonomy (ENISA 16), the cyber-
                  physical incident catalog (Miller 2014), and the Attack Vector, Operational
                  Impact, Defense, Information Impact, and Target (AVOIDIT) cyberattack
                  taxonomy (Simmons et al. 2009). Figure 5.1 consolidates certain categories
                  of cyberattacks based on the general characteristics of the attacks (Quader and
                  Janeja 2021).
                     Each of the major categories of attacks presents several variations, as show
                  in the ﬁgure. Social engineering relies on understanding the social interactions
                  of the individual and trying to gain access to user credentials. For example,
                  through phishing an individual may be motivated to provide their username
                  and password, which will allow a hacker to gain access to a system. Similarly,
                  phone phishing deals with phishing but through a phone system where the user
                  is coaxed to provide their credentials. Malware, on the other hand, deals with
                  the class of attacks that install a malware, such as virus, spyware, Trojans, etc.,
                  on a user’s system with the intent of gaining access and information from a
                  user’s system. Password attacks focus on getting user credentials either

                                                                    78


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                       5.1 Types of Attacks                     79




                       Figure 5.1 Types of attacks.



                 through a brute force attack or by checking the passwords against a dictionary
                 of words. Password attack is based on a hacker trying out different passwords
                 based on a set of passwords such as from a dictionary. To counter such attacks,
                 complex passwords and passwords that are not repeated from one site to the
                 next are recommended. Denial of service (DoS) attacks are caused when
                 malicious users tend to block legitimate trafﬁc by sending too many requests
                 to a server. Distributed versions of these attacks cause a coordinated attack to
                 take place, such as in the case of a botnet where several machines are carrying
                 out these requests being sent. Advanced persistent threats persist through
                 coordinated long-term attacks and mostly originate from organizations with
                 long-term interest in the assets on the hacked system. These could be initiated
                 from nation states. Database or software-based attacks are caused due to bugs
                 in the software such as in the case of a SQL injection attack where the front-
                 end user form can be used to initiate a query request to the back-end database
                 to gain access to the username and password credentials. Mobile ad hoc attacks
                 can be caused where the information ﬂow is disrupted, such as in the case of
                 the blackhole attack, where the network trafﬁc is redirected and may be lost. In
                 a cyberphysical system, there is another class of attacks such as a replay attack,
                 where valid data are sent maliciously but repeatedly with the intent to cause
                 delay or block the trafﬁc. Some of these attacks are further explained in
                 Figure 5.2, in terms of what the attack is, the mechanism of the attack,
                 countermeasures used, and any datasets that can be harvested to study
                 the attacks.
                    While we can focus on understanding each of these attacks individually,
                 they are inherently linked by the aim of the attacker. For example, an APT is




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  80                                   Types of Cyberattacks




                        Figure 5.2 Example attack types.


                  generally carried out by exploiting a vulnerability or by gaining access to a
                  system through a social engineering attack. More often than not, spear
                  phishing is the root cause of many types of attacks. Thus, security is more
                  than an engineering challenge, as people are an essential part of the critical
                  infrastructure. Therefore, understanding and addressing human behavior is
                  essential to building a security culture. Methodologies such as Cyber Kill
                  Chain (Lockheed Martin 2015), FireEye Mandiant purple team assessment
                  (Fireeye Mandiant 2019), and Mitre ATT&CK (MITRE 2020) provide add-
                  itional insights into the mindset of the attacker and the threat method.
                  Additional human behavioral perspectives in understanding cyberattacks are
                  discussed in Chapter 10.
                     We next consider two of the attack types and describe the cyberattack and
                  data analytics methods to discover characteristics of these attacks. We pick
                  these two types for their complexity and multiple types of datasets that might
                  be involved in analyzing them.




                                          5.2 Example: Social Engineering
                  Social engineering is a mechanism to gain access to computer systems, and the
                  information that resides there, in an unauthorized manner through human- or




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                               5.2 Example: Social Engineering                    81


                 computer-mediated methods targeting the social aspects of a user’s data.
                 Compromising information about a user’s credentials can be obtained through
                 social connections or impersonating social connections. An example of imper-
                 sonating social connections is spear phishing, where an email that appears to
                 be from a legitimate social connection or authority ﬁgure requests credentials.
                 The goal of social engineering is to obtain information that will allow the
                 hacker to gain unauthorized access, via human-mediated or computer-
                 mediated methods, to a system in order to compromise the system’s integrity,
                 potentially leading to other types of attacks. Human-mediated methods may
                 include impersonation, impersonating a help desk, third-party authorization,
                 phishing through impersonating a trusted authority ﬁgure, and snail mail, to
                 name a few (Quader and Janeja 2021).
                    The question addressed here is how do we detect common social engineer-
                 ing attacks in the network using computational models? A computational data
                 model is discussed next to detect the anomaly in the network data as a result of
                 password theft.


                         5.2.1 Computational Data Model for Social Engineering
                 Computational data models are derived on intuitions of how these attacks
                 affect the patterns in the data collected on the network. To build a computa-
                 tional data model for social engineering attacks, speciﬁcally password theft,
                 log data from intrusion detection systems, such as Snort log data, can be
                 analyzed. The objective is to derive a data model by which we can detect an
                 anomaly in the network that emulates the behavior of a password theft. This
                 model can be applied to Snort IDS log data or ﬁrewall or server log data to
                 identify a potential password theft attack.
                    Intuition: Let us consider what happens when a password is stolen with
                 malicious intent. It is highly likely that if a password is stolen, the intent could
                 be to generate more attacks inside the network through this compromised
                 system. Alternatively, if the intent is data theft, then several datasets might
                 be moved from this compromised system. Thus, in either case, the trafﬁc
                 would substantially increase after the password was stolen. To distinguish
                 such a change in data pattern of the user, we can also differentiate it from
                 other traditional attacks by eliminating any probes conducted on this system,
                 since traditional hacks into a system are done after a probe and scan in the
                 network. Therefore, the intuition is that if there is no probe or scan in the
                 network and the system under study and the network pattern has substantially
                 changed over time, this then leads to an observation that a password theft may
                 potentially have occurred. While this is a broadly deﬁned intuition, this is not a




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  82                                   Types of Cyberattacks


                  predictive labeling but an exploratory analysis, as a network administrator
                  would have to evaluate further whether the identiﬁed system indeed had a
                  password theft or there is another event signifying change in the trafﬁc
                  patterns. These types of intuitions allow the administrator to focus on a
                  narrower swath of data rather than the entire network trafﬁc at large.
                     Using this intuition, let us consider how it can be translated into a computa-
                  tional data model. The conditions of the model (Quader and Janeja 2014),
                  depicted in Figure 5.3, are about observing the activities on a user’s system and
                  identifying if there is any probe on that machine to gain access. A probe is an
                  attempt to gain access to a computer and its ﬁles through a known or probable
                  vulnerability in the computer system. Password theft in this study of social
                  engineering attack is a nonprobing scenario where the intruder may gain access
                  to the password via nonprobing means such as getting hold of a password
                  through human-mediated methods such as impersonation as IT
                  security personnel.
                     If the log ﬁles are evaluated for frequency of IP addresses, then the count of
                  the destination IP would be a small number in a situation when there is no
                  probe. Another condition that can be added is that a single source IP may
                  access several IP addresses in the network after the password theft.
                     In Figure 5.3, given a set of IP addresses N = {n1,. . . , nn}, IP n1 is the source
                  accessing n2 as the destination, with the number of accesses less than a certain
                  threshold ρ. Threshold computation is elaborated further.
                     The second condition, as depicted in Figure 5.3, is about signiﬁcant activity
                  increase on the same machine (IP) as a result of the intruder having access to
                  that machine. Once the target machine becomes a victim, the same machine is
                  used as a source (IP) to potentially attack other machines or send out data.
                  Hence, the activities on the source IP signiﬁcantly increase over time as a
                  result of password theft.




                        Figure 5.3 Computational data model conditions.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                               5.2 Example: Social Engineering                  83


                    In this model, the behavior of the destination IP at time Tx‒1 when this IP has
                 normal behavior is compared to the behavior of the same IP as a source at time
                 Tx when the IP becomes a victim of password compromise. ρ is the threshold,
                 below which a particular destination is identiﬁed as having a nonprobing
                 scenario. δ is the threshold, below which the source IP depicts normal activities
                 while the value above the threshold would identify the source to be sending out
                 a large amount of communication to other destinations (for example, data or
                 attacks).
                    Thus, given a set of IP addresses N = {n1,. . ., nn}, a compromised IP n1 is
                 the source and accessing destination ni more than a certain threshold δ.
                    Computing Thresholds: The data from log ﬁles can be divided into several
                 bins based on the time stamp and for each bin the count for each destination IP
                 can be computed and sorted in ascending order. The mean and standard
                 deviation of the counts can be computed. This mean can be considered as
                 the threshold value for ρ and δ; alternatively, mean + standard deviation can
                 also be used as a slightly restrictive threshold. For example, Figure 5.4 shows
                 example data for both time bins. Thresholds of µ + σ1 and µ + σ2 are computed
                 to indicate an anomalous communication at time Tx for IP n5. In general, if
                 subsequent bins show low values as compared to the threshold followed by high
                 values of the counts as compared to thresholds, then this may indicate a period
                 worth investigating. While this is not a predictive method, it may provide an
                 administrator with a way to zoom into unusual communications.
                    Notice the total count for source IP n1 before the password theft on Tx‒1 is 2,
                 which is less than our threshold of 2.28 (µ + 2σ). The total count of the source
                 n1 goes up signiﬁcantly after the password is potentially compromised on Tx,
                 which is 5. This count is greater than the threshold of 4.9 (µ + 2σ).
                    It is important to be able to identify the time periods as well where such
                 investigations can be initiated. As a preprocessing task, thresholds can be
                 identiﬁed from historic datasets. Overall interesting conditions are when




                       Figure 5.4 Setting the value for ρ and δ.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  84                                   Types of Cyberattacks


                  Count (destination (n1), Tx‒1) < ρ and Count (source (n1), Tx) > δ. Thus,
                  before the password theft occurs, the count (activity) for that IP (as a destin-
                  ation) is going to be lot less at time Tx‒1 and the count (activity) for that same
                  IP (as source) after the password theft is going to be a signiﬁcantly high at
                  Tx time.
                     Discovering Frequent Rules: Association rule mining (discussed in
                  Chapter 3) can be used to validate the rules where the activities of the
                  compromised IP increase signiﬁcantly with a high LIFT value. Association
                  rule mining provides the rules where the compromised source IP targets many
                  destination IPs once the intruder gains access to the source machine via
                  password theft. This source IP from ARM may also show a correspondence
                  with results from the computational data model and show this IP reaching out
                  to many targets (n2, n3, n4), and as a result it should show up in the association
                  rules. The lift value gives us the performance measure and the conﬁdence for
                  the ARM rules gathered from the algorithm.



                                  5.3 Example: Advanced Persistent Threat
                  One of the fundamental goals of an advanced persistent threat (APT) is to
                  remain undetected on the network for a long period of time in order to carry
                  out the threat’s mission. The desire to remain hidden, and the sophisticated
                  measures taken to avoid detection, makes it extremely difﬁcult to identify,
                  analyze, and categorize APTs. APTs are difﬁcult to detect, prevent intrusion
                  from, and remove, as explained next.
                     Difﬁcult to detect: Use of custom tools that do not have a signature for
                  detection are very challenging to discover. Zero-day exploits avoid detection
                  by signature-based systems. Legitimate third-party applications leveraged for
                  command and control hide in plain sight. Evidence that data have been
                  transferred from the system is deleted or overwritten.
                     Difﬁcult to prevent intrusion: Attackers target the users of the systems, via
                  socially engineered spear-phishing emails. Up-to-date systems are still
                  vulnerable to zero-day exploits. Attackers have been known to target add-
                  itional, outside organizations in order to access their true intended victim
                  (Trend Micro 2012).
                     Difﬁcult to remove: Attackers install backdoors throughout victim net-
                  works to maintain footholds, and hence they are very difﬁcult to remove.
                     Here a review of the APTs such as Mandiant (Binde et al. 2011), McAfee
                  (McAfee 2010, Websense 2011), Symantec (O’Gorman and McDonald 2012),
                  and Trend Micro (SecDev Group 2009, Leyden 2012) and from security




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                     5.3 Example: Advanced Persistent Threat (APT)                85




                       Figure 5.5 Characteristics of advanced persistent threats.


                 researchers is discussed. Several properties displayed by different APT groups
                 are discussed (as outlined in Quader et al. 2015). Also included in these
                 properties is the pervasiveness of the attacks, victims, the robustness of the
                 infrastructure, as well as other select attributes. By reviewing these attributes,
                 APTs are categorized into groups by their technical sophistication, longevity,
                 persistence, and overall threat.
                    APTs have speciﬁc characteristics, as shown in Figure 5.5, such as attack
                 vectors through which they are initiated, exploits through which they are
                 carried out, tools used to establish the threat, targets that make a target inviting
                 for an APT attack, command and control, and persistence of the attack, which
                 is longer lasting than other traditional attacks.
                    There are several reported APTs; however, only a very small set of APTs are
                 well known, fully understood, and reported to the general public. Of the
                 known threats, very few holistic pictures are available that detail the tactics,
                 techniques, and procedures. Here the more prominent APTs discovered over
                 the last several years are discussed and broken into individual parts of the APT
                 to study the attack vectors, exploits, tools, targets, command and control, and
                 persistence of each APT. Each attribute is described in the following subsec-
                 tions (Quader et al. 2015, Stauffer and Janeja 2017) and shown in Figure 5.5.



                                                  5.3.1 Attributes of APTs
                                             5.3.1.1 Attack Vector
                 APTs typically follow three primary attack vectors for gaining access to a
                 target’s system. No vector is necessarily more sophisticated than any other;
                 however, the level of sophistication is inherent in the quality and thoroughness
                 of the social engineering and spear-phishing techniques.
                    Several APTs have broadened their potential victim base and use an attack
                 vector known as a watering hole. Attackers ﬁrst identify a vulnerable website
                 and insert malicious code into the site that will redirect visitors to another




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  86                                   Types of Cyberattacks


                  malicious site hosting the APT‘s malware (O’Gorman and McDonald 2012).
                  SQL injection/other is probably the least utilized vector by APTs. Attackers
                  may use SQL injection to exploit a company’s web servers and then proceed
                  with the attack.

                                                  5.3.1.2 Exploits
                  Before an attacker can surreptitiously install their chosen backdoor on a victim
                  machine, vulnerability needs to be available to exploit. Vulnerabilities can be
                  found in many software applications.
                     Zero day: A zero-day vulnerability is not known by the software developer
                  or security community; it is typically only known by the attacker or a small
                  group of individuals. A zero day is valuable because any victim machine
                  running that software will be vulnerable to the exploit. Thus, Zero-day vulner-
                  abilities are difﬁcult to discover (O’Gorman and McDonald 2012).
                     Known, but unpatched vulnerabilities: A small window of time exists
                  between the discovery of vulnerability and the time it takes to develop and
                  release a patch. An attacker may take advantage of this time to develop an
                  exploit and use it maliciously.
                     Known, patched vulnerabilities: Since software developers have to release
                  updates to patch any vulnerability, an opportunity exists for attackers to take
                  advantage of users who do not regularly update their software.

                                                 5.3.1.3 Tools
                  Many attackers use similar, publicly available tools to navigate a victim
                  network once they have established backdoors on victim systems. The differ-
                  ence between APTs lies in the tools they use to maintain access to victims.
                     Custom tools: Some APTs use custom tools that are not publicly available.
                  Since a considerable amount of time, expertise, and money is needed to
                  develop a family of malware, custom tools will highlight the potential expert-
                  ise and backing of a group.
                     Publicly available tools: Many APTs use tools that are publicly available
                  and easily downloadable from many websites dedicated to hacking.

                                                 5.3.1.4 Targets
                  APT targets can be government/military, nongovernmental organizations,
                  commercial enterprises, or the defense industrial base.

                                        5.3.1.5 Command and Control
                  This highlights the ways in which an attacker communicates with implanted
                  machines:




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                          5.3 Example: Advanced Persistent Threat (APT)                                                                      87


                    Trojan-initiated callbacks: This type of communication is marked by the
                 malicious program initiating the connection to an external server. Most attack-
                 ers use this technique in order to defeat ﬁrewalls, which typically allow
                 outbound connections from computers within the network (Mandiant 2013).
                    Encryption: Encryption is used to hide C2 communications and make such
                 communications more difﬁcult to detect.
                    Third-party applications: Third-party applications, such as MSN
                 Messenger, are leveraged to communicate with victims. Using trusted applica-
                 tions makes it more difﬁcult for network defenders to identify C2 communi-
                 cations (Mandiant 2013).
                    Standard/default malware connections: Many publicly available back-
                 doors come with default settings. For example, Poison Ivy uses port 3460 by
                 default. Communications over default settings are more easily detected
                 because they are known by network defenders (Mandiant 2013).


                                               5.3.1.6 Persistence
                 Persistence is characterized by the length of time a particular APT has been
                 conducting operations, such as more than ﬁve years, between two and ﬁve
                 years, or less than two years
                   Figure 5.6 presents an overview of the characteristics of some well-known
                 APTs (SecDev Group 2009, Alperovitch 2011, McAfee Labs 2010, 2011,
                 Chien and O’Gorman 2011, Thakur 2011, Villeneuve and Sancho 2011,
                 Blasco 2013, Mandiant 2013). Taking into account the tools, exploits, and

                 Name            Attack vector      Exploit            Tools       Targets                           Command and control           Persistence
                 APT1            Spear phishing                        Custom      Commercial enterprises, defense   Trojan-initiated callbacks,   More than five
                                                                                   industrial base                   third party applications      years

                 Shady Rat       Spear phishing     Known patched                  Government/military, non                                        Less than two
                                                    vulnerabilities                governmental organization,                                      years
                                                                                   commercial enterprises, defense
                                                                                   industrial base
                  Aurora/        Spear phishing     Zero day           Custom      Nongovernmental organization,     Trojan-initiated callbacks,   Between two
                  Elderwood      Watering hole                                     commercial enterprises, defense   encryption                    and five years
                                                                                   industrial base
                  RSA Hack       Spear phishing     Zero day           Publicly    Commercial enterprises            Trojan-initiated callbacks,   Less than two
                                                                       available                                     standard/default malware      years
                                                                                                                     connections
                  Lurid          Spear phishing      Known but         Publicly    Government/military, commercial Trojan -initiated callbacks
                                                     unpatched         available   enterprises, defense industrial base
                                                     vulnerabilities
                  Night Dragon   Spear phishing      Known patched     Publicly    Commercial enterprises            Trojan-initiated callbacks    Between two
                                 SQL injection/other vulnerabilities   available                                                                   and five years

                  Ghost Net      Spear phishing     Known patched      Publicly    Government/military, non-                                       Less than two
                                                    vulnerabilities    available   governmental organization                                       years
                  Sykipot        Spear phishing     Known, but         Custom      Government/military, defense      Trojan-initiated callbacks,   More than five
                                 Watering hole      unpatched                      industrial base                   encryption                    years
                                                    vulnerabilities
                  Nitro          Spear phishing                        Publicly    Non-governmental organization,    Trojan-initiated callbacks,   Less than two
                                 Watering hole                         available   commercial enterprises            encryption                    years



                            Figure 5.6 APT characteristics.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  88                                   Types of Cyberattacks


                  command and control communications, it appears that Elderwood, APT1, and
                  Sykipot present the most substantial threats among the currently reported
                  APTs in terms of the characteristics discussed.


                             5.3.2 Data Analytics Methods for Persistent Threats
                  Let us consider how we can use data analytics to discover persistent threat
                  patterns such as those exhibited in an APT, particularly using the network
                  trafﬁc data.
                     For this, it is useful to evaluate the intrusion detection log data along with
                  other raw log data ﬁles and study them over time using data discretization.
                  Once the temporal bins are created to divide the data into chunks of time to
                  study persistent behavior in these time chunks, frequent patterns using the
                  association rule mining can be identiﬁed, and the overlapping and nonoverlap-
                  ping rules across these bins can be determined. The high-priority unusual
                  persistent threats can be isolated, i.e., the rules that occur frequently in the
                  temporal bins but are nonoverlapping across time periods. This will help
                  identify rules that do occur multiple times in a timer period but do not occur
                  across other time periods.
                     Intuition: An advanced persistent threat is generally unusual and uses
                  stealth mechanisms to not be discoverable. APTs also exhibit signs of system
                  access at unusual times, a high level of backdoor access, and unusual infor-
                  mation exchange. These events can be unusual yet frequent – but not neces-
                  sarily across multiple times. This unusualness comes from the times when
                  these events happen or in some cases the speciﬁc systems being targeted.
                  Association rules that are repeatedly occurring across the multiple time periods
                  represent the daily chatter in the log ﬁles. However, rules that are frequent but
                  are nonoverlapping across time periods can be deemed unusual and considered
                  as potential persistent threats. Similar to the social engineering example, here
                  the idea is to narrow down the data and time window, which can be further
                  investigated by an administrator. For example, frequent logins at unusual times
                  might be useful for an administrator to follow up on rather than looking at the
                  entire massive dataset. Keeping this intuition in mind, let us consider the
                  mining strategy.
                     Data discretization: This segregates data into time segments or bins repre-
                  senting the multiple time periods, which makes it easier to evaluate the
                  persistence of the threats across time periods represented by bins. Given a set
                  of temporally ordered alerts A = {a1, . . . , an} (from the IDS log ﬁles such as
                  from Snort logs) where each ai has a set of features ﬁ = {fi1, fi2, . . . , fim}, Bin
                  is a set of temporally ordered segments from A such that B = {b1 = (a1, . . . , ax),




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                     5.3 Example: Advanced Persistent Threat (APT)                           89


                 b2 = (ax+1, . . . , ay), . . . , br = (ai+1, . . . , an)}, where |b1| = |b2| = . . . = |bz| = z,
                 and where z is the size of the bin. Let us consider equal-sized bins, in this case
                 where z is ﬁxed frequency.
                    Suspicious network trafﬁc is captured through IDS in an alert log capturing
                 the source and destination IP, with time stamps and the priority. Here priority
                 indicates the severity of an alert (high, medium, or low-level alert). The high-
                 priority threats can be obvious suspicious activities, and the low-priority
                 threats can be potential alerts that may or may not be real. Such high-priority
                 alerts when looked at in combination over a long period of time may turn out to
                 be persistent. In general, an IDS does not capture threats over a period of time,
                 but views each individual alert and assigns priority. Therefore, it is important
                 to evaluate the alert priorities to see, when combined over time, what the
                 overall threat is.
                    Identify frequent patterns: Analyzing threats individually may not provide
                 the overall persistence of a threat. It is important to study the data from the
                 overall perspective and identify frequent patterns on a given time frame to
                 discover persistent threats. Thus, the data can be mined using association rule
                 mining techniques and isolate the persistent high-priority threats (PHPT) from the
                 individual high-priority threats (Quader et al. 2015). The PHPT are consistent and
                 may indicate APT behaviors. Now given a set of discrete bins B in the log
                 data, frequent pattern set P = {p1, . . . , ps} is a set of association rules where each
                 pi = {fij ! fik, fil ! fim, . . . , fip ! fiq} such that each rule set pi corresponds to
                 each bin bi and where fi = {fi1, fi2, . . . , fim} are features of alert ai in bi
                    Persistent threats: Persistent threats (PT) are unusual threats that stay
                 consistent over a long period of time. The binned datasets and their corres-
                 ponding frequent patterns can be intersected with each other to isolate the
                 nonintersecting high-priority threats to detect the potential persistent threats.
                 Persistent threat patterns have the following key characteristics: consistent
                 over time (occurs repeatedly); single source (same key players); individually
                 each is a threat, unusual (the pattern may be repeated at an unusual time of the
                 day or a single source accessing different sources repeatedly at the same time
                 of the day); and nonobvious (nonoverlapping).
                    In Figure 5.7, the PT patterns are located in the nonoverlapping area.
                 Each circle in the ﬁgure represents the association rules for a speciﬁc bin.
                 Now if the association rules overlap, they are consistent across bins and may
                 be more like probing, which is not consistent with the characteristics of an
                 APT. However, if the association rules do not overlap across bins and are
                 unique to certain time periods, then they can be considered as potential
                 persistent patterns of interest. Note that these are still frequent but not the
                 same across each time period.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  90                                   Types of Cyberattacks




                        Figure 5.7 Example overlapping and nonoverlapping rules from ARM for Bin1,
                        2, and 3.

                     Association rule mining technique with classiﬁcation-based association can
                  be used to obtain the implied priority on the right-hand side of the rule. This
                  helps identify the potential persistent threats with priority alert labels along
                  with the repetitive nature of the threats. The binning also allows plotting the
                  priorities on a timeline to associate the PT with time periods when these
                  events occur.
                     In Figure 5.7, we see three time periods T1, T2, and T3 with their
                  corresponding rule sets p1, p2, and p3. For example, p1 has associations in
                  the form of IP1 ! IP2. This could imply a source destination relationship
                  where IP1 is sending data to IP2. A union of two consecutive sets is taken and
                  the intersection is subtracted from this set. As a result, the nonoverlapping or
                  nonintersecting part of the two sets is discovered. Finally, after subsequent
                  operations, the most unusual frequent set is identiﬁed that is nonintersecting
                  across multiple bins.
                     In both these examples, the end result is not predictive but exploratory to
                  help narrow down the data and time periods that should be further investigated.
                  Each of this analysis is also based on the intuition of the attack pattern. Even in
                  supervised methods, the intuition is used in formulating the training set with
                  a given distribution. This is true to any data analytics task for identifying a
                  cyberattack. There is no true model that can predict or identify an attack with
                  a 100% certainty. Each detected pattern helps an administrator investigate the
                  potential occurrence of the attack or zeroing into the needle in the haystack
                  of data.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                    6
                             Anomaly Detection for Cybersecurity




                 In this chapter, we focus on what anomalies are, their types, and challenges in
                 detecting anomalies. In Chapter 7, we focus on speciﬁc methods for
                 detecting anomalies.



                                               6.1 What Are Anomalies?
                 An anomaly in a dataset is an observation or a set of observations that are
                 different and inconsistent with respect to the normal observations. An anomaly
                 is also referred to as outlier, peculiarity, exception, and discord, among other
                 terms. “Anomaly” and “outlier” are mostly used interchangeably. An anomaly
                 is always identiﬁed with respect to a frame of reference. The frame of reference
                 is the normal or baseline set of observations in the data. An anomaly stands
                 apart from this frame of reference. Therefore, anomaly detection heavily relies
                 on discovering the normal, the frame of reference, or the baseline against
                 which an observation is compared to be termed as an anomaly. The further
                 away the anomaly is from the frame of reference, the more severe is
                 the anomaly.
                    Anomaly detection is a well-studied area of research, with several surveys
                 describing the state of the art (Patcha and Park 2007, Chandola et al. 2009),
                 and more speciﬁcally anomaly detection in areas of cybersecurity (Estevez-
                 Tapiador et al. 2004, Feily 2009, Ten et al. 2011, Hong et al. 2014, Ahmed
                 et al. 2016).
                    In the area of data analytics, anomaly detection has utilized techniques from
                 supervised, semisupervised, and unsupervised learning to identify anomalies.
                 Anomalies have been characterized as single point, group of points, and
                 contextual anomalies (Chandola et al. 2009), as shown in Figure 6.1.
                 However, these different types of anomalies can be interrelated.

                                                                    91


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  92                         Anomaly Detection for Cybersecurity




                        Figure 6.1 Types of anomalies.




                        Figure 6.2 Illustrating the types of anomalies in clusters of network trafﬁc data.




                     To explain the types of anomalies, let us consider Figure 6.2. The ﬁgure
                  shows clusters of network trafﬁc data that comprise features such as time to
                  live, datagram length, and total size. Once clustering is performed, we see that
                  certain points do not fall into any of the clusters. We can evaluate this
                  clustering as containing potential anomalies.
                     Figure 6.2 depicts different types of anomalies. A point anomaly is a single
                  data point that is anomalous with respect to a group of neighboring points.
                  There can be different points of references such that an anomaly can be
                  identiﬁed with respect to all clusters or with respect to points in a cluster or
                  in some cases the entire dataset. For example, in the ﬁgure we can see that
                  there is a single point that is a global anomaly, which is an anomalous with
                  respect to all the three clusters 1, 2, and 3. There some local point anomalies,
                  which are anomalous with respect to speciﬁc clusters such as cluster 2 and 3.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              6.2 Context                       93


                    In some cases, a small group of points can also be an anomaly, called as a
                 collective anomaly, such as cluster 4 in Figure 6.2. This cluster is an anomaly
                 with respect to all the clusters due to the relative size of the cluster and its
                 distance from other clusters. Individual points inside the cluster may not be
                 anomalous on their own; however, when considered together as a group they
                 are anomalous. In the example in Figure 6.2, the point of reference is the other
                 clusters, such that the size of the clusters 1, 2, and 3 is much bigger and the
                 distance of the small cluster 4 to the other clusters is much bigger than the
                 distance between the clusters 1, 2, and 3. Thus, it is clear that a frame of
                 reference is extremely important in discovering anomalies such that points or
                 groups of points are not frivolously identiﬁed as anomalous.
                    Another type of anomaly is a contextual anomaly, where the anomaly is
                 identiﬁed with the perspective of a certain context. For example, if the network
                 trafﬁc in an e-commerce site at a certain time appears to be very high as
                 compared to the other network trafﬁc points for this site, they may appear to be
                 anomalous or the time period may appear anomalous. However, if there is a
                 speciﬁc event that is leading to the high network trafﬁc, such as high sales
                 during holiday time, then this high trafﬁc would not be anomalous. The
                 context here is that the high amount of trafﬁc is generated due to a marketing
                 event or a special sale and not because of a ﬂooding attack or a denial of
                 service attack. In the ﬁgure, we provide additional information that the cluster
                 4 is in fact a group of points where a large ﬁle was being uploaded by a speciﬁc
                 network admin, which resulted in the massive size of the transfer on the
                 network generating the data point that is different from that of the rest of the
                 trafﬁc. Given the context of the origin of the data, these data should not have
                 been included in the analysis. Thus deﬁning a context can be very important to
                 create a frame of reference. This can be done before the anomaly detection,
                 which is much more robust, to clean up the data of possible frivolous outliers
                 or as a postprocessing step where the outliers are ﬁltered through any context.



                                                           6.2 Context
                 Context can be in the form of attributes within the data that can be used to
                 create demarcations in the data so that data are separated into groups for further
                 analysis. Context can help deﬁne homogeneous groups for anomaly detection.
                 Context discovery is a preprocessing step where the groups are identiﬁed using
                 contextual attributes (such as shown in Figure 6.3), and then anomaly
                 detection is performed in the contextually relevant groups of data points using
                 the behavioral attributes that measure the phenomena (such as network trafﬁc




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  94                         Anomaly Detection for Cybersecurity




                        Figure 6.3 Context deﬁnition.


                  density). Context-aware processing allows for accommodating context deﬁn-
                  ition into the algorithmic process.
                     Context can be deﬁned in the terms of activity, individuality, spatial or
                  location context, temporal context, and relations context (Zimmermann et al.
                  2007). Context deﬁnition for an example network data point is shown in
                  Figure 6.3. For example, a data point, part of the network trafﬁc data, is a
                  source IP, is sending the data packet at 5 a.m., and is part of the IP address
                  allocated to the support team. Thus, if all the support team IPs are sending
                  similarly sized data and at similar time frame, then this point will be considered
                  normal. However, if this particular data point is sending data at an unusual
                  time and is originating from a geolocation outside of the expected locations,
                  then this could be a potential anomaly. Here the frame of reference is deﬁned
                  in terms of time, IP location, and the team. Thus, data points with a similar
                  context should be grouped together, and anomaly detection can be applied to
                  each of the groups for a well-deﬁned anomaly detection. The point, group, and
                  contextual anomalies are related to each other since a context can apply to both
                  a point and groups of outliers. Moreover, in some cases individual point
                  anomalies can collectively be part of a group anomaly. However, this may
                  not always be the case since data points that are part of the group may or may
                  not be individually anomalous.
                     Anomaly detection has several associated challenges, and these will be
                  clariﬁed next with the help of a motivating example.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                          6.3 Motivating Example: BGP Hijacking                95


                                  6.3 Motivating Example: BGP Hijacking
                 Network packets follow certain speciﬁc trafﬁc routes on the internet using the
                 announced and available routes maintained in the routing tables. Border
                 Gateway Protocol (BGP) is primarily responsible for exchange of information
                 between autonomous systems (AS) for successful transmission over the pub-
                 lished routes. Several types of attacks lead to hijacking of hosts or servers and
                 redirecting trafﬁc to anomalous sites or dumping trafﬁc at random sites. BGP
                 hijacking is one such type of attack. Examples include redirection of Google
                 and YouTube requests in Turkey (Paganini 2014) and erroneous rerouting of
                 YouTube trafﬁc (Sandoval 2008), among others.
                    BGP anomalies (Al-Musawi et al. 2016) prevent successful exchanges
                 between the AS, leading to loss of data or unauthorized rerouting of the data.
                 Such anomalies may include route ﬂapping, path announcements that delay in-
                 routed packets, malicious redirecting of trafﬁc for unauthorized surveillance
                 purposes, and dropping of packets to unknown destinations. BGP anomalies
                 where path announcements are made may lead to thousands of anomalous
                 updates. BGP ﬁrst initiates a complete routing table exchange and then subse-
                 quently exchanges updates. Thus, if there is an anomaly, then there will be a
                 lot more updates than normal. This can potentially indicate the presence of an
                 anomaly. However, a more speciﬁc discovery is needed to identify where (at
                 what location or speciﬁc AS) the anomaly originated, as this can provide
                 pertinent information for interpretation of the anomaly, whether it was a simple
                 misconﬁguration or a more malicious intent to disrupt or redirect the trafﬁc.
                    BGP anomalies can also be classiﬁed similar to the general anomalies a
                 point or collective anomaly. A single update can be considered as a point
                 anomaly if it has an invalid AS number, invalid IP preﬁx, or a preﬁx
                 announced by an illegitimate AS (Wübbeling et al. 2014). A set of updates
                 can be anomalous (collectively) if there are several BGP updates in a short
                 amount of time containing longest and shortest paths or substantial changes in
                 the BGP trafﬁc (Al-Musawi et al. 2015). Such anomaly detection can use data
                 from BGP update messages or routes that packets use. Several repositories are
                 available for such datasets to be analyzed and for discovering anomalies, as
                 shown in Table 6.1. Each of these datasets shows the complexity and massive
                 nature of the data.
                    Studies have shown that a large number of attributes can be mined to
                 discover BGP anomalies (Li et al. 2005, Al-Rousan et al. 2012). Using these
                 as an example the following section identiﬁes the challenges in understanding
                 and discovering anomalies.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  96                         Anomaly Detection for Cybersecurity


                                6.4 Challenges in Understanding Anomalies
                  As data size increases both in terms of the number of data points and the
                  features describing them, the patterns in the data get further embedded
                  deeper into the data space. This is primarily because data are sparse in high
                  dimensions. This means that the patterns may exist in some subspaces in the
                  data and not in others. This is referred to as the curse of dimensionality
                  (Bellman 1961). The curse of dimensionality affects all the data analytics
                  techniques and is even more relevant for anomaly detection, as anomalies
                  are already rare.
                     Several studies have explored the datasets listed in Table 6.1. Li et al. (2005)
                  used 35 features every one minute to generate decision trees based on past
                  BGP events. Such data are high dimensional and nearly real-time data. Let us
                  consider the dimensionality issue in such data. High-dimensional data can be
                  analyzed in various ways to identify anomalous routes. The full dataset can be
                  considered for the analysis or alternatively a smaller relevant (contextual)
                  subset of the data can be considered. It is possible that a route or a single
                  update can be an outlier in one subset of attributes but not an outlier in another
                  subset. For example, a route is not an outlier in the updates attribute but is an
                  outlier in the location attribute.
                     Thus, it is essential to carefully determine whether all the dimensions are to
                  be considered or a selected critical attribute set is considered. This selection of
                  the critical attribute set is also a data mining task in itself, such as through
                  feature selection.
                     In the example shown in Figure 6.4, the data are comprised of four attri-
                  butes: number of BGP announcements, number of BGP updates, number of


                  Table 6.1 BGP data repositories

                  Data description                    Link
                  RouteViews                          www.routeviews.org/
                  Réseaux IP Européens                www.ripe.net/manage-ips-and-asns/db
                  BGPMon                              https://bgpmon.net/
                  Internet route registries           http://irr.net/index.html
                  CIDR report (bogon preﬁx            www.cidr-report.org/as2.0/
                  lists)
                  MaxMind, GeoIP location             www.maxmind.com/en/open-source-data-and-api-for-
                  data                                ip-geolocation
                  IP2location                         www.ip2location.com/
                  CAIDA traceroute                    www.caida.org/proiects/ark/
                  platform




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                        6.4 Challenges in Understanding Anomalies                97




                       Figure 6.4 Example curse of dimensionality.



                 new paths announced, and number of withdrawals after announcing the same
                 path. The two-dimensional plot of the data considering all the attributes
                 together (Figure 6.4a) depicts clear anomalies that stand out from the other
                 data points. This anomaly corresponds to observation 4, which shows high
                 values for all attributes with respect to all the other observations. Figure 6.4b–e
                 shows the plot for each attribute. It is clear that observation 4 dominates plots
                 shown in Figure 6.4b–d. However, in Figure 6.4c we see that observation 3,
                 which has a high number of BGP updates, is also deviant with respect to the
                 rest of the data points. Finally, in Figure 6.4d, which plots the attribute AW,
                 which is the number of withdrawals after announcing the paths, it is evident
                 that observation 5 is highly deviant compared to the rest of the data points.
                 This anomaly did not show up in Figure 6.4a and was masked by the other
                 highly deviant values. This clearly shows the challenge of high dimensionality
                 when the patterns are hidden in the subspaces.
                    Thus, anomaly detection is not only focused on the mechanism of labeling
                 an outlier or anomaly but also carefully identifying the frame of reference in
                 terms of the objects to compare against and also the subset of attributes or
                 subspaces to consider.
                    Once the frame of reference or context in terms of the data and set of
                 dimensions to be used is determined, then the data mining and analysis could
                 be used to identify the deviation of the route from the normal.
                    This type of analysis based on a clearly deﬁned context could be useful in
                 selecting the suspicious routes for further investigation. Such analysis can help




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  98                         Anomaly Detection for Cybersecurity


                  answer the following: What routes or updates should a point be compared
                  against? What are the critical dimensions that facilitate the discovery of
                  anomalous routes? How can we inform why a certain route is an outlier by
                  identifying the dimensions contributing to the outlierness? If all dimensions
                  are being used for the discovery, then it is also important to explore subsets of
                  the attributes to account for contribution from dimensions and also identify the
                  (outlierness) contributing dimensions.



                                                      6.5 Interpretation
                  Anomalies are in the eyes of the beholder. Anomalies can be a nuisance for an
                  operator or a user who does not want too many alerts to slow them down. For
                  example, in some domains such as the emergency operating centers where
                  complex and multiple systems are used, too many alerts can lead to alert
                  fatigue, desensitizing the end users to the numerous pings from their systems.
                  Indeed, in healthcare environments, this type of alert fatigue has been studied,1
                  and it could lead to potential threats such as ransomware, etc. This can affect
                  the overall performance of a system, but more importantly this can desensitize
                  users to click when they should not be clicking. Alternately, for a security
                  ofﬁcer each anomaly may be a critical alert to portend the arrival of a major
                  attack or a major misconﬁguration leaving a gaping hole in a system.
                     Anomaly interpretation may also change from one domain to another. What
                  appears as a blip in an instrument reading in one domain (such as sensors
                  monitoring water monitoring quality in a stream) may appear to be a major
                  alert in another domain (such as sensors monitoring water in the nuclear power
                  plant). Another example is password attempts. How many failed password
                  attempts are allowed into a system will depend on the function of the system
                  being accessed. A bank may only allow three failed attempts before it locks out
                  the user, whereas an emailing system may allow more attempts. In each of
                  these systems, predicting whether there is a guess password attack will be
                  based on different criteria based on the domain context. Figure 6.5 depicts
                  some of the priorities and discussions at various levels that can impact the
                  discovery and interpretation of an anomaly. The organization’s priorities may
                  be connected to the business bottom line, such as reputation, when an attack
                  happens that can translate to millions of dollars lost (Drinkwater 2016).
                  Similarly, an end user is highly driven by the day-to-day functions and how

                  1
                      https://psnet.ahrq.gov/primers/primer/28/alert-fatigue Last accessed June 2017.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      6.6 Treating Anomalies                         99




                       Figure 6.5 Factors governing the interpretation and discovery of anomalies.


                 fast the functionality can return to normal. The system and security priorities
                 are more directly related to the anomaly detection and scoring. However, these
                 must work in conjunction to the other players’ priorities.
                    Thus, interpretation of anomalies will vary from one type of user to another,
                 one type of system to another, and one domain to another based on the context
                 deﬁned and agreed upon by each.
                    Many times, two users in the same organization may also not agree on the
                 deﬁnition of an anomaly. It is critical to have a well-crafted deﬁnition of an
                 anomaly to (a) facilitate the discovery of an anomaly, (b) reduce the false
                 positives, and (c) associate importance to the level of the anomaly for faster
                 recovery and remediation.


                                                 6.6 Treating Anomalies
                 Traditional statistical outlier detection (Barnett and Lewis 1994) has addressed
                 how outliers can be treated once they are discovered, whether they should be
                 accommodated into the analysis or rejected before the analysis.
                    Accommodation tends to detect the outlier and accommodate the value in
                 the dataset so that the whole set of observations is still intact. It tends to
                 manipulate the observation so that even if an anomaly is in the dataset, the data
                 do not become skewed because of this rogue observation. The idea is that
                 outliers are part of the data: although their removal ﬁts the data into some




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  100                        Anomaly Detection for Cybersecurity




                        Figure 6.6 Treatment of outliers (adapted from Barnett and Lewis 1994).


                  distribution or normalizes the data, the outliers’ presence could be equally
                  important for the analysis. Hence, the idea is to not reject outliers, but to
                  accommodate them so that the analysis can still be safely performed without
                  any loss of data or observations. Thus, it aims at the robustness of the analysis
                  in the presence of outliers.
                     Rejection is basically testing an outlier purely from the point of view of
                  rejecting it from the dataset or of identifying it as a feature of special interest
                  and removing it before further analysis is done.
                     Figure 6.6, adapted from Barnett and Lewis 1994, summarizes the treatment
                  of outliers based on the source of variation and the nature of outliers. If the
                  anomaly is caused due to a measurement error, it is either rejected or corrected,
                  or the detection is repeated. However, if the variation is inherent or due to
                  some real measurement of an event, then the anomaly detection is used, but
                  again in this case the outlier is incorporated in the revised model, identiﬁed for
                  a separate study of origin and form. Also, if the anomaly is due to some
                  random reason, then it could be accommodated to see the overall analysis
                  rather than eliminating the observation altogether.
                     In terms of cybersecurity, in the majority of the cases, the anomaly must be
                  eliminated. For instance, if there is a Trojan discovered in a computer system
                  that disrupts the regular functionality, it has to be eliminated. Similarly, if the
                  BGP updates appear to be anomalous, they need to be corrected for proper
                  communication and movement of the trafﬁc. However, in some cases the
                  anomaly needs to be studied, in which case the anomaly may be detected
                  and traced. This was a concept carried out in a setting called “Jail,” where an
                  attacker was traced through the system access and observations collected to
                  learn about the role and activities of the attacker (Cheswick 1992). Similarly,
                  honeypots are set up to collect data and activities of attackers (Spitzner 2003).
                     We next discuss methods for anomaly detection in Chapter 7.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                    7
                                      Anomaly Detection Methods




                 As discussed in Chapter 6, anomalies or outliers are objects or groups of
                 objects that are deviant with respect to other normal objects. This anomalous
                 behavior can be caused by extreme values in some dimensions, which could be
                 an inherent rare property of the anomalous objects. In high-dimensional data,
                 this rarity increases with the increase in the number of dimensions. This is
                 mainly because data become sparse in higher dimensions; this will further
                 aggravate the discovery of outliers. Other situations may be caused due to
                 measurement errors or phenomena that are causing the deviations. This chapter
                 focuses on techniques for anomaly detection addressing these issues and their
                 applicability to cybersecurity problems.
                    Figure 7.1 shows a broad categorization of anomaly detection techniques to
                 give an idea of the development in this ﬁeld. Several recent surveys provide a
                 lot more categories and discuss the works in detail (Patcha and Park 2007,
                 Chandola et al. 2009, Garcia-Teodoro et al. 2009, Bhuyan et al. 2014).
                    Outlier detection techniques have been adopted from the statistical literature
                 and treat the outliers as parametric outlier detection, in which the data are
                 assumed to ﬁt a certain distribution. The tail region of the distribution, such as
                 in a normal distribution, would constitute the outliers. However, in real-world
                 datasets, the data do not ﬁt into a standard statistical distribution. Certain other
                 techniques detect outliers using metrics such as distance, distance from nearest
                 neighbors, density, deviation, and other such measures. Other methods are a
                 byproduct of clustering methods. The data are ﬁrst clustered using some
                 clustering technique, and the data points, which lie outside of a cluster, are
                 considered to be outliers. There could also be a scenario that part or all of a
                 cluster of data points could be outliers based on the problem being studied.
                 Classiﬁcation-based techniques identify and predict anomalies based on his-
                 toric anomaly signatures.


                                                                   101


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  102                                   Anomaly Detection Methods




                                                              Classification
                                                              based
                                                              • Neural networks,
                                                                classifiers,
                                                                ensembles




                       High dimensional
                       outlier detection                                                                 Nearest
                       • Subspace clustering                                                             neighbor
                         based
                       • Discovery in large                                                              • Density based
                         and high-dimensional                                                            • Distance based
                         datasets
                                                                 Anomaly
                                                                 detecon




                                        Statistical                                   Clustering
                                        • Discordancy test                            based
                                          for distributions
                                        • Interquartile                               • Outliers as by
                                          range based                                  product of
                                        • Standard                                     clustering
                                          deviation based                              methods




                        Figure 7.1 Broad categorization of anomaly detection methods.


                     The discussion in this chapter is limited to key anomaly detection techniques
                  since they are the foundational approaches that are adopted as variations of
                  these methods, such as in the distance-based techniques and discovery of
                  anomalies in large, multidimensional datasets.


                                        7.1 Statistical Outlier Detection Tests
                  The distribution-based parametric methods are discussed in the statistical
                  outlier detection literature, which assumes that data ﬁt into a prespeciﬁed
                  distribution, such as normal distribution, and then identiﬁes the outliers with
                  respect to the model using discordancy tests (Barnett and Lewis 1994). The
                  discordancy tests are developed based on the properties of the distribution.
                  Similarly, the Inter Quartile Range based outlier detection method is developed
                  using statistical dispersion.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                            7.1 Statistical Outlier Detection Tests                103


                                                   7.1.1 Discordancy Tests
                 Discordancy tests evaluate the ﬁt of the data to an assumed distribution. It has
                 two main hypotheses: a working hypothesis and an alternative hypothesis. It
                 assumes a standard distribution of the dataset, and if the discordancy test ﬁnds
                 the outliers, then it tries to ﬁt the data to the alternative distribution; however,
                 the underlying assumption is that the data ﬁt a distribution, which might not be
                 the case always, especially for multidimensional real-world data.
                    As an example, if there is a normal distribution where x1 and xn are the
                 extremes, a discordancy test will check if xn, apart from being an extreme, is
                 also statistically unreasonable; if it is, then it is called a discordant upper
                 outlier. The next step would be to show that the outlier comes from the
                 alternative distribution and not the working distribution. However, this is a
                 difﬁcult task in itself. The key thing to note here is that the discordancy tests
                 are statistical measures used to see if the data element being tested ﬁts a
                 distribution. A key metric is to see the ﬁt of the data point using measures
                 such as deviation/spread statistics such that d ¼ μx1  s , where µ is a measure of
                 central tendency; in this case, the mean and s can be a known measure of
                 spread, such as range. For example, if d  1, then x1 is not an outlier; on the
                 other hand, if d > 1, it is an outlier.
                    There are two major procedures for outlier detection in statistical studies, as
                 shown in Figure 7.2: block procedures and consecutive (or sequential)
                 procedures.
                    In consecutive (or sequential) procedures, sample size is not ﬁxed, but
                 determined in each cycle in relation to the values of earlier observations.



                                                              Anomaly


                                                                                      Collective
                                        Point               Contextual
                                                                                      or group

                                                              Statistical
                                                               outliers

                                                                           Block
                                                 Sequential
                                                                         procedure
                       Figure 7.2 Types of anomalies and statistical methods of detection.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  104                              Anomaly Detection Methods


                  Each observation is screened for discordancy in relation to the already
                  screened set of observations. This procedure can be done in two ways: outside
                  inward, which means that the extreme outlier is tested ﬁrst, then second most
                  extreme, and so on, but more widely preferred way of doing it is the other way
                  around (starting with the least likely element to be an outlier). In block
                  procedures, two or more observations are tested together for outlierness.
                     These procedures have similarity to the point anomaly detection and col-
                  lective anomaly detection discussed in the data mining literature (Chandola
                  et al. 2009).
                     Consecutive procedures can suffer from challenges such as masking and
                  swamping (Barnett and Lewis 1994). Masking is an erroneous judgment
                  arising out of a single outlier test. Suppose if through a discordancy test
                  observation xn is declared an outlier with respect to all the n ‒ 1 values, then
                  xn‒1 is further tested. But if xn is not declared an outlier with respect to all n ‒ 1
                  values then xn‒1 is not tested. This could be a problem in a scenario where xn is
                  not an outlier with respect to the adjacent value of xn‒1, but both xn and xn‒1 are
                  outliers when tested together with respect to all n ‒ 2 values. Let us consider a
                  small sample values: 8, 10, 11, 13, 1,000, and 1,005. Now, for example, if
                  tested individually 1,009 will not be declared as an outlier since it is close to
                  1,000, but if 1,000 and 1,005 are tested together against other values, then they
                  are outliers with respect to all other n ‒ 2 values.
                     Swamping, on the other hand, results from using a block or consecutive
                  procedure to test for discordancy, i.e., testing two values together, as in a
                  sample such as 5, 8, 10, 12, 1,000.
                     If two values are tested together, then they are considered outliers, but value
                  12 is not an outlier, so in essence 12 is swamped by 1,000.
                     This behavior is also seen in majority of outlier detection techniques when
                  the incorrect context for comparison can lead to missing outlier values. This is
                  very relevant to cybersecurity applications where data is temporal and needs to
                  be evaluated as a sequence of time series measurements such as network
                  trafﬁc data.


                                           7.1.2 IQR-Based Outlier Detection
                  Interquartile range (IQR)–based outlier detection, shown in Figure 7.3, aims to
                  identify the range of the data and ﬁnd extreme values that are far away from the
                  range. First, data are sorted in increasing order. The median of the data is
                  identiﬁed, which becomes the second quartile. All the numbers to the left are
                  smaller than the median, and all the numbers to the right are greater. The
                  median of these left- and right-hand sides are identiﬁed as ﬁrst quartile and




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                              7.2 Density-Based Outlier Detection                                                 105


                                            25th percentile or 1st quartile                     75th percentile or 3rd quartile

                                                                                          IQR
                                                                         Median or 50th percentile


                                                  Sorted data
                                       Outliers are 1.5 x IQR above Q3 or below Q1

                       Figure 7.3 IQR-based outlier detection approach.


                 third quartile respectively. The data are now divided into four chunks of data
                 ordered by the quartiles. The difference between the third quartile and the ﬁrst
                 quartile is the IQR. IQR-based outlier detection assumes that the IQR should
                 have the majority of the data distribution measuring the spread of the data.
                 Now if this IQR range is further stretched beyond the ﬁrst and third quartile
                 such that the lower threshold is the ﬁrst quartile minus IQR times 1.5, and the
                 upper threshold is the third quartile plus the IQR times 1.5. This stretches the
                 range or spread of the data. Points that fall beyond these thresholds at the lower
                 extreme or the upper extreme are the outliers.
                    IQR is primarily a univariate outlier detection method. An example of IQR-
                 based outlier detection is shown in Figure 7.4, in the network trafﬁc data
                 sample for the attribute “packet size.”
                    In general, statistical outlier detection is a highly developed ﬁeld and has
                 been well established for a long time. However, for outlier detection using
                 statistical methods, the distribution of the dataset needs to be known in
                 advance and the knowledge of the distribution is the underlying assumption.
                 The properties of the distribution need to be known in advance such as the
                 mean, standard deviation, etc. Outlier detection also has to take into consider-
                 ation the masking and swamping effects for sequential and block procedures.
                 In general, the modeling process is more complicated, especially in case of
                 multidimensional datasets. The statistical outlier detection mainly works well
                 for univariate variables. Moreover, these techniques do not work well with
                 incomplete or inconclusive data, and computation of the results is expensive.


                          7.2 Density-Based Outlier Detection: OPTICS-OF
                                      Identifying Local Outliers
                 OPTICS-OF (Breunig et al. 1999) is an extension of the OPTICS density-
                 based clustering algorithm as discussed in Chapter 3. It discovers outliers
                 relative to their neighborhood. Distance-based outliers are good in a global
                 sense, but when different densities of objects exist within the data, distance-
                 based discovery is not adequate. Hence, each outlier is assigned with a degree




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  106                              Anomaly Detection Methods




                        Figure 7.4 Example of IQR-based univariate outlier detection.



                  by which the object is an outlier. Outliers, relative to their local surrounding
                  space, motivate a formal deﬁnition of local outliers. An object is mostly
                  deﬁned as an outlier or not an outlier; however, there could be a degree of
                  outlierness attached to each object based on the local density where position
                  of each object affects the other. The basic concepts of ε-neighborhood and
                  K-distance are adapted from the algorithm DBSCAN, and the concepts of core
                  distance and reachability distance are from the algorithm OPTICS.
                     OPTICS-OF deﬁnes a concept called local reachability, which is measured
                  in terms of the local reachability density of point p given as Lrd(p) = 1/average
                  reachability distance of minpts nearest neighbors of P.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                             7.2 Density-Based Outlier Detection               107




                       Figure 7.5 Example of OPTICS-OF parameter computation.


                    Let us consider the example shown in Figure 7.5. Here the minpts are set to
                 3, although there are more than 3 points in the neighborhood. Only reachability
                 distance to the 3 points needs to be measured. Thus, Lrd(p) = 1/((1 + 1 + 2)/3),
                 which is 0.75.
                    The outlier factor of p is measured in terms of the uniformity in the density
                 of p’s neighborhood. Thus, it takes into consideration the local reachability
                 density of all the minpnts’ nearest neighbors of p. In the preceding example,
                 these are M1, M2, and M3. The outlier factor of p is as follows:
                            P
                               lrd ðoÞ
                              lrd ðpÞ
                 OF ðpÞ ¼        N
                    So in the example from Figure 7.5, the outlier factor is as follows: (0.75 + 1 +
                 0.5/0.75)/3 = 1.
                    The OF = 1 represents a cluster of uniform density. The lower p’s Lrd is, and
                 the higher the Lrd of p’s minpts’ nearest neighbors is, the higher will be p’s
                 outlier factor.
                    This approach is one of the ﬁrst and few approaches that quantiﬁes the
                 outlierness of an object. In the case of multidimensional datasets, however, the
                 degree of the outlierness also depends on dimensions that are contributing to
                 the outlierness and possibly the cause of the outlierness. This approach is able
                 to identify the local or global outliers with respect to a set of points. For some
                 applications, both global and local outliers must be pointed out. Moreover, if
                 only distance from the neighbors or minpts in the neighborhood are con-
                 sidered, then we overlook the situation when several points are collectively
                 an anomaly compared to others. If several points deviate from the standard,




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  108                              Anomaly Detection Methods


                  simply relying on the neighborhood or distance measure is not effective. For
                  this, a clustering-based approach is needed where unusual clusters can be
                  identiﬁed as anomalous. In graphs and spatial data, other types of approaches
                  look at the collective structure of the anomalous subset with respect to the
                  other data points.



                                      7.3 Distance-Based Outlier Detection
                  In data mining, distribution of attributes is mostly unknown. Distance-based
                  outlier detection algorithms initially proposed by Knorr et al. (2000) continue
                  the idea of a uniﬁed notion of mining outliers, which extends statistical-based
                  outlier detection.
                     Such an approach generalizes the notion of outliers provided by many of the
                  discordancy tests for known distributions, such as Normal, Poisson, Binomial,
                  etc. Although it proposes a partitioning-based technique for distance-based
                  outlier detection, it also elaborates on how this approach can unify the various
                  discordancy tests available in the statistical/distribution-based outlier detection
                  techniques. The time complexity is linear with respect to number of objects,
                  and the algorithms are efﬁcient for low-dimensional datasets. The key idea
                  that outliers are far away from their neighbors in terms of a distance threshold
                  was proposed and has been adopted by many recent works (for example,
                  Zhang et al. 2009, Sugiyama and Borgwardt 2013, Cao et al. 2014).
                  Ramaswamy et al. (2000) treats the distance-based outlier detection as one
                  relative to K-nearest neighbors.
                     The distance-based outliers are identiﬁed with two parameters, p and D,
                  namely DB (p, D). An object O in a dataset T is a DB (p, D) outlier if at least a
                  fraction p of the objects in T are at a greater distance D from O. For example, in
                  Figure 7.6, the fraction of points p is 3 and distance threshold is 2. Thus, the
                  point O is at least greater than distance 2 from at least 3 points and can be
                  labeled an outlier.
                     Essentially, these outliers are objects that do not have enough neighbors
                  within a certain distance. This eliminates the computation for ﬁtting the

                                                         p=3
                                                         D=2
                                                                                  o
                                                                3.5       2.5

                                                                      3

                        Figure 7.6 Example of a distance-based outlier.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                            7.3 Distance-Based Outlier Detection               109


                 observed distribution into a standard distribution and in selecting the
                 discordancy tests. For many discordancy tests for standard distributions, if an
                 object is shown to be an outlier, then it is also a distance-based outlier.
                    Parameters p, D are set by a user in case of nonstandard distributions; this is
                 a trial-and-error approach, where the user interactively changes the p, D
                 variables to evaluate the outcome.
                    This approach identiﬁes outliers based on the distance of a candidate outlier
                 from a set of neighboring points; it is not dependent on the clustering structure
                 of the dataset. The outliers detected, however, are dependent on user input.
                 Different algorithms are proposed that are suitable for different types of
                 datasets. But these algorithms are sensitive to user input such as the
                 distance threshold, or the value of p to identify the number of points for
                 comparison to the candidate point. This approach is not suitable for high-
                 dimensional data since distance measures (such as the Euclidean distance)
                 do not scale well over high dimensions and average out the behavior of the
                 dimensions. The distance metric is a point metric; therefore, it detects
                 outliers that are at a distance greater than a parameter, and it does not take
                 into consideration outliers that could be as a result of a very small distance
                 measure in a subset of the dimensions. This technique is also mainly geared
                 toward detecting global outliers.
                    Ramaswamy et al. (2000) eliminates the dependency in terms of the user
                 input required for distance threshold. It also proposes outlier detection for large
                 datasets using a pruning technique. This issue is addressed using a structure
                 such as R Tree and CF Tree. This is a modiﬁed way of detecting outliers based
                 on a distance threshold; it uses K-NN query and detects global outliers. This
                 technique provides a pruning technique to deal with large datasets. However, it
                 does not handle multidimensional datasets and is unable to account for attri-
                 butes contributing to outlierness.
                    In general, distance-based outlier detection methods suffer from the curse of
                 dimensionality (as discussed in Chapter 6). In higher dimensions, data become
                 sparse, and points tend to become equidistant. This adversely affects the
                 methods based on spatial density, unless data follow certain simple distribu-
                 tions. For outlier detection, a subset of the entire attribute set should be enough
                 to detect or indicate the outliers. Aggarwal and Yu (2001) proposed the idea to
                 examine speciﬁc projections of high-dimensional data instead of examining all
                 the dimensions. If we consider cross sections of the data in various dimensions,
                 we can ﬁnd outliers better than in other cross sections. Aggarwal and Yu
                 (2001) deﬁne the abnormal lower-dimension projections. There can be many
                 abnormal projections, and this work facilitates the discovery of the best
                 abnormal projections.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  110                              Anomaly Detection Methods




                         Figure 7.7 Clustering in SANS 1,000-day data.


                                   7.4 Outlier Detection through Clustering
                  Some clustering algorithms, discussed in Chapter 3, such as DBSCAN, iden-
                  tify outliers as a byproduct of clustering. However, majority of clustering
                  algorithms have to be postprocessed to discover outliers. Thus, outliers can
                  be seen as a byproduct of the clustering process.
                     In traditional clustering, such as K-Means, by the end of the cluster analysis,
                  we assign each data point to one of the clusters, so basically there are no
                  unassigned data points. An example of clustering the SANS data,1 from IDS
                  sensors around the world for 1,000 days, including attributes of records,
                  targets, and sources of attacks (from 2017) is shown in Figure 7.7. This
                  clustering was generated using Weka2 Simple Kmeans clustering. Since all
                  the data are assigned to clusters, does that mean that there are no outliers in the
                  data? If there are still outliers, how do we ﬁlter out the outliers? There are a few
                  possibilities in a clustering output: (a) A point may be placed in a cluster by
                  itself. (b) A data point may be part of a cluster but far from the centroid. (c)
                  A small cluster with a lot fewer points than other clusters can be far from the
                  other clusters. (d) In DBScan-type clustering, points will not be connected or
                  in a cluster but a distinct outlier.
                     If a point is placed in its own cluster or is identiﬁed by the algorithm as an
                  outlier, such as in cases (a) and (d), then clearly a point anomaly has been


                  1                                                          2
                      http://isc.sans.edu/submissions_ascii.html, 2017.          www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                          7.4 Outlier Detection through Clustering               111


                 detected. In the other two cases, postprocessing of the analysis will need to be
                 performed to identify anomalies:
                     In the case of small clusters, if the data are clustered into groups of different
                         density and if there is a cluster with fewer points than the other clusters,
                         this cluster can be a candidate for a collective anomaly. In this case, the
                         density of the candidate cluster is highly deviant than the other clusters.
                         There can be other measures, such as the distance between the candidate
                         cluster and noncandidate cluster, and if the candidate cluster is far from
                         all other noncandidate points, they are potential outliers. In Figure 7.7,
                         we can see a density distribution for each cluster, and cluster 5 appears to
                         have very low density compared to the other clusters. When we consider
                         the three points in this cluster, they represent a very high number of
                         targets, sources, and records, indicating a high level of attack activity.
                         Each of the observations has a time stamp, i.e., the date. If we further
                         investigate the date by a simple Google search for the time period and
                         keyword cyberattack, we see reports of relevant attacks occurring around
                         that time period indicating the unusual activity during the time period.
                         This type of evaluation helps with exploratory analysis of the dataset.
                     In the case of larger clusters with scattered points, there may be bigger
                         clusters where the points in the cluster are not tightly bound around the
                         centroid. In this case, the distance of every point can be measured to the
                         centroid, and the points farthest from the centroid can be identiﬁed. This
                         is similar to a distance-based or a K-nearest neighbors–based outlier
                         detection inside such clusters. These clusters can be identiﬁed by looking
                         at the sum of squared error (SSE) of the clusters, and the clusters with a
                         high SSE can be candidates for postprocessing for identifying distance-
                         based outliers. For example, in Figure 7.7, clusters 5 and 6 are potential
                         clusters for postprocessing where the circled points could be evaluated as
                         potential outliers.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     8
                                Cybersecurity through Time Series
                                        and Spatial Data




                  As discussed in Chapter 4, the nature of data and data complexity must be
                  addressed carefully in any data analytics methods. This chapter presents a
                  spatial and temporal view of cybersecurity issues. Spatial data generally refer
                  to geospatial data in the context of cybersecurity. The spatial context comes
                  from the origination of the attacks or sources of attacks. In addition, attributes
                  related to the geospatial location may be important to consider, such as socio-
                  economic and geopolitical factors at play in the region. The network layout can
                  also have a spatial context. One example of spatial context in cybersecurity is
                  the geo-origination of anomalies such as massive spam originating from
                  certain spam hubs around the globe. Identifying geolocations for the origins
                  of attacks can provide insightful knowledge to address the defense mechan-
                  isms (Hu et al. 2015). Temporal context refers to the time reference of an
                  attack or network trafﬁc in general over a period of time. This could refer to
                  how network trafﬁc evolves over time or how certain trends over time could
                  indicate threats.
                     This chapter revisits the spatial and temporal nature of the data and the
                  challenges emanating from the data. Spatial and temporal approaches relevant
                  to anomaly detection in cybersecurity are discussed. Finally, examples of
                  spatiotemporal discovery in cybersecurity are discussed.




                                           8.1 Spatial and Temporal Data
                                                        8.1.1 Spatial Data
                  As discussed in Chapter 4, understanding the nature of data is critical for
                  spatial data mining because of the inherent complexities of the spatial data,
                  which consist of data pertaining to space, multidimensional points, lines,

                                                                    112


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                 8.1 Spatial and Temporal Data                    113


                 rectangles, polygons, cubes, and other geometric objects. Spatial data have
                 large volumes, so much so that they may require an inﬁnitely large database to
                 capture the real world precisely. Spatial data not only pose challenges due to
                 the type of data and volume but also due to the correlation between the objects
                 and their spatial neighbors with a neighborhood. There can be relationships
                 between spatial objects such as topological relationships (e.g., disjoint, meet,
                 overlap, etc.), direction relationships (e.g., north, south, above, below, etc.),
                 metric relationships (e.g., distance greater than), or complex relationships (e.g.,
                 overlap with a certain distance threshold in the north), which are based on
                 these basic relationships. Moreover, the data can depict temporal changes,
                 which are inherent in the data.
                    For the purposes of cybersecurity, we focus on georeferenced data, which
                 include spatial location in terms of latitude, longitude, and other information
                 about spatial and nonspatial attributes. This essentially means that there is some
                 preprocessing on the raw data to extract the georeferenced attributes and some
                 other nonspatial attributes such as geopolitical attributes, other regional attributes
                 affecting the network trends such as network bandwidths, etc. Chapter 11 dis-
                 cusses one such speciﬁc geospatial example. Figure 8.1 shows a list of various
                 cyberattack maps that capture this information in a georeferenced manner.


                                              8.1.2 Spatial Autocorrelation
                 Autocorrelation (Grifﬁth 1987, Haining 2003) refers to the correlation of a
                 variable to itself. Spatial autocorrelation refers to the correlation of the variable
                 with itself in space. It can either be positive (spatial clusters for high–high or
                 low–low values) or negative (high–low or low–high values). Everything is
                 related to everything else but nearby objects are more related than distant
                 objects (Tobler 1970). This is considered to be the core of spatial
                 autocorrelation statistics. Any statistical measure (such as Moran’s I, Geary’s
                 ratio, or Joint Count; Grifﬁth 1987, Haining 2003) of spatial autocorrelation
                 relies upon this (Tobler’s) ﬁrst law of geography.


                                                8.1.3 Spatial Heterogeneity
                 Spatial heterogeneity is the spatially varying autocorrelation where autocorre-
                 lation can be positive or negative. It refers to the variation in the region that
                 may generate characteristic spatial patterns, which could be due to the under-
                 lying geographical processes and geographical features in the region. This
                 behavior can be understood in different scales of spatial variation (Haining
                 2003), including large (macrovariation as autocorrelation) and medium/small




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  114              Cybersecurity through Time Series and Spatial Data




                        Figure 8.1 Cyberattack maps, based on geolocations of attack origins
                        and destinations.


                  (mesovariation as heterogeneity), as well as error (independent noise or
                  anomalies).
                     Based on the concept of spatial autocorrelation and heterogeneity, it may be
                  possible that the geospatial trends within United States may be similar due to
                  spatial autocorrelation; however, there may also be inherent variability due to
                  heterogeneity. Let us consider the number of attacks coming into the United
                  States as shown in the various maps in Figure 8.1. However, every location in
                  the United States will not be targeted with the same frequency. While the
                  number of incoming attacks are generally high for the United States, depicting
                  spatial autocorrelation, there is also a spatial heterogeneity due to the relative
                  variation of the attacks to different locations inside the United States.
                  Figure 8.2 shows that United States is the top targeted country; however, the




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                 8.1 Spatial and Temporal Data                 115




                       Figure 8.2 Illustration of spatial autocorrelation and heterogeneity.


                 number of attacks on the East Coast are much larger than the Midwest due to
                 the richness of targets in the East Coast. Thus, even though there is a bigger
                 class of locations, for a more accurate analysis the locations will need to be
                 subdivided to better evaluate and better allocate resources.

                                                     8.1.4 Temporal Data
                 Let us consider a location or an entity identiﬁed by an IP address. This location
                 or entity may have measurements for a variable separated by a regular interval
                 of time. For example, the trafﬁc information originating from the IP address is
                 generated continuously over time (separated by seconds or milliseconds).
                 These trafﬁc data are linked to the geolocation generating the trafﬁc. These
                 data by nature are temporal, as they are time ordered and each measurement is
                 separated by a time tick (seconds, milliseconds, or nanoseconds). The attribute
                 or variable being measured may be the datagram length (dgmLen) or size of
                 the packet. There is also a possibility that the object or entity is the network
                 itself and the variable being measured over time is the number of incoming or
                 outgoing connections to see the health of the network in terms of the network
                 trafﬁc. Similar to spatial data, temporal data also have issues of autocorrelation
                 and heterogeneity.

                                            8.1.5 Temporal Autocorrelation
                 Two instances of an object in time occurring one after the other (reﬂected as
                 two attribute values for this object) have a temporal relationship of adjacency.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  116              Cybersecurity through Time Series and Spatial Data


                  Since these instances occurred one after the other, they are possibly similar or
                  are related in terms of their values (quantiﬁed as temporal autocorrelation). The
                  time difference between the values of the attribute is referred to as lag. For
                  example, for the variable “packet size” for an IP address, the lag is 1 millisec-
                  ond. An autocorrelation coefﬁcient measures the correlations (such as using
                  Pearson’s correlation) between temporal values a certain temporal distance
                  apart. Here autocorrelation measures the correlation (positive or negative) of
                  the data variable to itself with a certain time lag. A few approaches (Zhang
                  et al. 2003) have accounted for this aspect in temporal data mining.



                                              8.1.6 Temporal Heterogeneity
                  The overall autocorrelation of a temporal data sequence may be positive and
                  high. However, there may be underlying processes that may bring about some
                  patterns, which are averaged out over larger time periods. Although temporal
                  mining accounts for issues such as seasonality, it does not account for the
                  bigger challenge of heterogeneity. Heterogeneity essentially is the property of
                  the temporal data due to which it behaves differently even in close time
                  proximity (Raveh and Tapiero 1980). So a temporal sequence that depicts an
                  ascending trend may give a high value for autocorrelation when considered for
                  a larger time window, and on close observation we may ﬁnd pockets of
                  variations in these data due to their inherent variability. If autocorrelation
                  exists in temporal data, it can be assumed that data are coming from the same
                  underlying process for the points in a time window. However, heterogeneity
                  indicates that even though the data may be autocorrelated, it may be
                  originating from multiple processes (Basawa et al. 1984) depicting
                  microscale variations.




                     8.2 Some Key Methods for Anomaly Detection in Spatial
                                     and Temporal Data
                  As discussed in Chapters 6 and 7, anomaly detection deals with discovering
                  nontrivial and intriguing knowledge, in the form of unusual patterns, objects,
                  and relationships. Such a discovery works on the principle of identifying
                  anomalies with respect to similarly behaving partitions in the data.
                  Accounting for heterogeneity within the data in creating these partitions is
                  critical to accurately identify anomalies. To understand the need for such
                  reﬁned anomaly detection, the current approaches to anomaly detection in




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                 8.2 Anomaly Detection in Spatial and Temporal Data             117


                 spatial and temporal data are discussed with an emphasis on identifying the
                 correct partitioning, referred to as neighborhood discovery, in spatial and
                 temporal data. The neighborhoods can also be used as a characterization such
                 that objects that deviate substantially from this characterization can be identi-
                 ﬁed as suspicious. This process is similar to anomaly detection using clustering
                 as discussed in Chapter 7; the key difference is that the preprocessing to form
                 the similar objects into a neighborhood is different for spatial and temporal
                 data due to the properties of the data outlined previously. So essentially the
                 anomaly detection process is similar for all data types, and the key difference is
                 the preprocessing based on different types of data. The next sections discuss
                 this process of preprocessing to form the neighborhoods.


                                            8.2.1 Spatial Anomaly Detection
                 We discuss the spatial anomaly detection in two parts: (1) spatial outlier
                 detection and (2) anomalous window detection. These two aspects of anomaly
                 detection are representative and important since in one case an individual
                 object or a set of objects can be outliers with respect to neighboring objects,
                 whereas in the other a set of contiguous spatial objects are outliers with respect
                 to the entire data. This follows the types of anomalies discussed in Chapter 6,
                 namely point and collective anomalies. In addition, here the context of location
                 plays a key role in preprocessing the data before the anomaly detection can
                 take place.


                                             8.2.2 Spatial Outlier Detection
                 A spatial outlier is an object that is deviant in its behavior from its neighboring
                 objects. This behavior is quantiﬁed in terms of signiﬁcant difference in attri-
                 bute values of the object with similarly behaving objects in a certain proximity
                 (neighbors based on spatial relationships). Thus, the neighborhood deﬁnition
                 (Ester et al. 1997, 1998) is a critical aspect for any spatial data mining task. In
                 general, a graph-based neighborhood deﬁnition facilitates the accounting of
                 autocorrelation (Shekhar et al. 2001). However, traditional approaches ignore
                 heterogeneity, i.e., when nearby spatial objects may behave differently. Other
                 approaches address both autocorrelation and heterogeneity (Janeja et al. 2010).
                 The issue of outlier detection has been addressed in several approaches and has
                 been extensively studied (Aggarwal 2017). Several techniques consider neigh-
                 borhoods that are based primarily on spatial relationships, thus they only
                 account for autocorrelation but ignore spatial heterogeneity. Second, the
                 neighborhood formation is not order invariant. Thus, a neighborhood based




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  118              Cybersecurity through Time Series and Spatial Data


                  on cardinality (number of objects in the neighborhood) will lead to different
                  neighborhood formation and outlier detection outcomes with different starting
                  points. Third, the outlier detection considers the deviation in terms of a single
                  attribute only or Euclidean distance between multiple attributes and not inter-
                  relationships between attributes. Some approaches speciﬁcally discuss these
                  issues and consider the treatment of both autocorrelation and heterogeneity
                  (Janeja et al. 2009, 2010).
                     Anomalous window detection deals with the discovery of contiguous set of
                  objects forming an unusual window. In most clustering techniques (such as
                  DBSCAN (Sander et al. 1998), OPTICS (Ankerst et al. 1999), the focus is on
                  the identiﬁcation of the major groupings in the data, as opposed to unusually
                  ordered groupings. Similar to clustering, outlier detection identiﬁes individual
                  outliers and does not quantify the degree of unusualness of an outlier.
                     Scan statistic approaches (Naus 1965, Glaz et al. 2001) detect a group of
                  objects behaving anomalously with respect to all the objects in the dataset and
                  detect quantiﬁable anomalous behavior in multiple attributes in relation to one
                  another. A variation of the simple scan statistic is the spatial and spatiotemporal
                  scan statistic (Kulldorff 1997, Kulldorff et al. 1998), which detects unusual
                  space or space-time windows using circular or cylindrical windows respectively.
                  However, this approach does not account for the combination of both
                  autocorrelation and heterogeneity. Most of these approaches use circle
                  (Openshaw 1987, Besag and Newell 1991, Kulldorff 1997), square, rectangular
                  windows (Neill et al. 2005) and several complex shapes (pyramid with square
                  cross sections) (Iyengar 2004). FlexScan (Tango and Takahashi 2005) identiﬁes
                  ﬂexible shaped scan windows and only considers adjacency as the factor for
                  moving to the next spatial node in the K 1 nearest neighbors, and therefore
                  overlooks heterogeneity. Duczmal and Renato (2003) use simulated annealing to
                  identify arbitrarily shaped spatial clusters, by absorbing not only the surrounding
                  regions with nonelevated risks but also faraway regions with nonelevated risk,
                  extended with a compactness measure to penalize very large-sized windows.
                  The linear semantic–based scan statistic (LS3) (Janeja and Atluri 2005) extends
                  the basic scan statistic approach. Additionally, Janeja and Atluri (2005, 2008),
                  Shi and Janeja (2009) and Tang et al. (2017) propose approaches accounting for
                  heterogeneity with improved results as compared to several other approaches.
                     Thus, most of the scan statistic–based approaches suffer from two major
                  issues. First, the window shape is not free-form. Second, the anomaly detection
                  is primarily based on autocorrelation only and does not take into account
                  heterogeneity. It is interesting to note that recently spatial heterogeneity has
                  been identiﬁed as a major issue in various spatial applications, but its quantiﬁ-
                  cation has suffered from the absence of a clearly outlined deﬁnition.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                 8.2 Anomaly Detection in Spatial and Temporal Data           119


                    The traditional anomaly detection methods, for example anomalous window
                 detection (window shapes such as a circular window), assume autocorrelation
                 by virtue of the proximity of the spatial objects. Subsequently, the deviation
                 of these objects is compared to the rest of the data. However, spatial analysts
                 have recognized that every location has an intrinsic degree of uniqueness
                 (Miller 2004).



                                                8.2.3 Spatial Neighborhood
                 The goal of this step is to identify spatial neighborhoods accommodating both
                 spatial autocorrelation and heterogeneity in the region. The neighborhood
                 should not be identiﬁed simply by the change in geospatial features or solely
                 on the basis of spatial proximity determined using spatial relationships such as
                 adjacency of objects. Spatial neighborhoods can be considered a characteriza-
                 tion of the region (as shown in Janeja et al. 2010). This approach consists of
                 the following distinct steps:
                 (1) Generate the immediate neighborhood of an object, called a
                     microneighborhood, as shown in Figure 8.3a, using Voronoi tessellations.
                     This captures the knowledge about the immediate neighborhood of this
                     object such as the presence or absence of spatial features (e.g., proximity
                     to geopolitical events or prior known cyberattacks from this location) in its
                     proximity and attributes of the object. This will allow us to associate
                     features and attributes to these objects, which can be used to determine
                     similarity or dissimilarity across spatial objects.
                 (2) Identify spatial relationships (such as adjacency) using the spatial attri-
                     butes of the microneighborhoods to accommodate autocorrelation.




                       Figure 8.3 (a) Micro neighborhood; (b) macro neighborhood.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  120              Cybersecurity through Time Series and Spatial Data




                                                                               m2

                                                     IP1
                                                           m1

                                                                        IP2
                                                                          mi
                                              Macro neighborhood

                        Figure 8.4 Neighborhood as an underlying characterization.


                  (3) Capture spatial heterogeneity by identifying semantic relationships
                      between the nonspatial attributes and features in the microneighborhoods.
                      A semantic relationship is deﬁned using similarity coefﬁcients such as
                      Jaccard and Silhouette coefﬁcients. If there is a spatial and semantic
                      relationship between spatial objects, the microneighborhoods are merged
                      to form macroneighborhoods as shown in Figure 8.3b. This facilitates the
                      determination of the local heterogeneous patterns across neighborhood in
                      terms of the attributes associated with each spatial object. Thus, the
                      macroneighborhood captures both autocorrelation and heterogeneity in
                      the neighborhood deﬁnitions by not only considering proximity but also
                      the change in the localized features and attributes in the region.
                     This neighborhood deﬁnition can be used as a precursor to the anomaly
                  detection in reference to this neighborhood. Similarly, if an anomaly or an
                  attack event is discovered in one part of this neighborhood, then chances are
                  that the attack can propagate to other parts of the neighborhood given the
                  similarity and homogeneousness in this neighborhood.
                     Neighborhoods can be seen as an underlying characterization as well. For
                  example, if two IP addresses are communicating with each other (e.g., IP1
                  sending a packet to IP2), then using geolocation (through databases such as
                  Maxmind1), these IP addresses can be located and overlaid on top of the
                  neighborhood deﬁnitions, as shown in Figure 8.4. For example, if
                  macroneighborhood m1 has a series of features indicating that it has known
                  prior attacks originating and is a source of geopolitical unrest, then this IP1
                  gets a certain reputation score and should be monitored carefully. This will
                  help network administrators go beyond the white and black listing of IP

                  1
                      www.maxmind.com/en/home.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                 8.2 Anomaly Detection in Spatial and Temporal Data         121


                 addresses and use geolocated information sources as well. One potential
                 challenge to using geolocation information of IP addresses is the vulnerability
                 of an IP address to be spoofed such that an attacker can illicitly impersonate
                 another host by using a forged IP address. We envision geospatially enhanced
                 models to work as a supplementary model that bolsters a network analyst’s
                 existing knowledge. Geospatial models may not effectively work for network
                 trafﬁc with high probability of being spoofed, for example in UDP trafﬁc.
                 However, using geospatially enhanced data helps provide geocontextual infor-
                 mation as well, potentially enhancing detection accuracy.


                                          8.2.4 Temporal Anomaly Detection
                 There is a rich literature in temporal data mining and statistical time series
                 analysis. The aspects closest to anomaly detection in temporal data are
                 reviewed here. Speciﬁcally, this section looks at approaches that facilitate
                 the discovery of relevant segments in temporal data (equivalent to the neigh-
                 borhood deﬁnition in spatial literature) and discovery of anomalies such as
                 outliers and discords in such datasets are discussed.
                    Change point detection addresses the discovery of time points at which the
                 behavior of time series data change. Several techniques (Aminikhanghahi and
                 Cook 1994) have been proposed to detect change points in time series data.
                 However, most of these approaches assume that a phenomenon can be
                 approximated by a known model whereas in reality several dynamic models
                 may be in play. Yamanishi and Takeuchi (2002) proposes an approach for
                 outlier and change point detection in nonstationary time series data. Guralnik
                 and Srivastava (1999) outline an approach for event detection from time series
                 data by detecting the change of model or parameters of the model that describe
                 the underlying data.
                    Discretization has been extensively studied, and many efﬁcient solutions
                 exist for simple discretization techniques, including equal width or equiprob-
                 able discretization and piecewise aggregate approximation (PAA) (Lin et al.
                 2003, Duchene et al. 2004) Although some approaches (Tim et al. 1999,
                 Duchene et al. 2004) have looked at the problem of variable width discretiza-
                 tion, they do not address variable number of widths across multiple time series
                 generated in a spatial proximity.
                    Time series discords are subsequences of a longer time series that are
                 maximally different to all the rest of the temporal subsequences. Discord
                 discovery was introduced by Keogh et al. (2005). Ameen and Basha (2006)
                 propose improvements on the discord discovery algorithms. Wei et al. (2006)
                 describe an approach for ﬁnding discords in shapes by converting shapes into




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  122              Cybersecurity through Time Series and Spatial Data


                  time series data. Yankov et al. (2007) discover unusual time series or discords
                  with a disk-aware algorithm.
                     First, most of these approaches consider autocorrelated segments as true
                  segments for pattern discovery. This may ignore heterogeneity in the discovery
                  process, possibly in the form of unequal width segments. Second, most of
                  these approaches do not quantify the unusualness of a patterns discovered in
                  terms of how distinct the pattern is from the data. Similar to spatial behavior,
                  temporal autocorrelation, and heterogeneity are a challenge.
                     Finally, in the area of spatiotemporal mining, several approaches have
                  explored the spatiotemporal nature of the data (such as Abraham and
                  Roddick 1999, Roddick and Spiliopoulou 1999, and Roddick et al. 2001).
                  As such, there does not exist a generalizable framework that facilitates the
                  accommodation of the properties of space and time in an effective and efﬁcient
                  manner. Additionally, there is no consensus on spatial-dominant or temporal-
                  dominant analysis of spatiotemporal data. Thus, there is a need for a shift that
                  facilitates the analysis based on the properties of space and time (spatial,
                  temporal autocorrelation, and heterogeneity) in a uniﬁed framework.


                                             8.2.5 Temporal Neighborhoods
                  Let us consider a computer network and its connectivity as a time series dataset
                  where we have time stamps associated with a set of attributes such as number
                  of nodes, number of edges, and total trafﬁc. Similar to spatial neighborhood
                  discovery, temporal neighborhoods can be seen as a precursor to anomaly
                  detection. Let us now consider these network properties over time to demarcate
                  temporal neighborhoods.


                                    8.2.5.1 Stationary Distribution-Based Merging
                  If we consider a time series, with many small time intervals, the end goal is to
                  generate merged intervals (or neighborhoods). The idea here is to generate
                  similarly behaving time segments so that these neighborhoods can be used for
                  anomaly detection within these time segments. One approach models the time
                  series data as a Markov model (Dey et al. 2009, 2014). This approach starts
                  with many small equal frequency bins in the data as the states of a Markov
                  model (Figure 8.5a). The similarity between the bins is computed using a
                  distance measure. A transition matrix based on these similarities is generated
                  for this Markov model and subsequently normalized to obtain a row-stochastic
                  matrix. In order to form the larger time segments or similar temporal neigh-
                  borhoods, an intuition is used that the adjacent bins in the transition matrix




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                   8.3 Cybersecurity through Spatiotemporal Analysis            123




                       Figure 8.5 Markov stationary distribution-based discretization.


                 having a high degree of probability of transition should be merged in order to
                 obtain the unequal depth bins.
                    Thus, a Markov stationary distribution-based merging is used to form the
                 stationary distribution vector (Figure 8.5b, e). The split points in this vector are
                 identiﬁed by ﬁnding spikes in the stationary distribution vector plot
                 (Figure 8.5e) (Brigham 2002).
                    This temporal neighborhood indicated by the split time series in Figure 8.5d
                 can be used as a precursor to anomaly detection to identify anomalies in the
                 temporal neighborhoods, which are more homogeneous for an accurate identi-
                 ﬁcation of unusual events. Moreover, the spikes in the distribution also may
                 correspond to events of interest. Thus, if we apply this method to the network
                 trafﬁc data or even data about the network connectivity, we can identify the
                 more homogeneous neighborhoods as the regular trafﬁc patterns and the
                 smaller spikes as unusual activity in the network. This approach is fairly robust
                 to small-scale noise or data-to-day ﬂuctuation in the data.


                         8.3 Cybersecurity through Spatiotemporal Analysis
                                     8.3.1 Spatial Anomalies in Cybersecurity
                 While cyber threats that target networks are directed toward speciﬁc nodes
                 during speciﬁc time periods, these nodes are not randomly selected but may be
                 located in speciﬁc geographical regions. According to Davies (2012),




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  124              Cybersecurity through Time Series and Spatial Data


                  Kaspersky reported that Iran is the most common place where the Flame
                  malware was discovered. Cases were also reported in Israel, Palestine,
                  Sudan, Syria, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, and Egypt. Out of all computer systems
                  that were affected worldwide by Stuxnet, 60% of them belonged to Iran
                  (Halliday 2010, Burns 2012). Also, a recent analysis indicates that most online
                  schemes occur in Eastern Europe, East Asia, and Africa. These schemes and
                  phishing attacks are shifting to other countries like Canada, United States,
                  France, Israel, Iran, and Afghanistan (Bronskill 2012). Thus, the spatial elem-
                  ent plays a key role in strengthening the cyber infrastructure, not only com-
                  puter networks but also in power grids and industrial control systems.
                  Therefore, while identifying locations of cyberattack victims is important in
                  a power grid or computer network, it is also crucial to determine the location of
                  those responsible for these attacks, as it may have serious national security
                  implications. Cyberattacks may be targeted toward speciﬁc countries due to
                  sociopolitical factors. It is therefore important to identify the association
                  between a cyberattack, its target, and the origin location.
                     A spatial aspect to cyber data analysis can be brought through (a) identiﬁ-
                  cation of spatial neighborhoods in the network structure to discover the impact
                  of an event in space, (b) studying inﬂuence of events in neighborhoods, and (c)
                  studying correlation and associations of events over time.


                                        8.3.2 Neighborhood-Based Anomalies
                  Several works have studied spatial neighborhood deﬁnition in sensor networks
                  (Janeja and Alturi 2008, McGuire et al. 2008, 2012, Janeja et al. 2010, Sun
                  et al. 2012). The neighborhood discovery can be used to describe inﬂuence
                  ﬂow among spatial objects. In the network, vertices represent spatial objects,
                  and edges represent the possible inﬂuence ﬂow. The weight on each edge
                  indicates the hardship the inﬂuence faces to reach from one spatial object to
                  another. Such a weight takes into account the spatial distance and other factors
                  such as barriers, which can be network properties such as number of hops as
                  the distance measure, geopolitical factors such as IP domain, country, etc. So,
                  for instance, Mexico and United States, even though they are in proximity, will
                  have different rates of spread of an event due to differences in the cyber
                  infrastructure. Thus, even though they are in proximity, their links’ weight
                  will be less if we are studying event propagation. This was made evident even
                  within the United States when a major breach of social security numbers
                  (Kosner 2012) occurred in South Carolina that did not affect the nearby or
                  any other states. It is obvious that there are other organizational contexts at
                  play that create geospatially heterogeneous behaviors.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                   8.3 Cybersecurity through Spatiotemporal Analysis         125


                    Let us consider a network of nodes in a spatial neighborhood, where the
                 spatial nodes are connected by edges, based on spatial relationships, with
                 weights computed from the distance between the spatial and nonspatial attri-
                 butes through the previously discussed similarity coefﬁcients. So given an
                 event being studied, such as a speciﬁc attack if we want to study the propaga-
                 tion of the attack, inﬂuence distance can be used to quantify it. The inﬂuence
                 distance from one spatial object IPp to object IPq is the sum of the weights of
                 the constituent edges of the shortest paths from IPp to IPq. If IPp and IPq are
                 unconnected, then the inﬂuence distance is ∞, such as in the example of South
                 Carolina. If IPp to IPq are the same, then the distance is 0.
                    The difference of the inﬂuence distance between events can also be com-
                 pared. For example, an event such as a local breach only has an inﬂuence on
                 spatial objects located on a direct connection, whereas a global event can
                 impact a much larger part of the network.
                    For example, a phenomenon such as a distributed denial of service (DDoS)
                 attack will have a much larger inﬂuence than a single computer infected by a
                 virus. One can argue that even a single infected computer can also lead to a
                 larger impact; however, if we model the network appropriately, then that
                 should be captured in the weights between the edges and subsequently on
                 the inﬂuence distance of this infected system.
                    These concepts can also be used to model attacks in nuclear power plants or
                 highly networked organizations. Similarly, multiple organizations using the same
                 software with a vulnerability can also be modeled using the inﬂuence distance.


                                  8.3.3 Spatio temporally Clustered Anomalies
                 A network can also be seen as in a spatial layout to discover various types of
                 clustered network anomalies. This can be done based on spatial window-based
                 techniques discussed earlier (Kulldorf 1997). Figure 8.6 outlines an example
                 using a scan statistic–based approach. A network can be laid out on a spatial
                 grid based on relationships of network bandwidth usage and usage of the
                 network, as shown in Figure 8.6. Subsequently, using any tcpdmp software
                 the packet data can be extracted into population and case ﬁles, where the
                 population ﬁle has the overall network usage information extracted from
                 historic data and the case ﬁle has the current usage information. Here network
                 usage can be measured in terms of a variable of interest, such as number of
                 packets every minute or average packet size or total packet size. Once the ﬁles
                 are created from the raw data, spatial and temporal anomalies can be identiﬁed.
                 These anomalies are in the form of (a) nodes on the network that behave
                 anomalously with respect to other nodes (or geospatial points) on the network,




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                   126                              Cybersecurity through Time Series and Spatial Data


                                     1.2

                                                                                 ISP switch

                                      1
                                                                                  Server 2

                                     0.8                      CISCO 1                  Server 3         Media server
                 USAGE LOW TO HIGH




                                     0.6         Web server

                                                                        Sharepoint
                                     0.4
                                                                          server
                                                                                             Database
                                                                                              server
                                     0.2




                                      0
                                           0            0.2                0.4                0.6        0.8           1           1.2
                                                                         RELATIVE DISTANCE AS BANDWIDTH USAGE

                                           Figure 8.6 Spatio temporally clustered anomalies.


                   and (b) cluster of network trafﬁc points that are anomalous as a temporal
                   cluster with respect to other neighboring servers.


                                               8.3.4 Insights through Geo-Origination of IP Addresses
                   The geolocation of IP addresses sending emails can provide insights into
                   origination of spam or phishing activities. Certain parts of the world are more
                   known to be related to spam or phishing activities (for example, top 10
                   countries2 that are the worst spam enablers or top phishiest countries3).
                   Geolocation4 of the (nonspoofed) IP address identiﬁes the physical location
                   down to latitude and longitude. Such information can be utilized in tools
                   providing actionable information of user emails. Keim et al. (2005) describe
                   a visualization tool to mine and analyze spatiotemporal aspects of emails.
                   A histomap provides a visualization of spam origination from across the world
                   and within the United States. Email routes can be visualized to discover

                   2
                                     www.spamhaus.org/statistics/countries/. The world’s worst spam enabling countries, last
                                     accessed March 2021.
                   3
                                     https://news.netcraft.com/archives/2012/12/13/world-map-of-phishing-attacks.html. Phishiest
                                     countries, last accessed March 2021.
                   4
                                     http://geoiplookup.net/, last accessed August 2017.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                      8.4 Temporal Behaviors in Evolving Networks             127


                 unusual locations and routes. This can help users identify potential threat
                 locations, particularly when users are in a sensitive job or secure location.



                             8.4 Temporal Behaviors in Evolving Networks
                 Computer network trafﬁc over a period of time can be studied by utilizing the
                 temporal neighborhoods and help draw out several forms of communication
                 patterns, as discussed in Chapter 4. For example, one can identify if some nodes
                 are popular on the network, either as a common source point to all other nodes or
                 consistently a common destination point from all other nodes on the network.
                 One can also determine if the popularity of a node either increases or decreases
                 over time. Studies have discussed various properties in networks. These proper-
                 ties include but are not limited to the centrality of nodes in a network, the
                 densiﬁcation of a network, and the diameter of a network (Leskovec et al. 2005,
                 Leskovec and Faloutsos 2007, Leskovec 2008, Kang et al. 2009).
                    Studies have portrayed that networks tend to follow the properties of
                 densiﬁcation and shrinking diameter of a network (Lescovec et al. 2005), they
                 have been applied to study of communication networks, speciﬁcally network
                 trafﬁc ﬂows (Namayanja and Janeja 2015, 2019). More so, these studies have
                 accounted for the importance of nodes on the network and how this may affect
                 the densiﬁcation of the network and the shrinking diameter over time. These
                 approaches determine how change in the behavior of a central node on the
                 network may impact the overall behavior of the network over time.
                    Therefore, the mining of large networks can be performed with the aim of
                 understanding the following: Does the structure of the network change over
                 time? Can we deﬁne what changes occur as the network evolves? And most
                 importantly, can we identify when these changes in the network take place? By
                 detecting changes in a temporally evolving network, one can drill down and
                 identify the underlying cause of this change in the network, which could have
                 come forth as a result of a threat to the network. For example, the unexpected
                 unavailability of a server system from the network could be due to an unknown
                 denial of service attack. Using a temporal approach can discover inconsist-
                 encies in the network and identify times when these inconsistencies occur.
                 This is in turn useful in the efﬁcient allocation of resources for monitoring
                 network activity. Chapter 9 discusses graph-based techniques and using tem-
                 poral evolution of the network as a way to measure the threat propagation
                 over time.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                     9
                  Cybersecurity through Network and Graph Data




                  Graphs (as discussed in Chapter 4) depict the relationships between various
                  entities. A graph is comprised of nodes and links (or vertices and edges). The
                  node or vertex represents an entity such as an IP address, and the edge or link
                  represents the relationship between the two entities, such as a message sent
                  from one IP address to another. Thus, network trafﬁc data lend themselves to
                  graph representation, which opens up a vast array of graph-based analytics that
                  can be applied to studying cybersecurity issues.
                     Figure 9.1 depicts the cybersecurity applications that can utilize graphs.
                  These are only some of the major examples from research and application
                  themes:
                  • Communication graphs: Network trafﬁc has been extensively studied as a
                    graphs; here source and destination IP addresses are vertices, and the
                    communication between them is the edge. Various properties such as cen-
                    trality, density, and diameter have been used to evaluate the state of the
                    graph and study communication patterns over time (Lescovec et al. 2005,
                    Kang et al. 2010, Tartakovsky et al. 2013, Namayanja and Janeja 2014).
                  • Attack graphs: These graphs (Wang et al. 2007a, b) are used to evaluate
                    exploits and their pre- and postconditions. Here the vertex can be an exploit,
                    and the edges connect to the conditions that occur before or after the exploit.
                    Attack graphs can also be used to evaluate conditions in a network model
                    that violate security policies (Jha et al. 2002). Thus, such graphs help in
                    studying various paths that can be taken in a graph that propagate an exploit.
                    Attack graphs should ideally be exhaustive and yet succinct to provide a
                    comprehensive view of the network health in terms of the security policy.
                    Violations discovered can help make a network more robust through
                    enforcement of more stringent security policies.



                                                                    128


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                      Cybersecurity through Network and Graph Data                                         129


                                                                     Traffic                     Graph properties : centrality,
                                                          Source and desnaon IP as           density, diameter to measure the
                                                        verces; communicaon as edge        level of communication in the traffic



                                                                Security policies            Network model M, security policies
                  Graphs in computer network–based
                                                                                              P, all executions of M violating P,
                      cybersecurity applicaons             Modeled in aack graphs                 exhaustive and succinct


                                                           Vulnerabilities and threats          Evaluating similarity between
                                                        graph verces are threats, edge is        threats, identify morphed
                                                            similarity between them                     vulnerabilities


                       Figure 9.1 Graph-based studies for cybersecurity applications.


                 • Threat similarity–based graphs: Graphs have been used to ﬁnd relation-
                   ships between known vulnerabilities. In such graphs, known vulnerabilities
                   are the nodes, and the similarity between two vulnerabilities is the edge. The
                   weight on the edge depicts the level of similarity. These types of graphs can
                   be augmented with semantic and contextual information (AlEroud and
                   Karabatis 2013). These graphs can be queried when a new unknown threat
                   is potentially observed, such as a zero-day attack. By computing the simi-
                   larities between the zero-day attack and the known attacks, a score can be
                   provided to indicate the level of threat from this zero day (AlEroud and
                   Karabatis 2014).
                 • Threat propagation: A cyber threat not only impacts an individual entity
                   (one single computer or IP address) but can easily propagate to other
                   connected entities (Ingols et al. 2006, Trinius et al. 2009, Ohm et al.
                   2020). Studies have been conducted to identify the spread and prevention
                   of threats such as in high-risk groups of IP addresses. Some of these studies
                   and approaches are restricted to individual IP behavior, such as black and
                   white listing IP addresses, which limit the understanding of the dynamics
                   involved in the spread of the threat. Apart from individual behavior, high-
                   risk behavior can also be captured at two other levels: the microsocial level
                   (e.g., personal network), and macro level (through analysis of the network
                   structural factors inﬂuencing the transmission mechanism). Computer net-
                   works and communication across the networks provide a framework to study
                   the spread and prevention of high-risk behavior for widespread cyberattacks.
                   Several relevant graph-based anomaly detection applications are also dis-
                 cussed in Akoglu et al. (2015). In the following sections, this chapter evaluates
                 basic graph properties that can be utilized and discusses some speciﬁc types of
                 methods within these themes.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  130                Cybersecurity through Network and Graph Data


                                                   9.1 Graph Properties
                  Certain graph properties are central to the graph mining used in cybersecurity
                  applications. For a general introduction to graph theory and those properties
                  relevant to anomaly detection, several texts are available, such as Rivest and
                  Vuillemin (1976), Wilson (1986), and Akoglu et al. (2015). Some key proper-
                  ties are described in this section.
                     Adjacency matrix: A graph can be represented as an adjacency matrix. Let
                  us consider a graph G with E edges and V vertices. The adjacency matrix of
                  G is a V  V matrix where each cell in the matrix has a 0 for no edge between
                  the pair of vertices or 1 for an edge between the pair of vertices. If there are
                  multiple edges between two vertices, then the value of the matrix cell is the
                  number of edges. A vertex degree is the number of edges incident on a node or
                  vertex. In an undirected graph, the matrix is asymmetric, as shown in
                  Figure 9.2a. The sum of the row or column in the asymmetric matrix is the
                  out degree (edges going outward from a node, such as outbound network
                  communication from an IP address) and in degree (edges going inward to a
                  node, such as inbound network communication to an IP address) respectively.
                  In an undirected graph, the matrix is symmetric, as shown in Figure 9.2b. The
                  sum of the row or column is the same, which is the degree of a vertex (such as
                  the total of the inbound and outbound communication for an IP address).
                     Walk: In a graph, the sequence of edges leading from one vertex to another
                  is called a walk. A walk where no vertex appears more than once is a path. The




                        Figure 9.2 (a) Directed and (b) undirected graphs.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                        9.1 Graph Properties                  131


                 distance between two vertices is the shortest path between the two vertices,
                 also referred to as geodesic path. A graph can be disconnected when some
                 parts of the graph are not connected by a path, or if a single node is discon-
                 nected it means that there is no edge connecting it to the graph. For example, in
                 the graph in Figure 9.2b, there are three separate (disconnected) components.
                    Centrality: Centrality in a graph structure indicates prominence of a node in
                 a graph. A node with high centrality will potentially be more inﬂuential.
                 A simple type of centrality is the degree centrality (Freeman 1978), which
                 indicates the total number of edges incident on a node in an undirected graph.
                 This can be divided into in-degree and out-degree for directed graphs.
                 Betweenness centrality (Freeman 1978) of a vertex v measures the number
                 of geodesic paths connecting vertices ij that are passing through v, divided by
                 the total number of shortest paths connecting ij. This is summed across all ij to
                 get the overall betweenness centrality of v. Akoglu et al. (2015) provides a
                 detailed survey of several different types of centrality, such as betweenness,
                 closeness, and eigenvector centrality, among others.
                    Cliques: Traditionally, a clique is deﬁned as any complete subgraph such
                 that each pair of the vertices in the subgraph are connected by an edge, for
                 example nodes b, n, and g in Figure 9.3. Cliques may be mapped to coteries
                 (such as high-risk groups in the context of spreading a virus or DoS attack).
                    More importantly, the nodes among different cliques may overlap, which
                 indicates a higher relevance of those nodes in high-risk groups.




                       Figure 9.3 Graph example.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  132                 Cybersecurity through Network and Graph Data




                         Figure 9.4 Using graph properties to evaluate consistency of nodes across time.


                     Given the adjacency matrix for the graphs in Figure 9.3, the visualization is
                  generated using NodeXL.1 Figure 9.3a presents a directed graph view, and
                  Figure 9.3b shows an undirected view of the graph. In Figure 9.3a, it is evident
                  that node k has a high out-degree, and nodes h, n, r, and t have a high in-
                  degree. Overall, vertex n has the highest degree. In terms of centrality in an
                  undirected graph vertex, n will be considered the most central node.
                     Another example of using graph properties is to evaluate consistency of
                  nodes over time. For example, Figure 9.4 depicts three time periods, T1, T2,
                  and T3, with their corresponding graphs. Each time period has a set of nodes
                  a–f that communicate with each other as depicted by the edges. The corres-
                  ponding graphs and degrees are shown in the ﬁgure. A degree threshold can be
                  used such that anything less than or equal to the threshold is not central. For
                  example, in this dataset, the threshold is two, then the central nodes are shown
                  that are equal or greater than this threshold. Node c, which is central in time
                  period T1, does not show up in the other time periods. As discussed in
                  Chapter 3, association rules and their related metrics of conﬁdence and sup-
                  port, showing the likelihood and strength of associations or frequent co-
                  occurrences, can be utilized here. Association rules for each time period are
                  shown that provide a complementary view of the communication in this
                  example. For example, f, which is not a central node, is also not frequent, as
                  support is low. However, in all time periods, the rule f  e is always present.

                  1
                      https://nodexl.com/.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                 9.2 Understanding Evolving Network Communication              133


                 Similarly, the nodes a and d are consistently central, and the rule a  d is
                 consistently a strong rule in terms of support and conﬁdence. On the other
                 hand, a  e has high conﬁdence, and both nodes are central; however, the
                 support is low compared to other rules with central nodes. Thus, multiple types
                 of analysis can be used to analyze the network trafﬁc data to provide
                 complementary knowledge.




                     9.2 Graphs for Cybersecurity: Understanding Evolving
                                   Network Communication
                 Utilizing the temporal neighborhoods, as discussed in Chapter 8, communi-
                 cation networks over a period of time can be evaluated as shown in the
                 example in Figure 9.4. Several forms of communication patterns can be
                 discovered. Examining certain key graph properties can help us understand
                 the overall behavior of a network, as discussed next.
                    Centrality over time: The level of connectivity to or from a given node can
                 be used to measure the centrality of the node. This level of centrality can be
                 used to determine the importance of a node and how critical this node is on the
                 network, by virtue of its high degree of connectivity in the graph. For example,
                 as discussed earlier, the degree centrality is the number of edges incident to a
                 given node. Page rank provides the number of highly central nodes that are
                 adjacent to a given node. The number of nodes that are connected to a given
                 node and the quality of the nodes that connect to it can both be identiﬁed.
                 Intuitively, one can expect to ﬁnd certain nodes to be consistently central over
                 time periods. Alternatively, a node that is central only at one or few time
                 periods is interesting to study as it may be a source or destination of an attack,
                 or alternatively, due to the period in time, may have taken an important role in
                 the network. The idea here is to not predict an anomalous central node but to
                 narrow down nodes of interest, especially in massive network trafﬁc data,
                 which may lead to a very complex graph.
                    Densiﬁcation over time: Studies have indicated that an increase in the
                 number of nodes on the network over a period of time also leads to an increase
                 in the number of edges. This process is referred to as densiﬁcation of a network
                 (Lescovec et al. 2005). However, these studies have looked at densiﬁcation of
                 all nodes and edges on the network without looking at evolving densiﬁcation
                 (Faloutsos et al. 1999, Phillips 1999, Fabrikant et al. 2002, Kang et al. 2010).
                 Densiﬁcation can also be evaluated in terms of the highly central nodes.
                 Determining the change in the behavior of a central critical node – for




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  134                Cybersecurity through Network and Graph Data


                  example, its unexpected absence from the network – can identify whether this
                  affects the densiﬁcation of the network. If densiﬁcation is tracked over a period
                  of time, it is possible to identify time points where the densiﬁcation is
                  anomalous compared to the overall trend in the network. Such time periods
                  may indicate unusual changes in the network. Now if such changes are
                  consistent over multiple, large time periods (depicting periodicity, for example
                  every year in December), then this can be related to a trend; however, if this
                  happens in only one sample year, then it may indicate an anomalous
                  time period.
                     Diameter over time: Densiﬁcation draws nodes closer to each other such
                  that the distance between those nodes that are far apart becomes smaller. As a
                  result, the diameter of the network reduces, a concept commonly described as
                  the shrinking diameter (Lescovec et al. 2005). Similar to densiﬁcation,
                  changing the diameter of the network over time can provide insights about
                  the health of the network trafﬁc. This analysis can be performed for the central
                  nodes, which is particularly helpful for massive datasets. The change in the
                  behavior of a critical node, for example its unexpected absence from the
                  network, can impact the diameter of the network. Thus, drastic changes in
                  the diameter, such as expanding diameter, can indicate malicious effects on the
                  central nodes.




                  9.3 Graphs for Cybersecurity: Similarity-Based Redundancy
                                   in Router Connectivity
                  Router conﬁguration can be a difﬁcult and complex task, especially on larger
                  networks, which can typically have hundreds of routers (Caldwell et al. 2004).
                  There is a clear need for automatic router conﬁgurations; however, many
                  organizations continue to rely on manual conﬁgurations and reconﬁgurations,
                  leading to several network outages. After several reconﬁgurations, it is pos-
                  sible that the network topology may be considerably different from the origin-
                  ally planned topology. As a result, problems such as bottlenecks or redundancy
                  may crop up.
                     A bottleneck router can be a router that is dissimilar to other routers on the
                  network in terms of its connectivity, such that it has a unique function to
                  perform through its unique set of connections. Other parts of the network will
                  rely on it to connect to keep certain parts of the network connected, and if this
                  router is impacted in any way to perform its functionality, then the overall
                  network connectivity may suffer.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                               9.3 Similarity-Based Redundancy                  135




                       Figure 9.5 Network redundancy.


                    A redundant router, on the other hand, can be highly similar to other routers
                 in terms of its connectivity. Taking a redundant router ofﬂine would probably
                 have little effect on the network connectivity. Such a redundant router can act
                 as a fail-safe if it is similar to some critical network routers. On the other hand,
                 this redundant router can be used for load balancing or reallocating it to other
                 useful roles.
                    Router connectivity can be considered as a graph, and similarity coefﬁcients
                 can provide an intuitive method of determining whether a router is similar or
                 unique in relation to the other routers connected on the graph representing the
                 network. As discussed in Chapter 3, several similarity coefﬁcients have been
                 studied (Lewis and Janeja 2011). An example use is shown in Figure 9.5 using
                 the Jaccard coefﬁcient (JC). An example graph with various routers connected
                 is shown in Figure 9.5a. The corresponding adjacency matrix is also depicted
                 in Figure 9.5b. Pairwise similarity between each pair of the routers is com-
                 puted using JC, which is given as positive matches (1–1 match) divided by the
                 sum of positive matches and positive mismatches (0–1 or 1–0 mismatch) as
                 shown in Figure 9.5c. Thus, looking at the two rows of connectivity in the
                 adjacency matrix for routers R4 and R3, we can see that they have perfect set
                 of matches (1–1) and no mismatches (0–1 or 1–0). Thus, JC for similarity
                 between R3 and R4 is 1, and they can be seen as redundant routers that are
                 perfectly similar to replace each other’s role in terms of their connectivity. On
                 the other hand, when we look at the total similarity of each node and its degree
                 in Figure 9.5d, e respectively, we can see that nodes R5 and R6 have lowest




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  136                Cybersecurity through Network and Graph Data


                  degree and lowest similarity, thus they are the most vulnerable nodes in terms
                  of connectivity. Similarly, nodes R1 and R2 are highly central but have only
                  some similarity. Thus, they are possible bottleneck nodes due to their unique
                  connectivity and highly central nature.
                     Such preemptive exploratory analysis using basic graph properties can help
                  facilitate the network management for better response to threats and recovery
                  from network impact. For instance, in the preceding example, if there is better
                  planning in terms of identifying bottlenecks and redundant nodes, the reme-
                  diation and recovery from a network-based cyberattack can be facilitated.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                   10
                                  Human-Centered Data Analytics
                                       for Cybersecurity




                 Humans are a key part of the security infrastructure (Wybourne et al. 2009).
                 Several studies have looked at the human aspect of cyber threats from the user
                 or attacker perspective. Given that more and more users use home computers,
                 systems are becoming vulnerable and susceptible to more cyberattacks,
                 Anderson et al. (2010) hypothesized that psychological ownership of one’s
                 computer is positively related to behavioral intentions to protect one’s own
                 computer. More and more research has suggested that social, political, eco-
                 nomic, and cultural (SPEC) conﬂicts are a leading cause for cyberattacks
                 (Gandhi et al. 2011). This chapter looks at the different key players’ view-
                 points in the cyberattack and how they can be strengthened to prevent and
                 mitigate the risks of the attack.
                    In general, there are two key parties at play in a cyberattack: a user who is a
                 victim and the attacker. In a cyberattack against a business, there are three key
                 parties in play: the business, a user or employee, and an attacker. In addition,
                 there may also be other types of employees involved, such as network adminis-
                 trators or system administrators who are conﬁguring the systems, and pro-
                 grammers who are programming functionalities.
                    While this is a compartmentalized view of the real-world ﬂuid scenarios, it
                 helps us understand the dynamics of an attack and study ways to prevent it.
                 Each of these parties have a set of constraints and factors that help facilitate or
                 restrict the perpetration of the attack.
                    A user or employee in a business comes with a certain educational back-
                 ground, experiences, and any lessons learned in the past. In addition, a user
                 also has certain psychological traits that impact how they respond to certain
                 types of requests, from clicking of links, downloading content, or providing
                 their credentials.
                    Businesses have to follow their business model, which could be highly
                 secure or more open. They have a mission and a set of principles they abide by.

                                                                   137


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  138               Human-Centered Data Analytics for Cybersecurity




                        Figure 10.1 Key players in a cyberattack.


                  Moreover, a business may or may not have a well-deﬁned set of security policies.
                  Lastly, the types of business applications being run in a business may have their
                  own set of complexities and challenges.
                     In addition to having technological know-how, an attacker has certain
                  motivations and an end goal to achieve through perpetrating the attack. An
                  attacker may have certain psychological traits that lead them to instigate these
                  attacks not unlike other types of crimes. Greitzer et al. (2011) has implemented
                  a psychological reasoning for human behavior in cyberattacks and categorized
                  the attackers with disgruntlement, difﬁculty accepting feedback, anger man-
                  agement issues, disengagement, and disregard for authority.
                     Additionally, depending on the amount of resources an attacker may have,
                  the extent of the attack may vary from a single computer to a network or entire
                  business being targeted. An attacker targets a user of the business systems, be
                  it a technology worker or an end user, utilizing the business systems. Some of
                  these aspects of the key players in a cyberattack are depicted in Figure 10.1.
                     This chapter addresses certain types of cyberattacks that have a major inﬂuence
                  of the human perspective, such as phishing and insider threats. It outlines data
                  analytics methods to study human behaviors through models extracted from data.


                         10.1 Human Perspective to Cybersecurity: Phishing
                  A cyber threat can come in several forms, such as phishing, viruses, and
                  vulnerabilities, to name a few. Let us consider the case of spear phishing,




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                   10.1 Human Perspective to Cybersecurity: Phishing            139


                 where an individual receives an email claiming to be from an organization
                 known to the individual and is asking for the individual’s username and
                 password or interacting with the user through a malicious link in the email.
                 While users with knowledge of security threats may be inclined to check the
                 sender’s email address and the validity of the link for authenticity, others may
                 interact with the message, compromising security.
                    In general, cybersecurity can be aimed toward hardening our systems or taking
                 offensive approaches. However, in this case, cybersecurity cannot simply be seen
                 as an organization-centric issue but an individual user-level issue. In social
                 engineering–type attacks, such as phishing, indeed it is an individual user who
                 may lead to opening up an organization to bigger risks (for example, by clicking
                 on an unsafe link or providing the users credentials). Recent cases of cybersecurity
                 breaches in the commercial (Rashid 2013) and government sectors (Hoffman
                 2011, Zetter 2011) indicate that in the majority of cases, a user’s choice can be
                 attributed as the root cause of the cyberattack. A recent study by Trend Micro
                 found that 91% of all targeted attacks are initiated with a spear-phishing email,
                 potentially leading to advanced persistent threats (APT) (Trend Micro 2012).
                 Therefore, the human perspective is critical to evaluate and address questions
                 such as: what makes a user click on a potentially malicious link? Why would
                 a user open a malicious website or provide their credentials? How do users
                 determine whether an email appears to be fraudulent?
                    There is also an organizational perspective in a user’s behavior. It’s import-
                 ant to consider if an organization has checks in place to prevent phishing
                 emails reaching from email inboxes. Are there ways that the organization
                 labels emails? For example, many organizations include messages or tags
                 indicating that the email is external so that it is not incorrectly seen as
                 originating from a supervisor or a colleague in the organization – which is
                 generally the mask in spear phishing emails. This is a simple way to tag emails
                 but may be quite effective.
                    An evaluation of this perspective can lead to insights into preventing future
                 cyberattacks. Built on prior psychological and behavioral research on phishing
                 (Grazioli 2004, Davinson and Sillence 2010, 2014, Wright and Marett 2010), it
                 can be hypothesized that end users’ experience and perception play critical roles in
                 the behavioral process of phishing detection. However, the perceptions of the user
                 can be changed. Speciﬁcally, a user’s perception of security can be changed based
                 on targeted education and awareness of ways to address cybersecurity threats.
                 Studies to evaluate user perception can include the following:
                 (a) Evaluating behavioral factors affecting end users’ ability to detect phish-
                     ing, such as through survey-based methods to study users’ psychological




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  140               Human-Centered Data Analytics for Cybersecurity


                      factors related to phishing detection (Jakobsson 2007, Wright and Merett
                      2010, Fischer et al. 2013, Pfeiffer et al. 2013).
                  (b) Evaluating the effectiveness of a simply designed educational intervention
                      and awareness program. The intervention can involve presentation of
                      vignettes, carefully designed to support a diverse user group (those with
                      or without technical background). Zimmermann and Renaud (2021) evalu-
                      ate the impact of user nudges on decision making, particularly when
                      making choices of picking a secure Wi-Fi channel.
                  (c) Eye-tracking to determine areas of an interface where attention is focused
                      when performing tasks where threats may be evident (e.g., when interact-
                      ing online, the user may focus on the security icon on the toolbar). There
                      has been some research in evaluating toolbars in preventing phishing (Wu
                      et al. 2006) and using eye-tracking data to evaluate browser security
                      indicators (Darwish 2012).
                  (d) Data mining to evaluate patterns observed in the user’s eye gaze data and
                      how those patterns affect phishing detection or interaction with threat-
                      prone areas on the user interface. This can include evaluating the focus of
                      the user and associate different foci for different types of users (based on
                      psychological proﬁles, background, and demographics).



                    10.2 Human Perspective to Cybersecurity: Insider Threat
                  Insider threats consist of an authorized user of a system who perpetrates an
                  attack compromising the system’s conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability,
                  which may include illegal copying of data, sending data to unauthorized users,
                  or providing access to unauthorized users. In such scenarios, there is a need for
                  a deeper understanding of cybersecurity from multiple perspectives. Insider
                  threat detection and masquerade detection (Salem et al. 2008, Salem and Stolfo
                  2011, Garg et al. 2013) can be categorized based on the approaches used
                  namely: system call analysis, graph-based analysis, network mapping/top-
                  ology analysis, structural anomaly detection, and rule-based analysis.
                     Brdiczka et al. (2012) propose a hybrid system that combines structural
                  anomaly detection from social and information networks (graph analysis,
                  dynamic tracking, and machine learning) with psychological proﬁling
                  (dynamic psychological proﬁling from behavioral patterns). Eberle et al.
                  (2010) describe a graph-based anomaly detection approach for insider threat
                  detection. The approach is quite robust with few false positives, but falls short
                  on dynamic graphs and while handling numeric values in structural analysis.
                  Across the multiple areas of study discussed here, there is no work that brings




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                         10.2 Human Perspective to Cybersecurity                        141


                 together multiple facets from data and behavioral perspectives for discovering
                 insider threats. Insider threats remain one of the hardest types of threats to detect.
                    Studying how network trafﬁc changes over time, which locations are the
                 sources, where is it headed, how are people generating this trafﬁc, and how
                 people respond physiologically (such as through stress indicators) when
                 involved in these events – all these aspects become critical in distinguishing
                 the normal from the abnormal in the domain of cybersecurity. This requires
                 shifting gears to view cybersecurity as a people problem rather than a purely
                 technological problem.
                    As discussed in Chapter 2, several features can be utilized from disparate
                 domains, as shown in Figure 10.2, such as computer usage including CPU,
                 memory, and kernel modules, network trafﬁc features including source, des-
                 tination IP, port, protocol, derived geolocation, and other location-related
                 features, such as geopolitical event information and physiological sensors
                 providing knowledge of affective behaviors, including features such as emo-
                 tion and stress variations. Each of these domains provides insights into the
                 workings of a networked information system over a period of time. Each
                 domain individually is not sufﬁcient to indicate an insider threat. When
                 combined, these disparate data streams can facilitate detection of potentially
                 anomalous user trafﬁc for deeper inspection. These features can be evaluated
                 individually and in conjunction to provide knowledge of potential insider
                 threats.




                       Figure 10.2 Integrating multiple domain datasets for insider threat detection.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  142               Human-Centered Data Analytics for Cybersecurity


                     Figure 10.2 indicates relating multiple factors for insider threat evaluation:
                  • A user’s systems usage changes over time; similarly, network trafﬁc evolves
                    over time, and communication patterns change over time. These key
                    changes, which are deviant from the normal changes, can be associated with
                    anomalies in the network trafﬁc and system usage.
                  • Any type of attack has common underpinnings of how it is carried out; this
                    has not changed from physical security breaches to computer security
                    breaches. Thus, data representing the user’s behavior from both the usage
                    of the systems and affective behaviors (such as stress indicators) provide
                    important knowledge. This knowledge can be leveraged to identify behav-
                    ioral models of anomalies where patterns of misuse can be identiﬁed.
                  • Studying multiple types of datasets and monitoring users through the appli-
                    cation of affective computing techniques (Picard 2003) can have ethical and
                    privacy implications. Effective adversarial monitoring techniques need to be
                    developed such that they are ethical and respect user privacy.
                  Utilizing data-based and human behavioral aspects of learning, new know-
                  ledge from the vast array of processes can lead to new insights of understand-
                  ing the challenges faced in this important domain of cybersecurity.



                                           10.3 User/Employee Viewpoint
                  A cyberattack victim may be a technology-savvy user or a user who is not as
                  well versed with technology use. While one may assume that those users less
                  familiar with technology would be more prone to cyberattacks, technology-
                  savvy users are equally prone to attacks.
                     Goldberg (1990) and Roddick and Spiliopoulou (1999) outline the big ﬁve
                  factors that describe an individual’s personality traits, as shown in Figure 10.3.
                     Shropshire et al. (2006) and McBride et al. (2012) propose to create a link
                  between the personality traits and users who are likely to commit security
                  infractions. These could be unknowingly or through malicious intent.
                  Shropshire et al. (2006) propose the hypothesis that conscientiousness and
                  agreeableness are positively related to IT security compliant behavior.
                  McBride et al. (2012) establishes that individuals react differently to different
                  scenarios, and therefore the cybersecurity training approach should be adopted
                  to differentiate between personality types. McBride et al. (2012) also provide a
                  ﬁne-grained evaluation within the personality types. For example, agreeable
                  individuals with a low sense of sanction (fear of receiving a reprimand) are
                  more likely to violate security policies.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                10.3 User/Employee Viewpoint                   143




                       Figure 10.3 Big ﬁve personality factors.



                    As such, there is a very limited number of studies that establish the relation-
                 ships between personality traits and IT security incidents where an insider or
                 an unknowing user was responsible for the perpetration of the attack.
                    Certain key aspects of human behavior and personality traits can manifest in
                 technological viewpoints, as follows:
                 • User interaction: How a user interacts with a system is telling of their
                   personalities and their preferences. One common example is setting pass-
                   words and saving passwords, which is considered to be one of the biggest
                   points of risk for systems (Yildirim and Mackie 2019). Setting the same
                   passwords for multiple applications is a big security threat and in some
                   regards a single point of failure. Saving passwords on the system, or on a
                   piece of paper, while convenient, may be a security threat, especially if the
                   device is located in a somewhat nonsecure location. Similarly, use of
                   mechanisms such as two-factor authentication have to be carefully evaluated
                   for the types of proposed users of the systems (Das et al. 2020).
                 • Interface design: A very busy interface can leave average nontechnical
                   users confused. This is true for new users who may be starting to use an
                   interface in a new job or for experienced users after a change from the
                   systems they are used to. In some cases, it is also possible that highly
                   technical systems with several parameters may leave users vulnerable to




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  144               Human-Centered Data Analytics for Cybersecurity


                    mistakes. Simple-to-use interfaces can be helpful in alleviating this. Studies
                    (Abdellahi et al. 2020) have also presented user interface security assessment
                    models that can help evaluate user interactions from a security perspective.
                  • Where does the user look: Studies have been performed (Katsini et al.
                    2020) where user views are tracked to identify the level of interest of a user
                    while interacting with an interface such as a browser. There is indeed a trade-
                    off between accuracy of eye gaze–based solutions for security. Moreover,
                    there may be privacy concerns to use such methods.
                  • Education: A basic cyber education can be critical in averting the more
                    common types of situations such as phishing attacks. Similarly, educating
                    users to keep their systems up to date is also very important to avert known
                    attacks. Nudging users in the right direction and giving indicators in decision
                    making (Zimmerman and Renaud 2021) are indeed helpful ways to increase
                    user awareness.
                  While these aspects appear to be straightforward, they need to be enumerated
                  and carefully evaluated in an organization’s context to avoid cyberattacks that
                  can be averted with better design principles from a user interaction perspective.


                        10.4 Attacker Viewpoint: Anomaly Detection Methods
                  A data-oriented approach can be developed to understand how an attack is
                  carried out or what the behavioral aspect of an attack is. In cyberattacks, the
                  intruder will ﬁrst choose a target and then initiate attacks. Before the attack
                  succeeds or fails, the intruder will have to try multiple times, and they will
                  continue trying different methods until they are successful or eventually give
                  up. This is the nature of the cyberattacks and almost universal in all attacks.
                  This may vary for attacks by insiders where they may know the system well
                  and do not need to scan the system and try multiple methods.
                     Another behavioral factor in cyberattacks is that the attackers will target
                  relatively few targets each time, and most times only attack one target at a
                  time. This provides a clue that when the attack happens, usually they will focus
                  on one target in a short period of time. The attackers assumed to be human will
                  usually not spend a prolonged time on one target. After they have tried
                  extensively on one target in a short period of time, they will switch targets.
                  These behavioral factors provide hints in developing behavioral models of
                  anomalies. The intruders will essentially leave a trace of activities in network
                  monitors such as in the intrusion detection system (IDS) logs. IDS logs (for
                  example, snort alert logs) can be utilized to generate behavioral models
                  of anomalies.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                10.4 Attacker Viewpoint: Anomaly Detection Methods              145




                       Figure 10.4 Models describing attacker behaviors.


                    Let us consider all the visitors V of a network N, for each visitor of the
                 network, V in N, a source IP address, IPsource, and a target IP address, IPtarget,
                 are displayed in the IDS log. The alert information indicates the actions from
                 the source IP addresses. The IDS logs do not always categorize the attacks as
                 such since they observe it in isolation. The alerts in combination may be
                 potentially related to identify the collective behavior of attackers. Let us
                 consider three user patterns and build them into three models to exhibit
                 attacker behavior (Chen and Janeja 2014), as shown in Figure 10.4.
                 • Model 1: When a cyberattack occurs, the attacker usually will not be
                   successful the ﬁrst time. The attacker will attempt different methods in order
                   to gain access to the target. As discussed in Liu et al. (2008), when an attack
                   happens, it takes multiple steps: probe, scan, intrusion, and goal. Let us say
                   each attacker is represented by a unique IP source, and each attempt is
                   differentiated by the alert messages. If the time when the attack will happen
                   is not known, then data can be divided into temporal neighborhoods, as
                   discussed in Chapter 3. This will reduce the number of instances analyzed
                   each time. It also helps to show the attacks in a smaller subset of the data. If
                   the count of number of unique attempts between IP1 and IP2 in a given
                   Interval(i) is greater than a threshold, then this action can be considered
                   anomalous and this source IP address is a potential attacker. Here
                   C represents empirical criteria to differentiate attacks and nonattacks. This
                   is based on the context of a network. If it is at a commercial network, C will
                   be larger than in a private network. Heuristically, we can consider C as three
                   times the average attempts of regular users. If an IPsource is identiﬁed as an
                   attacker IP address, its activities before or after the actions will be considered
                   part of the attack because its other incidents are likely to be in the probe or
                   scanning stage and in preparation for the following attacks.
                 • Model 2: When an attack happens, the target address usually is unique or
                   relatively a few addresses. The attackers will target the unique targets
                   persistently until success or failure. If a target IP address is accessed by a




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  146               Human-Centered Data Analytics for Cybersecurity


                    much higher number of unique IP addresses than usual within a short period
                    of time, this target IP address is potentially being accessed anomalously.
                  • Model 3: A common attack method is when there are a massive number of
                    attempts in a short time in order, for example, to obtain the password
                    information. Hence, if an IPtarget is experiencing much higher than normal
                    trafﬁc from a single or a few IPsource, this IPtarget is under attack. This
                    represents the percentage of total trafﬁc between two IP addresses in a given
                    interval (i). If this exceeds a threshold C, an alert can be raised. C can be an
                    empirical criteria to differentiate attacks and nonattacks, and this can be
                    based on experimental assessments and evaluating historic trafﬁc patterns.
                    All these models are based on intuitions on potential attacker behavior,
                  represented by data on a network. Other models can be developed based on
                  psychological behavioral models such as those discussed in Chapter 5 for
                  social engineering threats.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                   11
                               Future Directions in Data Analytics
                                       for Cybersecurity




                 This chapter discusses some key future directions and new and emerging
                 threats in a complex landscape of machine learning and AI models. This
                 chapter outlines cyberphysical systems, with a subcategory of the Internet of
                 Things (IoT), multidomain mining, and how outputs from disparate systems
                 can be fused for an integrative anomaly detection. This chapter also outlines
                 deep learning and generative adversarial networks and discusses emerging
                 challenges in model reuse. These areas are selected due to the emerging threats
                 and technology landscapes. At the end of this chapter, we also present an
                 important topic of ethical thinking in the data analytics process.



                              11.1 Data Analytics in Cyberphysical Systems
                                              11.1.1 Cyberphysical Systems
                 Cyberphysical systems are formed as a result of an integration and interaction
                 of the cyber and physical systems. This introduces many interesting issues in
                 managing, monitoring, and analyzing these interactions and interfaces. One
                 major category of CPS is the industrial control systems (ICS).
                    Traditionally, ICS is comprised of supervisory control and data acquisition
                 (SCADA) systems, distributed control systems (DCS), and programmable
                 logic controllers (PLC) found in the industrial sectors and critical infrastruc-
                 tures. These are used for industries such as electrical, water, oil, gas,
                 and energy.
                    Traditionally, ICS has been considered a much more physical process-
                 oriented space as compared to traditional information technology systems
                 (see Figure 11.1). As a result, a cyberattack on an ICS will have much bigger
                 impact on the health and safety of people and impact the economy. These

                                                                   147


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  148                          Future Directions in Cybersecurity




                        Figure 11.1 ICS vs. IT systems.


                  systems will also have a higher emphasis on reliability and accurate perform-
                  ance. System integrity and availability have much more emphasis, as these
                  systems cannot be ofﬂine for long periods. In addition, there are redundancy
                  requirements in events of failure. All these are also brought into focus with the
                  interactions with the physical domains (Stouffer et al. 2009).
                     One of the key vulnerability identiﬁed in the Guide to Industrial Control
                  Systems (ICS) Security (Stouffer et al. 2009) is a lack of redundancy in critical
                  components that could lead to a single point of failure. The signals sent
                  between the various sensors and the control units can be mapped similar to a
                  network communication ﬂow between IP addresses. Let’s consider the scen-
                  ario in Figure 11.2, where the various signals or signal pathways are shown.
                  The ICS systems may be comprised of sensors measuring a signal and
                  actuators or movers acting on the signal. Anomaly detection is an important
                  security application to evaluate risks in ICS, such as water monitoring sensor
                  networks (Lin et al. 2018).
                     Sensor networking (such as in spatial data, discussed in Chapter 8) and its
                  applications can be adapted to industrial control systems (ICS) and computer
                  networks for supporting cybersecurity. Let us consider a part of the sensor
                  network where the nodes A, B, C, and D (comprising of sensors and actuators,
                  with the lines indicating the potential connections and communication between
                  them) are shown in Figure 11.2a, b. We evaluate the nodes based on connec-
                  tions or number of links in Figure 11.2a. Using concepts of graph-based
                  metrics, as discussed in Chapter 9, we can evaluate these communication
                  patterns. Here nodes A and C can be considered important as they are
                  connecting hubs, where a large number of edges are incident, indicating a
                  high degree of communication. Similarly, node B can be considered important




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                      11.1 Data Analytics in Cyberphysical Systems            149




                       Figure 11.2 Temporal evaluation of a sensor network.


                 because it is a connector between the two hubs. However, in Figure 11.2b we
                 see a different scenario, where it is difﬁcult to determine the clear importance
                 based on links. Thus, simply using metrics such as centrality, focusing on the
                 number of edges incident on a node, may not be the best approach or even
                 feasible. Evaluating the critical nodes based on their behavior over time is much
                 more useful here. This behavior can be captured in terms of relationships based
                 on edges between nodes, which could represent data transfers between nodes,
                 such as in a computer network or an ICS network. For example, in Figure 11.2c,
                 the data transfers at time t1, t2, t3 for the network in Figure 11.2b are shown.
                 These can now be used for link-based or node-based patterns to produce a
                 ranking of links and nodes by importance, in terms of how many times they
                 appear in the temporal windows, as shown in Figure 11.2d. These can be mined
                 in an association rule–based method. Certain time periods may be more import-
                 ant, and thus may be given more weight, which may be mined using quantitative
                 association rule–based methods. This brings together concepts of temporal
                 evolution of a network, as discussed in Chapter 9.

                                             11.1.2 Internet-of-Things (IoT)
                 IoT is interchangeably used and considered complementary to CPS
                 (Simmon et al. 2015, Blasch et al. 2017). Other studies have distinguished




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  150                          Future Directions in Cybersecurity


                  IoT as a class of CPS (Nunes et al. 2015) or seen it as intersecting with CPS
                  (Calvaresi et al. 2017).
                     IoT has indeed become a big share of the CPS space due to the explosion of
                  the number of devices and advancements of smart devices and sensors. Even
                  though estimates vary, they are projected to grow upto 31 billion devices
                  worldwide by 2025 (Statista 2021). This is a very large number of devices
                  by any estimate and creates more security challenges given the highly unregu-
                  lated and nonstandard market for IoT devices. One such space where smart
                  devices have created this interesting intersection between cyberphysical and
                  Internet of Things is a smart car. We are making our vehicles smart: fully
                  connected with the internet to view real-time trafﬁc and weather, talk on the
                  phone with Bluetooth, listen to the radio, watch video, as well as get real-time
                  status of automobile’s mechanical functions. However, this smart interface
                  comes at a price, which is the vulnerability to threats as well as malfunctions to
                  mechanical parts of the vehicle.
                     Other areas where IoT has taken a big role is in home security systems with
                  ﬁre alarms, CO monitors, door and garage sensors, alarms, and temperature
                  control sensors. Figure 11.3 depicts the complex landscape of IoT.
                     Let us consider a smart home with a series of devices measuring various
                  phenomena around them. In such a setting, depicted in Figure 11.3, several
                  smart devices collect the information from a location with different levels of




                        Figure 11.3 IoT examples: car and home sensors.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                    11.2 Multidomain Mining                  151


                 precision, collecting different data streams, perhaps using different standards.
                 We may want to evaluate behavioral aspects, such as, how are we using our
                 devices? Are there behavioral trends? We may also want to evaluate aspects of
                 something anomalous in this complex space, such as, are there deviations from
                 trends? How do we discover threats and attacks?
                    The data collected in the IoT space are often of different modalities,
                 including spatial, temporal, image, and text data. The data can also sliced in
                 a multidimensional view over time. The attack space is simply unmanageable.
                 Let us consider an example of a case study evaluating an incident at a
                 university that had close to 5,000 systems making DNS lookups every 15 min-
                 utes (Verizon 2017). In our current connected environments, edge devices,
                 vending machines, environmental systems, alarm systems, and every other
                 connected device on a university campus can lead to a massive attack space.
                 This truly becomes a needle in the haystack problem.
                    Unlike companies and businesses where the responsibility of preventing and
                 mitigating an attack is on the system administrators, where does this responsi-
                 bility lie in an IoT scenario? It lies both with the device maker and the user.
                 This still creates difﬁcult scenarios where IoT use is occurring in a public or
                 shared space. This landscape is one of the frontiers of cybersecurity and
                 development of novel data analytics solutions for such a space.



                                               11.2 Multidomain Mining
                 Data in real world are generated by multiple sources and are often
                 heterogeneous in terms of the types of attributes in each dataset. To be
                 preemptive and provide actionable insights, data from multiple sources need
                 to be analyzed to. This type of mining is referred to as multidomain mining,
                 where “domain” refers to distinct sources of data, and these distinct sources
                 may be completely disparately generated. Here a couple of examples are
                 discussed to highlight the challenges and potential solutions to analyzing
                 disparate data sources to provide actionable knowledge for events.


                               11.2.1 Integrating Multiple Heterogeneous Data
                 In a computer network, there are various mechanisms to allow for analyzing
                 the network trafﬁc data. However, there may be scenarios where we want to
                 expand the decision criteria, especially when we may not have access to any
                 trafﬁc data, such as payload, but only header information in the network trafﬁc.
                 If we want to detect IP addresses with malicious intent, it becomes harder, as




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  152                          Future Directions in Cybersecurity


                  the data would be limited. In such a scenarios, we can augment the header
                  information with other types of data. One such view point is that of geospatial
                  data, which can enhance the knowledge of the IP session or even the IP
                  reputation score itself.
                     Current reputation systems pursue classiﬁcation into a white and black list,
                  i.e., binary categorization. Separate lists for URLs and IP addresses are
                  maintained. Some tools that provide rudimentary reputation services include
                  Cisco SenderBase (www.senderbase.org/), VirusTotal IP reputation (www
                  .virustotal.com/), and Spam and Open Relay Blocking System (SORBS)
                  (www.sorbs.net/). Most of these tools and lists are based on smaller feature
                  sets from one source, with no correlation across other data sources. Such a
                  shortcoming degrades a system’s effectiveness for detecting sophisticated
                  attacks and terminating malicious activities, such as zero-day attacks.
                     The set of attributes that the reputation scoring considers can be enriched,
                  providing an expressive scoring system that enables an administrator to under-
                  stand what is at stake, and increasing robustness by correlating the various
                  pieces of information while factoring in the trustworthiness of their sources. IP
                  reputation scoring model can be enriched using network session features and
                  geocontextual features such that the incoming session IP is labeled based on
                  the most similar IP addresses, both in terms of network features and geocon-
                  textual features (Sainani et al. 2020). This can provide better threat assessment
                  by considering not only the network features but also additional context, such
                  as the geospatial context information collected from external sources.
                     Indeed, in some countries, networks may encounter or even host large
                  quantities of attacks as compared to others. This may be due to shortage of
                  cybersecurity expertise, level of development, the abundance of resources,
                  corruption levels, or the computing culture in these countries (Mezzour
                  2015). Identifying these factors and quantifying them can provide insights into
                  security policies and have a positive impact on the attack incidents. These
                  scenarios not only impact the countries facing such cybersecurity crises but
                  also impact other countries and end users due to the level of connectivity in
                  today’s day and age. In addition, studies have also identiﬁed regions across the
                  world that are prone to hosting certain types of attacks. For example, studies
                  have indicated that Trojans, worms, and viruses are most prevalent in Sub-
                  Saharan Africa (Mezzour 2015), some families of malware preferentially target
                  Europe and US (Caballero et al. 2011). Yet other studies (Wang and Kim
                  2009) have explained broad categories of worldwide systemic risks and
                  country-speciﬁc risks where country-speciﬁc risks include aspects of econ-
                  omy, technology, industry, and international cooperation in enforcement of
                  laws and policies.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                    11.2 Multidomain Mining                           153




                       Figure 11.4 Sources of geospatial data relevant to cybersecurity events with
                       geopolitical aspects.


                    Thus, geospatial data not only provide additional context but offer a frame-
                 work to accommodate additional geopolitical information that often plays a big
                 role in hactivism or politically inspired attacks. Figure 11.4 provides a set of
                 rich sources to access geospatial data for countries and in some cases even at a
                 granular level of cities. Some of these sources, such as Ip2location, provide a
                 way to identify a user location based on IP address in a nonintrusive manner.
                 Several other data sources such as World Bank Open Data (https://data
                 .worldbank.org/), PIOR-GRID (http://grid.prio.org/#/), and the Armed Conﬂict
                 Location and Event Data Project (ACLED) (www.acleddata.com/) data provide
                 sociopolitical and geopolitical conﬂict data. Such data can be used to create
                 geospatial characterization of regions (for example, using methods proposed by
                 Janeja et al. 2010, as discussed in Chapter 8). When an IP address is encoun-
                 tered, it can be geolocated using the IP location databases such as Ip2location or
                 Maxmind. As shown in Figure 11.5, based on its geolocation the location score
                 from the characterization can be attributed to it. In addition the geospatial
                 attributes for this region can be appended to the network attributes for this IP
                 (Sainani 2018, 2020). Any additional security intelligence can be appended to
                 provide an aggregate reputation score to this IP.
                    The data heterogeneity in terms of types of attributes, namely categorical
                 versus continuous, can be addressed using methods that are capable of hand-
                 ling mixed attribute datasets (such as Misal et al. 2016).




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  154                            Future Directions in Cybersecurity


                                                        (Offline) Precomputed geo reputation

                        Evaluate
                        sources                Geospatial                Data preprocessing
                       Geospatial
                        sources                 features



                                                                           Geospatial
                                                                                                       Geospatial
                                          Feature selection              characterization              reputation


                                                       (Online) online geo reputation attribution



                             IP address                              IP geolocation
                                                                     (MaxMind etc.)                 Geospatial score




                        Aggregate reputation
                                                                 Security intelligence                Multi-attribute
                              score
                                                                                                    reputation scoring



                        Figure 11.5 Reputation scoring with geospatial context.



                                    11.2.2 Integrated Alerts from Multiple Sources
                  Computer networks are increasingly facing the threat of unauthorized access.
                  In addition to computer networks, other networks, such as sensor networks and
                  industrial control systems, also face similar threats. Intrusion detection aims at
                  identifying such threats using signatures of unauthorized access or attacks.
                  There are very few systems that address the issue of zero-day attacks, where
                  the attack signature is not known before-hand.
                     Let us consider a scenario, as outlined in Chapter 1, where the threat is two
                  pronged: ﬁrst, there is an attack on the organization; and second, there is an
                  attack on a partner that shares key resources. In the ﬁrst part of the attack,
                  intruders take advantage of vulnerabilities in public-facing web servers. In
                  addition, hackers secretively scout the network from compromised worksta-
                  tions that have already been targeted beforehand as part of a coordinated
                  prolonged attack. The second part of the attack starts with spear-phishing.
                  Instead of casting out thousands of emails randomly, spear phishers target
                  select groups of people with something in common, such as a common
                  employer, a similar banking or ﬁnancial institution, the same college, etc.
                  The emails are deceptive since they appear to be from organizations from
                  which victims are expecting emails. So potentially a second group of hackers
                  institutes a spear-phishing attack on the organization’s major business partners,
                  with which it shares network resources. The hackers are able to obtain a




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                            11.2 Multidomain Mining                               155


                                                       Soware                                     Soware
                              Agency A                 module 1                 Agency B           module 2
                 Level1




                            Alarms                     Alarms                   Alarms         Alarms

                                                                  Alarms
                                                             originating from
                                              Alarms
                  Level 2




                                                                agency B
                                          originating for
                                            agency A
                                                                                                     Iterative
                                                                                                   alarm fusion
                                                         Alarms
                                                       originating
                                                      from agency
                                                            C




                                         Alert                                             Alert

                            Figure 11.6 Alarm data fusion.


                 privileged account and compromise a root domain controller that is shared by
                 the organization and its partner. When the intruders try to recreate and assign
                 privileges, they trigger an alarm.
                    In this scenario where the attack is distributed, it may be difﬁcult to integrate
                 these alarms to identify if this is a single malicious attack or if the attack was
                 spread out over time. This requires the discovery of an integrated alert from
                 alarms generated from disparate sources across a prolonged period of time, as
                 shown in Figure 11.6. Each alarm generated has a set of attributes such as the
                 source and destination of the data, port, length of data packet, etc. Each source
                 generating the alarm is also described through a set of attributes, such as type,
                 port frequently used, etc.
                    The series of alarms received in such a complex application domain is
                 composed of the raw messages received from multiple sources, and an alert
                 is the processed and aggregated output generated from these alarms. Such an
                 approach for the alarm data fusion would include alarm source characterization
                 and alarm clustering using source characterization and temporal lag determin-
                 ation. The alarms could be generated from a single source as a series of bursts,
                 or from multiple sources such as multiple agencies or multiple software
                 modules, as shown in Figure 11.6. Another scenario (Janeja et al. 2014) is
                 when the alarms are being generated from multiple IDS systems.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  156                          Future Directions in Cybersecurity


                     We can perform clustering of the IDS log data after preprocessing. The data
                  are in the form of parsed IDS alarms, where each alarm is a data point with a
                  priority level: high, medium, or low. These data are collected from multiple
                  IDS sources. In this case, the premise is that a low-priority alarm may not
                  really be a low-priority alarm when seen in conjunction with some of the other
                  alarms from different IDS systems. Since we are looking at all alarms from
                  multiple IDS systems, we have the opportunity to study the similarity between
                  alarms and then judge whether an alarm is truly a low priority or could be
                  potentially high priority. The end goal is that multiple similar low-priority
                  alarms could potentially indicate cyberattacks.
                     To distinguish whether these alarms are true alerts, we would need to
                  examine if the sources have similar characteristics. A source characterization
                  based on the features associated with sources can be performed. Here “source”
                  refers to either IDS systems associated with various parts of an organization or
                  even multiple organizations; similarly, “source” could also refer to an applica-
                  tion source or even an agency in a multiagency scenario. Sources could also
                  refer to sensors in an ICS example, as discussed earlier in this chapter. This
                  approach is adaptable if the alarm can be sufﬁciently preprocessed in a uniform
                  manner across different types of alarm data.
                     Clusters of alarms based on attributes can be generated. For each cluster, the
                  set of sources associated with each cluster and the alarm cardinality of each
                  cluster, which is the number of alarms in a cluster, are identiﬁed:
                  • If only one source is generating alarms in a cluster, then the source is ﬂagged
                    for investigation. If alarm cardinality of a cluster is greater than a preset
                    threshold and if all of the alarms in the cluster are from one source, then this
                    can lead to raising an alert. Let us consider a sensor generating alarms in an
                    ICS. If a single sensor is generating alarms, then this sensor should be
                    investigated. Moreover, if data from the sensors are clustered and readings
                    from one sensor dominates the cluster, this could further raise the alert.
                  • Next, for every source in a particular characterization (based on similarly
                    behaving sources) such that this source is not equal to the source in the
                    cluster, if the source s is in not in any other cluster it implies that potentially
                    the other sources in the characterization as well are not generating alarms.
                    This cluster can be ﬂagged as a possible false positive for further investi-
                    gation. This really means that if a source is part of a cluster but the other
                    sources from this characterization are not in any of the clusters, then this
                    source may be a false positive.
                    After removing the clusters representing the false positives, among the
                  remaining clusters of alarms, two cases may occur: (a) a cluster comprises a




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                         11.3 Advanced Machine Learning Models                  157


                 signiﬁcant number of alarms, but these alarms do not belong to one single
                 source in a characterization; and (b) no single cluster has a signiﬁcant number
                 of alarms:
                 • In the case of the ﬁrst scenario, an aggregated alert can be generated if there
                   is any cluster that has alarms greater than a preset threshold.
                 • In the case of the second scenario, we can identify the overlap between the
                   clusters, using measures such as silhouette coefﬁcient and entropy, to ﬁnd
                   mutually related alarms to generate an aggregated alert. The greater the
                   overlap, the more strongly related are the alarms.
                   Once an alert is generated, sources can be associated with it. The set of
                 sources of the alarms is the sources of the alarms in the cluster, or in the other
                 scenario, the sources of the alarms in the overlap. These sources can be
                 aggregated by grouping the feature vectors of all the sources, thus generating
                 a composite feature vector of the source of the alert.




                                 11.3 Advanced Machine Learning Models
                                                    11.3.1 Deep Learning
                 The output of a machine learning algorithm is only as good as the data that are
                 fed to train the model. Machine learning models such as classiﬁcation learn to
                 predict the outcome of a task based on a set of features that are provided to the
                 training algorithm. Essentially, the model is trained based on the set of
                 features. For example, based on the packet features, can a packet be labeled
                 as anomalous or benign? Here feature selection is a major task. The features
                 provide a representation of the data. If the features or representations of the
                 data are not correctly selected, this can lead to erroneous results.
                    Deep learning is a type of machine learning that learns the features through
                 multiple layers of abstractions. For example, if the task is learning to recognize a
                 picture of an individual, the deep learning model may start with various levels of
                 abstractions, starting with the most basic pixels in an image, to an abstraction of
                 an outline of the nose to the outline of the facial structure. Deep learning
                 algorithms compute the representations of one layer by tuning the parameters
                 from the previous layers (Le Cun et al. 2015). As the amount of data increases,
                 performance of most machine learning algorithms plateaus. However, perform-
                 ance of deep learning algorithms increases as the amount of input data increases.
                    An example deep learning model is shown in Figure 11.7, where the input is
                 translated into several features or representations in layer 1. Some of these




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  158                          Future Directions in Cybersecurity




                        Figure 11.7 Example of a deep learning model.



                  representations can be dropped in subsequent layers, and throughout the layers
                  the representations are weighted based on the reduction in a loss function until
                  the model converges to the output, which is the prediction task. Deep learning
                  has found a major application in computer vision, where images can be labeled
                  based on their most basic of features and abstracting to the higher-level
                  composition of the images. Deep learning has also found applications in
                  anomaly detection (Naseer et al. 2018).
                     Deep learning emulates how human brain learns through connections of
                  neurons. The most fundamental level of learning comes from neural networks
                  that were in vogue in the early 1960s and have now had a renewed interest due
                  to deep learning algorithms. The difference is now we have the availability of
                  massive amounts of data and computing capacity, which has resulted in
                  stronger models and learning algorithms. In cybersecurity applications, higher
                  accuracy and lower false positive rates are very important to label truly
                  anomalous events. Deep learning methods such as deep belief networks,
                  recurrent neural networks, and convolutional neural networks have the cap-
                  acity to learn from unlabeled data and produce better outcomes (Xin
                  et al. 2018).
                     However, deep learning suffers from several challenges, as summarized in
                  Figure 11.8. Deep learning models have several hyperparameters that need to




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                         11.3 Advanced Machine Learning Models              159




                       Figure 11.8 Deep learning challenges.



                 be predetermined and tuned, including number of layers, number of nodes in
                 each layer, network weights, and dropouts in each layer. Some of these factors
                 are also interdependent and can also impact the learning rate of the model.
                 Moreover, if the input data are not large, the model cannot be trained well.
                 Thus, the true strength of deep learning is possible in massive datasets and
                 requires heavy parameter tuning. The challenge also comes in with
                 explainability of how these parameters are impacting the outputs and the
                 interpretation of the ﬁnal outcomes. However, this area is constantly evolving,
                 and methods such as deep reinforcement learning (Nguyen and Reddi 2019)
                 are ﬁnding use in cybersecurity applications to provide adaptive, responsive,
                 and scalable methods of threat detection.



                                      11.3.2 Generative Adversarial Networks
                 Increasingly, cybersecurity challenges have started emerging with image and
                 data manipulation. As machine learning models are increasingly being used for
                 cybersecurity applications, so are ways to manipulate these systems from an




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  160                          Future Directions in Cybersecurity


                  adversarial standpoint. Attacks may increase the chances of misclassiﬁcation
                  of outcomes from a predictive model; for example, poison attacks may add bad
                  data into the training samples, and evasion attacks may distort input data so
                  that they are not correctly classiﬁed (Yinka-Banjo and Ugot 2019). Attacks
                  may also emerge due to model reuse (as discussed in the next section). It is
                  imperative that such types of generative samples are part of the learning
                  strategy for accurate detection of truly anomalous samples.
                     Generative models have been explored with pioneering work in 1996
                  (Revow et al. 1996), where an expectation maximization algorithm was used
                  to identify the model that generated an image of a handwritten digit. This
                  approach not only labeled the data but also explained the model generating it.
                     Recent work (Goodfellow et al. 2014) formalized the idea of a generative
                  adversarial network (GAN) as a model comprising two components: a genera-
                  tive model and a discriminative model. As shown in Figure 11.9, each of these
                  models has a different function. A discriminator takes input and labels the
                  input as belonging to a certain class. In this example, the input can be images
                  and the output is the label for the images as belonging to a certain class. On the
                  other hand, the generator can take the images (or distributions as a starting
                  point) and learn from the distribution to produce new outputs, in this case new
                  images. The new images may not be realistically comparable to the original but
                  emulate the distribution.




                        Figure 11.9 Generative vs. discriminative functions.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                         11.3 Advanced Machine Learning Models                  161




                       Figure 11.10 Generative adversarial network.


                    In a GAN, the two components interact in a two-player game where each is
                 trying to win over the other maximizing the similarity to the original distribution.
                 Here the generative model emulates the probability distribution to match the
                 original data, and the discriminative model tries to distinguish whether the gener-
                 ated sample came from the original distribution or from the generative model.
                    As shown in Figure 11.10, we can see that the two components are pitted
                 against each other. Here an input (a combination of noise and random images)
                 is provided to the generator, which generates samples. On the other hand, the
                 discriminator, which is trained on the real-world images, examines these
                 generated samples. These samples are labeled as real or fake. In addition, the
                 discriminator also learns from the loss of labeling the samples incorrectly and
                 corrects the weights in the discriminator. This process can iteratively improve
                 the learning from a discriminator.
                    Based on game theoretic concepts, an “adversarial” concept is generally
                 used; however, this could also be a “cooperative” setting where the discrimin-
                 ator can share the information with the generator (Goodfellow 2016). Other
                 types of adversaries, such as adaptive adversaries, have also been discussed in
                 a request-answer game theoretic setting (Ben-David et al. 1994, Gormley et al.
                 2000). While such adaptations have not been shown in computational deep
                 learning models yet, these types of models can be used to make the machine
                 learning samples more robust against adversarial attacks.


                                                      11.3.3 Model Reuse
                 As machine learning and in general data analytics models become more easily
                 available, they are being pervasively used and reused. Many repositories have




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  162                          Future Directions in Cybersecurity




                         Figure 11.11 Model reuse attacks.


                  emerged where models are checked in by researchers and others are reusing
                  these. Examples include the Open Neural Network Exchange (ONNX)
                  format1, Azure AI gallery2, and Caffe Model Zoo3. It is only a matter of time
                  before models are as easily available and searchable as public datasets.
                  However, there is a clear danger in reusing machine learning models without
                  understanding the provenance of the models and the model pipelines. This has
                  been a well-studied problem in software reuse (Paul and Taylor 2002, Kath
                  et al. 2009). Vulnerability databases have been established to study known
                  software defects to prevent propagating them to other users and applications. If
                  reuse of vulnerable software and code in general is not prevented, it can lead to
                  massive disruptions and attacks such as in the case of the heart bleed bug
                  (Carvalho et al. 2014).
                     This level of understanding has been well established in machine learning
                  models. Recently some studies have shown that manipulating even simple
                  building blocks of a machine learning model can lead to model reuse attacks
                  (Ji et al. 2018) where corrupted models can lead the host systems to behave
                  anomalously when certain types of input triggers are introduced into the
                  system. These threats in model reuse and training data manipulation (Ji et al.
                  2018) can be summarized as shown in Figure 11.11.
                     To understand the impacts of such an attack, consider an autonomous
                  vehicle that has to evaluate several images from multiple camera inputs in an
                  ensemble learning system. In such a complex system, if a trigger results in an
                  anomalous decision, this can have far-reaching impacts for the immediate

                  1                       2
                      http://onnx.ai/       https://gallery.azure.ai//
                  3
                      http://caffe.berkeleyvision.org/model_zoo.html




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                  11.4 Ethical Thinking in the Data Analytics Process         163


                 vicinity where the vehicle is driving and also in the long term for the company
                 that has developed the autonomous vehicle and the systems processing the
                 images. Indeed, studies have shown how researchers have hacked into driver-
                 less cars (Versprille 2015) and studied potential risks in smart car functional-
                 ities (Weimerskirch and Dominic 2018). Model reuse attacks can bring in a
                 new wave of cyberattacks where complex systems that rely on machine
                 learning behave erratically when certain trigger inputs are introduced.



                         11.4 Ethical Thinking in the Data Analytics Process
                 Data analytics, developed using data-driven technologies from artiﬁcial intelli-
                 gence, machine learning, and statistics, are extremely beneﬁcial for cyberse-
                 curity if used well. These systems can lead to substantial beneﬁts in terms of
                 the speed, cost, and scalability of decision making compared to human deci-
                 sion making, and they often lead to better and more reliable decisions, espe-
                 cially in cases where system administrators are ﬂooded with data from massive
                 organizational computer networks. If implemented appropriately, these
                 systems also have the potential to be more robust in identifying accurate alerts.
                 Since the same procedure is applied across massive amounts of data, achieving
                 such robustness may simply not be possible for a network administrator.
                 However, because of the far-reaching scalability of the data analysis, data
                 and algorithms being implemented also need to be considered from
                 ethical viewpoints.
                    Ethics generally works on the principles of do no harm (Janeja 2019).
                 Although research protocols to protect human beings have been in place for
                 a while now, the pervasiveness of multiple types of data and their use make it
                 less clear where the impact on human beings is in the data analytics processes.
                 Thus, harm is not only direct based on exposing identiﬁable data for individ-
                 uals, but also indirect resulting from the reuse of easily available data and
                 combining multiple datasets, as we have discussed in various examples of data
                 manipulation throughout the book.
                    In particular for data analytics, there is a need to develop ethical critical
                 thinking while analyzing the data. Throughout the entire life cycle of the data
                 analytics in the knowledge discovery process, there are many opportunities for
                 ethical decision making that need to be evaluated to consider the human and
                 societal impacts.
                    Here the harms are not only in terms of privacy, for example through
                 identiﬁcation of personally identiﬁable information (PII), but also other types
                 of data and algorithms that may not necessarily fall under the direct purview of




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  164                          Future Directions in Cybersecurity


                  traditional privacy protections. There may be yet other types of data that may
                  have impacts for the society as a whole. Consider data such as location data
                  collected on a phone, driving data collected through on board diagnostics
                  (OBD), or atmospheric data collected through sensors in a community. Now
                  let us consider the types of patterns one may discover if they have access to
                  such data. For example, the GPS data on the phone may pinpoint the geospatial
                  coordinates of secure locations where an individual is carrying the phone;
                  OBD driving data may provide insights into driving behavior; systems may
                  falsely label anomalous behavior. Data collection is another very important
                  element where ethical considerations (in addition to legal considerations)
                  are important.
                     As we think through the examples, we can also think of the uses of the data
                  while integrating them with data from other sources. For example, if the data of
                  IP addresses are combined with geographical distribution of demographics,
                  does that identify vulnerable populations, especially if the system being used is
                  not robust to false positives? Can the driver behavior, discovered through OBD
                  or the information on the neighborhoods that the driver passes through, lead to
                  additional security risks? Even in these limited examples we can see begin-
                  nings of questions of bias and risk to individuals as more and more systems
                  relying on data analytics are being used. Indeed, such systems are beginning to
                  be used in augmented decision making that can impact lives and livelihoods.
                     We all have come to accept recommendations made by data-driven analytics
                  algorithms in our day-to-day lives, such as in spam labels for emails and fraud
                  alerts from our credit card companies. Things start getting tricky if these data
                  analytics systems are being used to make decisions that would generally take a lot
                  of thought and deliberation – for example, who should receive bail or not, who
                  could be a criminal or not, or if a facial recognition system should be used or not.
                     The vast complexity of data, the data’s easy availability, and algorithmic
                  tools requires vigilance around access, privacy, provenance, curation, inter-
                  operability, issues of fairness, accountability, and transparency. In studying
                  data analytics algorithms and systems such as for the security alert mechanisms
                  discussed in this book, it is clear that there are several checkpoints where a
                  system follows a pathway based on the choices that the creator of that system
                  made or the user of the system made. It is important to know what those
                  choices are and how they can impact lives and livelihoods. It is also important
                  to explain the outcomes from such systems and ensure they are not dispro-
                  portionately impacting certain groups or individuals. Just like we would
                  carefully hire an employee, supervise them, and give them advice in making
                  critical decisions, we need to have sensible extensions so that we do the same
                  for data analytics algorithms and systems.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                          References




                 Abad, C., Taylor, J., Sengul, C., et al. (2003). “Log correlation for intrusion detection: a
                     proof of concept.” 19th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, 2003.
                     Proceedings., 2003, pp. 255–264, doi: 10.1109/CSAC.2003.1254330.
                 Abdellahi, S., Lipford, H. R., Gates, C., and Fellows, J. (2020). “Developing a User
                     Interface Security Assessment method.” USENIX Symposium on Usable Privacy
                     and Security (SOUPS) 2020. August 9–11, 2020, Boston.
                 Abedin, M., Nessa, S., Khan, L., Al-Shaer, E., and Awad, M. (2010). “Analysis of
                     ﬁrewall policy rules using trafﬁc mining techniques.” International Journal of
                     Internet Protocol Technology, 5(1–2), 3–22.
                 Abraham, T. and Roddick, J. F. (1999). “Survey of spatio-temporal databases.”
                     GeoInformatica, 3(1), 61–99.
                 Aggarwal, C. C. (2017). “Spatial outlier detection.” Outlier Analysis. Springer
                     International Publishing, 345–368.
                 Aggarwal, C. C. and Yu, P. S. (2001, May). “Outlier detection for high dimensional
                     data.” ACM Sigmod Record, 30(2) 37–46.
                 Agrawal, R., Gehrke, J., Gunopulos, D., and Raghavan, P. (1998). “Automatic sub-
                     space clustering of high dimensional data for data mining applications.”
                     Proceedings of the 1998 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on
                     Management of Data. ACM Press, 94–105.
                 Agrawal, R. and Srikant, R. (1994). “Fast algorithms for mining association rules.”
                     Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases,
                     VLDB, J. B. Bocca, M. Jarke, and C. Zaniolo (Eds.). Morgan Kaufmann, 487–499.
                 Agarwal, S., Farid, H., Gu, Y., et al. (2019, June). “Protecting world leaders against
                     deep fakes.” Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
                     Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops, 38–45.
                 Ahmed, M., Mahmood, A. N., and Hu, J. (2016). “A survey of network
                     anomaly detection techniques.” Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
                     60, 19–31.
                 Akamai. (2016). “Q4 2016 state of the internet/security report.” www.akamai.com/
                     newsroom/press-release/akamai-releases-fourth-quarter-2016-state-of-the-inter
                     net-connectivity-report. Last accessed November 2021.




                                                                   165


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  166                                          References


                  Akamai. (2019). “Web attacks and gaming abuse, 2019.” www.akamai.com/us/en/
                       multimedia/documents/state-of-the-internet/soti-security-web-attacks-and-
                       gaming-abuse-report-2019.pdf. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Akoglu, L., Tong, H., and Koutra, D. (2015). “Graph based anomaly detection and
                       description: a survey.” Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 29(3), 626–688.
                  Al-Musawi, B., Branch, P., and Armitage, G. (2015, December). “Detecting BGP
                       instability using Recurrence Quantiﬁcation Analysis (RQA).” Computing and
                       Communications Conference (IPCCC), 2015 IEEE 34th International
                       Performance. IEEE, 1–8.
                  Al-Musawi, B., Branch, P., and Armitage, G. (2016). “BGP anomaly detection tech-
                       niques: a survey.” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 19(1) 377–396.
                  Al-Rousan, N. M. and Trajković, L. (2012, June). “Machine learning models for
                       classiﬁcation of BGP anomalies.” 2012 IEEE 13th International Conference on
                       High Performance Switching and Routing (HPSR). IEEEV, 103–108.
                  Al Shalabi, L., Shaaban, Z., and Kasasbeh, B. (2006). “Data mining: a preprocessing
                       engine.” Journal of Computer Science, 2(9), 735–739.
                  Aleroud, A. and Karabatis, G. (2013). “A system for cyber attack detection using
                       contextual semantics.” 7th International Conference on Knowledge Management
                       in Organizations: Service and Cloud Computing, L. Uden, F. Herrera, J. B. Pérez,
                       and J. M. Corchado Rodríguez (Eds.). Springer, 431–442.
                  Aleroud, A. and Karabatis, G. (2014, September). “Detecting zero-day attacks using
                       contextual relations.” International Conference on Knowledge Management in
                       Organizations, L. Uden, D. Fuenzaliza Oshee, I. H. Ting, and D. Liberona
                       (Eds.). Springer, 373–385.
                  Alperovitch, D. (2011). “Revealed: Operation Shady RAT.” www.csri.info/wp-content/
                       uploads/2012/08/wp-operation-shady-rat1.pdf. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Alseadoon, I., Chan, T., Foo, E., and Gonzales, N. J. (2012). “Who is more susceptible
                       to phishing emails? A Saudi Arabian study.” Proceedings of the 23rd Australasian
                       Conference on Information Systems. ACIS, 1–11
                  Ameen, J. and Basha, R. “Mining time series for identifying unusual sub-sequences
                       with applications.” ICICIC’06: Proceedings of the First International Conference
                       on Innovative Computing, Information and Control. IEEE Computer Society,
                       574–577.
                  Aminikhanghahi, S. and Cook, D. J. (2017). A survey of methods for time series change
                       point detection. Knowledge and Information Systems, 51(2), 339–367.
                  Anderson, L. C. and Agarwal, R. (2010, September). “Practicing safe computing: a
                       multimethod empirical examination of home computer user security behavioral
                       intentions.” MIS Quarterly, 34(3), 613–643.
                  Ankerst, M., Breunig, M. M., Kriegel, H. P., and Sander, J. (1999, June). “OPTICS:
                       ordering points to identify the clustering structure.” Proceedings of the 1999 ACM
                       SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD '99).
                       ACM, 49–60. doi: 10.1145/304182.304187.
                  Azari, A., Janeja, V. P., and Levin, S. (2017). “MILES: multiclass imbalanced
                       learning in ensembles through selective sampling.” ACM Symposium on
                       Applied Computing, Data Mining. ACM, 811–816. doi: 10.1145/
                       3019612.3019667.
                  Azari, A., Namayanja, J. M., Kaur, N., Misal, V., and Shukla, S. (2020, May).
                       “Imbalanced learning in massive phishing datasets.” 2020 IEEE 6th




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              References                                167


                      International Conference on Big Data Security on Cloud (BigDataSecurity), IEEE
                      International Conference on High Performance and Smart Computing (HPSC)
                      and IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Data and Security (IDS). IEEE,
                      127–132.
                 Banerjee, A., Venkatasubramanian, K. K., Mukherjee, T., and Gupta, S. K. S. (2012).
                      “Ensuring safety, security, and sustainability of mission-critical cyber–physical
                      systems.” Proceedings of the IEEE, 100(1), 283–299.
                 Barnes, R. (2013, August 8). “Geocoding router log data.” http://resources
                      .infosecinstitute.com/geocoding-router-log-data/#gref. Last accessed November
                      2021.
                 Barnett, V. and Lewis, R. (1994). Outliers in Statistical Data. John Wiley and Sons.
                 Basawa, I. V., Billard, L., and Srinivasan, R. (1984). “Large-sample tests of homogen-
                      eity for time series models.” Biometrika, 71(1), 203–206.
                 Bellman, R. (1961). Adaptive Control Processes: A Guided Tour. Princeton University
                      Press.
                 Ben-David, S., Borodin, A., Karp, R., Tardos, G., and Wigderson, A. (1994). “On
                      the power of randomization in on-line algorithms.” Algorithmica, 11(1),
                      2–14.
                 Ben Salem, M., Hershkop, S., and Stolfo, S. J. (2008). “A survey of insider attack
                      detection research.” Insider Attack and Cyber Security: Advances in Information
                      Security, vol. 39, S. J. Stolfo, S. M. Bellovin, A. D. Keromytis, S. Hershkop, S. W.
                      Smith, and S. Sinclair (Eds.). Springer, 1–19.
                 Ben Salem, M. and Stolfo, S. J. (2011). “Modeling user search behavior for masquerade
                      detection.” Insider Attack and Cyber Security: Advances in Information Security,
                      vol. 39, S. J. Stolfo, S. M. Bellovin, A. D. Keromytis, S. Hershkop, S. W. Smith,
                      and S. Sinclair (Eds.). Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-77322-3_5.
                 Besag, J. and Newell, J. (1991).“The detection of clusters in rare diseases.” Journal of
                      the Royal Statistical Society Series A, 154, 143–155.
                 Beyer, M. A. and Laney, D. (2012). The Importance of “Big Data”: A Deﬁnition.
                      Gartner.
                 Bhuyan, M. H., Bhattacharyya, D. K., and Kalita, J. K. (2014). “Network anomaly
                      detection: methods, systems and tools.” IEEE Communications Surveys and
                      Tutorials, 16(1), 303–336.
                 Binde, B. E., McRee, R., and O’Connor, T. (2011, May). “Assessing outbound trafﬁc to
                      uncover advanced persistent threat.” doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.16401.07520.
                 Blasch, E., Kadar, I., Grewe, L. L., et al. (2017, May). “Panel summary of
                      cyber-physical systems (CPS) and internet of things (IoT) opportunities with
                      information fusion.” Signal Processing, Sensor/Information Fusion, and Target
                      Recognition XXVI, vol. 10200, International Society for Optics and Photonics,
                      02000O.
                 Blasco, J. (2013, March 21). “New Sykipot developments.” https://cybersecurity.att
                      .com/blogs/labs-research/new-sykipot-developments. Last accessed November
                      2021.
                 Brdiczka, O., Liu, J., Price, B., et al. (2012). “Proactive insider threat detection through
                      graph learning and psychological context.” 2012 IEEE Symposium on Security and
                      Privacy Workshops (SPW). IEEE, 142–149.
                 Breiman, L. (1996). “Bagging predictors.” Machine Learning, 24(2), 123–140.
                 Breiman, L. (2001). “Random forests.” Machine Learning, 45(1), 5–32.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  168                                          References


                  Breunig, M. M., Kriegel, H. P., Ng, R. T., and Sander, J. (1999, September).
                       “Optics-of: identifying local outliers.” Principles of Data Mining and
                       Knowledge Discovery. PKDD 1999, J. M. Żytkow and J. Rauch (Eds.)
                       Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1704. Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
                       540-48247-5_28.
                  Brigham, E. O. (2002). The Fast Fourier Transform. Prentice Hall.
                  Bright, A. (2007). “Estonia accuses Russia of ‘cyberattack’.” www.csmonitor.com/
                       2007/0517/p99s01-duts.html. Last accessed March 2020.
                  Bronskill, J. (2012, November 9). “Govt fears Canada becoming host country for cyber-
                       attacker.” https://winnipeg.ctvnews.ca/canada-becoming-host-country-for-cyber-
                       attackers-government-fears-.1032064. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Burns, C. (2012, June 1). “Stuxnet virus origin conﬁrmed: USA and Isreali govern-
                       ments.” www.slashgear.com/stuxnet-virus-origin-conﬁrmed-usa-and-isreali-gov
                       ernments-01231244/. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Caballero, J., Grier, C., Kreibich, C., and Paxson, V. (2011, August). “Measuring pay-
                       per-install: the commoditization of malware distribution.” Proceedings of the 20th
                       USENIX Conference on Security (SEC'11), 13.
                  Cai, L. and Hao, C. (2011). “TouchLogger: inferring keystrokes on touch screen from
                       smartphone motion.” HotSec, 11(2011), 9–9.
                  Caldwell, D., Gilbert, A., Gottlieb, J., et al. (2004). “The cutting EDGE of IP router
                       conﬁguration.” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 34(1),
                       21–26.
                  Calvaresi, D., Marinoni, M., Sturm, A., Schumacher, M., and Buttazzo, G. (2017,
                       August). “The challenge of real-time multi-agent systems for enabling IoT and
                       CPS.” Proceedings of the International Conference on Web Intelligence. ACM,
                       356–364.
                  Cao, L., Yang, D., Wang, Q., Yu, Y., Wang, J., and Rundensteiner, E. A. (2014,
                       March). “Scalable distance-based outlier detection over high-volume data
                       streams.” 2014 IEEE 30th International Conference on Data Engineering
                       (ICDE) . IEEE, 76–87.
                  Carvalho, M., DeMott, J., Ford, R., and Wheeler, D. A. (2014). “Heartbleed 101.” IEEE
                       Security & Privacy, 12(4), 63–67.
                  Chandola, V., Banerjee, A., and Kumar, V. (2009). “Anomaly detection: a survey.”
                       ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 41(3), 15.
                  Chandrashekar, G. and Sahin, F. (2014). “A survey on feature selection methods.”
                       Computers & Electrical Engineering, 40(1), 16–28.
                  Chapman, P., Clinton, J., Kerber, R., et al. (2000). CRISP-DM 1.0, Step-by-Step Data
                       Mining Guide. CRISP-DM Consortium; SPSS: Chicago, IL, USA.
                  Check Point. (2020). “Threat map.” https://threatmap.checkpoint.com/. Last accessed
                       March 2020.
                  Chen, M., Mao, S., and Liu, Y. (2014). “Big data: a survey.” Mobile Networks and
                       Applications 19(2), 171–209.
                  Chen, S. and Janeja, V. P. (2014). “Human perspective to anomaly detection for
                       cybersecurity.” Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, 42(1), 133–153.
                  Cheok, R. (2014). “Wire shark: a guide to color my packets detecting network recon-
                       naissance to host exploitation.” GIAC Certiﬁcation Paper. SANS Institute Reading
                       Room.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              References                           169


                 Cheswick, B. (1992, January). “An evening with Berferd in which a cracker is lured,
                      endured, and studied.” Proceedings of the Winter USENIX Conference, San
                      Francisco, 20–24.
                 Chi, M. (2014). “Cyberspace: America’s new battleground.” www.sans.org/reading-
                      room/whitepapers/warfare/cyberspace-americas-battleground-35612.              Last
                      accessed November 2021.
                 Chien, E. and O’Gorman, G. (2011). “The nitro attacks, stealing secrets from the
                      chemical industry.” Symantec Security Response (2011), 1–8.
                 CIA. (2021). “World Factbook.” Last accessed November 2021.
                 Cleary, J. G. and Trigg, L. E. (1995). “K*: an instance-based learner using an entropic
                      distance measure.” Machine Learning Proceedings 1995, A. Prieditis and S.
                      Russell (Eds.). Morgan Kaufmann, 108–114.
                 Cloud Security Alliance. (2014). Big data taxonomy. https://downloads
                      .cloudsecurityalliance.org/initiatives/bdwg/Big_Data_Taxonomy.pdf. Last accessed
                      April 13, 2017.
                 Cohen, E., Datar, M., Fujiwara, S., et al. (2001). “Finding interesting associations
                      without support pruning.” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
                      Engineering, 13(1), 64–78.
                 Cohen, W. W. (1995, July). “Fast effective rule induction.” Proceedings of the Twelfth
                      International Conference on Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann, 115–123.
                 Cooper, G. F. and Herskovits, E. (1992). “A Bayesian method for the induction of
                      probabilistic networks from data.” Machine Learning, 9, 309–347.
                 Cortes, C. and Vapnik, V. (1995). “Support-vector networks.” Machine Learning, 20
                      (3), 273–297.
                 Cover, T. and Hart, P. (1967). “Nearest neighbor pattern classiﬁcation.” IEEE
                      Transactions on Information Theory, 13(1), 21–27.
                 Dark Reading. (2011). “PNNL attack: 7 lessons: surviving a zero-day attack.” www
                      .darkreading.com/attacks-and-breaches/7-lessons-surviving-a-zero-day-attack/d/d-
                      id/1100226. Last accessed March 2020.
                 Darwish, A. and Bataineh, E. (2012, December 18–20). “Eye tracking analysis of
                      browser security indicators.” 2012 International Conference on Computer
                      Systems and Industrial Informatics (ICCSII), 1, 6. doi: 10.1109/
                      ICCSII.2012.6454330. Last accessed November 2021.
                 Das, A., Ng, W.-K., and Woon, Y.-K. 2001. “Rapid association rule mining.”
                      Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Information and
                      Knowledge Management. ACM Press, 474–481.
                 Das, S., Kim, A., Jelen, B., Huber, L., and Camp, L. J. (2020). “Non-inclusive online
                      security: older adults’ experience with two-factor authentication.” Proceedings of
                      the 54th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 6472.
                 Dash, M. and Liu, H. (1997). “Feature selection for classiﬁcation.” Intelligent Data
                      Analysis, 1(1–4), 131–156.
                 Davies, C. “Flame cyber-espionage discovered in vast infection net.” (2012, May 28).
                      www.slashgear.com/ﬂame-cyber-espionage-discovered-in-vast-infection-net-
                      28230470/. Last accessed November 2021.
                 Davinson, N. and Sillence, E. (2010). “It won’t happen to me: Promoting secure
                      behaviour among internet users.” Computers in Human Behavior, 26(6),
                      1739–1747.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  170                                          References


                  Davinson, N. and Sillence, E. (2014). “Using the health belief model to explore users’
                       perceptions of ‘being safe and secure’ in the world of technology mediated
                       ﬁnancial transactions.” International Journal of Human–Computer Studies, 72
                       (2), 154–168.
                  Dempster, A. P., Laird, N. M., and Rubin, D. B. (1977). “Maximum likelihood from
                       incomplete data via the EM algorithm.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
                       Series B (Methodological), 39(1), 1–22.
                  Deokar, B. and Hazarnis, A. (2012). “Intrusion detection system using log ﬁles and reinforce-
                       ment learning.” International Journal of Computer Applications 45(19), 28–35.
                  Dey, S., Janeja, V. P., and Gangopadhyay, A. (2009). “Temporal neighborhood dis-
                       covery through unequal depth binning.” IEEE International Conference on Data
                       Mining (ICDM’09), 110–119.
                  Dey, S., Janeja, V. P., and Gangopadhyay, A. (2014). “Discovery of temporal neigh-
                       borhoods through discretization methods.” Intelligent Data Analysis, 18(4),
                       609–636.
                  Ding, Y., Yan, E., Frazho, A., and Caverlee, J. (2009, November). “Pagerank for
                       ranking authors in co-citation networks.” Journal of the American Society for
                       Information Science and Technology, 60(11), 2229–2243.
                  Domo. (2017). “Data never sleeps.” www.domo.com/learn/data-never-sleeps-5?aid=
                       ogsm072517_1&sf100871281=1. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Drinkwater, D. (2016). “Does a data breach really affect your ﬁrm’s reputation?” www
                       .csoonline.com/article/3019283/data-breach/does-a-data-breach-really-affect-
                       your-ﬁrm-s-reputation.html. Last accessed June 2017.
                  Duchene, F., Garbayl, C., and Rialle, V. (2004). “Mining heterogeneous multivariate
                       time-series for learning meaningful patterns: application to home health telecare.”
                       arXiv preprint cs/0412003.
                  Duczmal, L. and Renato, A. (2004). “A simulated annealing strategy for the detection
                       of arbitrarily shaped spatial clusters.” Computational Statistics and Data Analysis,
                       45(2), 269–286.
                  Eberle, W., Graves, J., and Holder, L. (2010). “Insider threat detection using a graph-
                       based approach.” Journal of Applied Security Research, 6(1), 32–81.
                  ENISA (European Union Agency for Network And Information Security). (2016, Jan).
                       “Threat Taxonomy: a tool for structuring threat information.” https://library
                       .cyentia.com/report/report_001462.html. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Ester, M., Frommelt, A., Kriegel, H.-P., and Sander, J. (1998). “Algorithms for
                       characterization and trend detection in spatial databases.” Proceedings of the
                       Fourth International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
                       (KDD'98), 44–50.
                  Ester, M., Kriegel, H., and Sander, J. (1997). “Spatial data mining: a database
                       approach.” The 5th International Symposium on Advances in Spatial Databases,
                       Springer-Verlag, 47–66.
                  Ester, M., Kriegel, H. P., Sander, J., and Xu, X. (1996, August). “A density-based
                       algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise.” KDD, 96
                       (34), 226–231.
                  Estevez-Tapiador, J. M., Garcia-Teodoro, P., and Diaz-Verdejo, J. E. (2004). “Anomaly
                       detection methods in wired networks: a survey and taxonomy.” Computer
                       Communications, 27(16), 1569–1584.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              References                             171


                 Fabrikant, A., Koutsoupias, E., and Papadimitriou, C. H. (2002). “Heuristically opti-
                      mized trade-offs: a new paradigm for power laws in the Internet.” International
                      Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming. Springer, 110–122.
                 Faloutsos, M., Faloutsos, P., and Faloutsos, C. (1999). “On power-law relationships
                      of the internet topology.” The Structure and Dynamics of Networks, M. Newman,
                      A.-L. Barabási, and D. J. Watts (Eds.). Princeton University Press, 195–206.
                 Famili, A., Shen, W. M., Weber, R., and Simoudis, E. (1997). “Data preprocessing and
                      intelligent data analysis.” Intelligent Data Analysis, 1(1–4), 3–23.
                 Fayyad, U., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., and Smyth, P. (1996). “From data mining to
                      knowledge discovery in databases.” AI Magazine 17(3), 37.
                 Feily, M., Shahrestani, A., and Ramadass, S. (2009, June). “A survey of botnet and
                      botnet detection.” Third International Conference on Emerging Security
                      Information, Systems and Technologies, 2009. SECURWARE’09. IEEE, 268–273.
                 Ferebee, D., Dasgupta, D., and Wu, Q. (2012, December). “A cyber-security storm
                      map.” 2012 International Conference on Cyber Security (CyberSecurity). IEEE,
                      93–102.
                 FireEye. (2019). “Mandiant Purple Team Assessment data sheet.” www.ﬁreeye.com/
                      content/dam/ﬁreeye-www/services/pdfs/pf/ms/ds-purple-team-assessment.pdf.
                      Last accessed November 2021.
                 Fischer, P., Lea, S. E., and Evans, K. M. (2013). “Why do individuals respond to
                      fraudulent scam communications and lose money? The psychological determin-
                      ants of scam compliance.” Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 43(10),
                      2060–2072.
                 Fodor, I. K. (2002). “A survey of dimension reduction techniques.” Center for Applied
                      Scientiﬁc Computing, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 9, 1–18.
                 Frank, E., and Witten, H. I. (1998). “Generating accurate rule sets without global
                      optimization.” Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Machine
                      Learning (ICML’98), Madison, Wisconsin, E. Frank and I. H. Witten (Eds.).
                      Morgan Kaufmann, 144–151.
                 Frank, L., Greitzer, R., and Hohimer, E. (2011, Summer). “Modeling human behavior
                      to anticipate insider attacks.” Journal of Strategic Security: Strategic Security in
                      Cyber Age, 4(2), 25–48.
                 Freeman, L. C. (1978). “Centrality in social networks conceptual clariﬁcation.” Social
                      Networks, 1(3), 215–239.
                 Frei, S., May, M., Fiedler, U., and Plattner, B. (2006, September). “Large-scale
                      vulnerability analysis.” Proceedings of the 2006 SIGCOMM Workshop on
                      Large-Scale Attack Defense. ACM, 131–138.
                 Freund, Y. and Schapire, R. E. (1996). “Experiments with a new boosting algorithm.”
                      Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Machine Learning. Morgan
                      Kaufmann, 148–146.
                 Gandhi, R., Sharma, A., Mahoney, W., et al. (2011). “Dimensions of cyber-attacks:
                      cultural, social, economic, and political.” IEEE Technology and Society Magazine,
                      30(1), 28–38.
                 Garcia, S., Luengo, J., Sáez, J. A., Lopez, V., and Herrera, F. (2013). “A survey
                      of discretization techniques: taxonomy and empirical analysis in supervised
                      learning.” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 25(4),
                      734–750.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  172                                          References


                  Garcia-Teodoro, P., Diaz-Verdejo, J., Maciá-Fernández, G., and Vázquez, E. (2009).
                       “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: techniques, systems and chal-
                       lenges.” Computers and Security, 28(1), 18–28.
                  Garg, A., Upadhyaya, S., and Kwiat, K. (2013). “A user behavior monitoring and
                       proﬁling scheme for masquerade detection.” Handbook of Statistics: Machine
                       Learning: Theory and Applications, 31, 353.
                  Geenens, P. (2020). “FireEye hack turns into a global supply chain attack.” https://
                       securityboulevard.com/2020/12/ﬁreeye-hack-turns-into-a-global-supply-chain-
                       attack/. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Gennari, J. H., Langley, P., and Fisher, D. (1989). “Models of incremental concept
                       formation.” Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 40(1–3), 11–61.
                  Gesenhues, A. (2014). “Google Dorking: it’s all fun & games until the hackers show
                       up.”        http://searchengineland.com/google-dorking-fun-games-hackers-show-
                       202191. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Glaz, J., Naus, J., and Wallenstein, S. (2001). Scan Statistics. Springer Verlag.
                  Goldberg, L. R. (1990). “An alternative ‘description of personality’: the big-ﬁve factor
                       structure.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(6), 1216.
                  Golnabi, K., Min, R. K,. Khan, L., and Al-Shaer, E. (2006). “Analysis of ﬁrewall policy
                       rules using data mining techniques.” 2006 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and
                       Management Symposium, NOMS 2006. IEEE/IFIP, 205–315.
                  Goodfellow, I. (2016). “NIPS 2016 tutorial: generative adversarial networks.”
                       arXiv:1701.00160.
                  Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., et al. (2014). “Generative adversarial
                       nets.” Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Neural Information
                       Processing Systems – Volume 2 (NIPS'14). MIT Press, 2672–2680.
                  Gopalani, S. and Arora, R. (2015). “Comparing Apache Spark and Map Reduce with
                       performance analysis using K-means.” International Journal of Computer
                       Applications, 113(1), 8–11.
                  Gormley, T., Reingold, N., Torng, E., and Westbrook, J. (2000). “Generating adversar-
                       ies for request-answer games.” Proceedings of the 11th ACM-SIAM Symposium on
                       Discrete Algorithms. ACM-SIAM, 564–565.
                  Grazioli, S. (2004). “Where did they go wrong? An analysis of the failure of know-
                       ledgeable internet consumers to detect deception over the internet.” Group
                       Decision and Negotiation, 13(2), 149–172.
                  Grifﬁth, D. A. (1987). Spatial Autocorrelation: A Primer. Association of American
                       Geographers.
                  Grover, A., Gholap, J. Janeja, V. P., et al. (2015). “SQL-like big data environments:
                       case study in clinical trial analytics.” Proceedings of 2015 IEEE International
                       Conference on Big Data, 2680–2689.
                  Gu, G., Zhang, J., and Lee, W. (2008, February). “BotSniffer: detecting botnet com-
                       mand and control channels in network trafﬁc.” Proceedings of the 15th Annual
                       Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, vol. 8, 1–18.
                  Guardian, The. (2016). “Norway, the country where you can see everyone’s tax
                       returns.” www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/apr/11/when-it-comes-to-tax-
                       transparency-norway-leads-the-ﬁeld. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Guha, S., Rastogi, R., and Shim, K. (1998, June). “CURE: an efﬁcient clustering
                       algorithm for large databases.” ACM Sigmod Record, 27(2), 73–84.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              References                               173


                 Guha, S., Rastogi, R., and Shim, K. (2000). “ROCK: a robust clustering algorithm for
                      categorical attributes.” Information Systems, 25(5), 345–366.
                 Gupta, H., Sural, S., Atluri, V., and Vaidya, J. (2016). “Deciphering text from touchsc-
                      reen key taps.” IFIP Annual Conference on Data and Applications Security and
                      Privacy. Springer International Publishing, 3–18.
                 Guralnik, V. and Srivastava, J. (1999). “Event detection from time series data.”
                      KDD’99: Proceedings of the Fifth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
                      Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 33–42.
                 Haining, R. (2003). Spatial Data Analysis: Theory and Practice. Cambridge University Press.
                 Halevi, T., Lewis, J., and Memon, N. (2013, May). “A pilot study of cyber security and
                      privacy related behavior and personality traits.” Proceedings of the 22nd
                      International Conference on World Wide Web Companion. International World
                      Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 737–744.
                 Halliday, J. (2010, September 24). “Stuxnet worm is the ‘work of a national govern-
                      ment agency’.” www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2010/sep/24/stuxnet-worm-
                      national-agency. Last accessed November 2021.
                 Han, J., and Fu, Y. (1995, September). “Discovery of multiple-level association rules
                      from large databases.” VLDB’95, Proceedings of 21th International Conference
                      on Very Large Data Bases, U. Dayal, P. Gray, and S. Nishio (Eds.). Morgan
                      Kaufmann, 420–431.
                 Han, J., Pei, J., and Yin, Y. (2000, May). “Mining frequent patterns without candidate
                      generation.” ACM Sigmod Record, 29(2), 1–12.
                 Hellerstein, J. L., Ma, S., and Perng, C.-S. (2002). “Discovering actionable patterns in
                      event data.” IBM Systems Journal, 41(3), 475–493.
                 Heron, S. (2007). “The rise and rise of the keyloggers.” Network Security 2007(6), 4–6.
                 Hinneburg, A., and Keim, D. A. (1998, August). “An efﬁcient approach to clustering in
                      large multimedia databases with noise.” KDD, 98, 58–65.
                 Hoffman, S. (2011). “Cyber attack forces internet shut down for DOE lab, on July 8.”
                      www.crn.com/news/security/231001261/cyber-attack-forces-internet-shut-down-
                      for-doe-lab.htm. Last accessed February 23, 2014.
                 Hong, J., Liu, C. C., and Govindarasu, M. (2014). “Integrated anomaly detection for cyber
                      security of the substations.” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 5(4), 1643–1653.
                 Hu, M. and Liu, B. (2004, August). “Mining and summarizing customer reviews.”
                      Proceedings of the Tenth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
                      Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 168–177.
                 Hu, Z., Baynard, C. W., Hu, H., and Fazio, M. (2015, June). “GIS mapping and spatial
                      analysis of cybersecurity attacks on a Florida university.” 2015 23rd International
                      Conference on Geoinformatics. IEEE, 1–5.
                 Hu, Z., Wang, H., Zhu, J., et al. (2014). “Discovery of rare sequential topic patterns in
                      document stream.” Proceedings of the 2014 SIAM International Conference on
                      Data Mining, 533–541.
                 Huang, Y., Pei, J., and Xiong, H. (2006). “Mining co-location patterns with rare events
                      from spatial data sets.” GeoInformatica, 10(3), 239–260.
                 Hussain, M., Al-Haiqi, A., Zaidan, A. A., Zaidan, B. B., Kiah, M. M., Anuar, N. B., and
                      Abdulnabi, M. (2016). “The rise of keyloggers on smartphones: A survey and
                      insight into motion-based tap inference attacks.” Pervasive and Mobile
                      Computing, 25, 1–25.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  174                                          References


                  Ingols, K., Lippmann, R., & Piwowarski, K. (2006, December). “Practical attack graph
                        generation for network defense.” Computer Security Applications Conference,
                        2006. ACSAC’06. 22nd Annual. IEEE, 121–130.
                  Iyengar, V. S. (2004). “On detecting space-time clusters.” KDD’04: Proceedings of the
                        Tenth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
                        Data Mining. ACM Press, 587–592.
                  Jain, A. K. (2010). “Data clustering: 50 years beyond K-means.” Pattern Recognition
                        Letters, 31(8), 651–666.
                  Jakobsson, M. (2007). “The human factor in phishing.” Privacy & Security of
                        Consumer Information, 7(1), 1–19.
                  Janeja, V. P. (2019). Do No Harm: An Ethical Data Life Cycle, Sci on the Fly. AAAS.
                  Janeja, V. P., Adam, N. R., Atluri, V., and Vaidya, J. (2010). “Spatial neighborhood
                        based anomaly detection in sensor datasets.” Data Mining and Knowledge
                        Discovery, 20(2), 221–258.
                  Janeja, V. P. and Atluri, V. (2005). “LS3: A linear semantic scan statistic technique for
                        detecting anomalous windows. Proceedings of the 2005 ACM Symposium on
                        Applied Computing, 493–497.
                  Janeja, V. P. and Atluri, V. (2005). “FS3: A random walk based free-form spatial scan
                        statistic for anomalous window detection.” Fifth IEEE International Conference
                        on Data Mining (ICDM’05). IEEE Computer Society, 661–664.
                  Janeja, V. P, and Atluri, V. (2008). “Random walks to identify anomalous free-form
                        spatial scan windows.” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
                        20(10), 1378–1392.
                  Janeja, V. P. and Atluri, V. (2009). “Spatial outlier detection in heterogeneous neigh-
                        borhoods.” Intelligent Data Analysis, 13(1), 85–107.
                  Janeja, V. P., Azari, A., Namayanja, J. M., and Heilig, B. (2014, October).
                        “B-dids: Mining anomalies in a Big-distributed Intrusion Detection System.”
                        In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) (pp. 32–34).
                        IEEE.
                  Jarvis, R. A. and Patrick, E. A. (1973). “Clustering using a similarity measure based
                        on shared near neighbors.” IEEE Transactions on Computers, 100(11),
                        1025–1034.
                  Jha, S., Sheyner, O., and Wing, J. (2002). “Two formal analyses of attack graphs.” Computer
                        Security Foundations Workshop, 2002. Proceedings. 15th IEEE. IEEE, 49–63.
                  Ji, Y., Zhang, X., Ji, S., Luo, X., and Wang, T. (2018, October). “Model-reuse attacks
                        on deep learning systems.” Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
                        Computer and Communications Security. ACM, 349–363.
                  Joachims, T. (2002, July). “Optimizing search engines using clickthrough data.”
                        Proceedings of the Eighth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
                        Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 133–142.
                  John, O. P. and Srivastava, S. (1999). “The big-ﬁve trait taxonomy: history,
                        measurement, and theoretical perspectives.” Handbook of Personality:
                        Theory and Research, vol. 2., L. A. Pervin and O. P. John (Eds.). Guilford
                        Press, 102–138.
                  Kang, I., Kim, T., and Li, K. (1997). “A spatial data mining method by Delaunay
                        triangulation.” Proceedings of the 5th ACM International Workshop on Advances
                        in Geographic Information Systems. ACM, 35–39.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              References                           175


                 Kang, U., Tsourakakis, C., Appel, A., Faloutsos, C., and Leskovec, J. (2010). “Radius
                      plots for mining tera-byte scale graphs: algorithms, patterns, and observations.”
                      Proceedings of the 2010 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM),
                      548–558.
                 Kang, U., Tsourakakis, C., and Faloutsos, C. (2009). “Pegasus: a peta-scale graph
                      mining system – implementation and observations.” 2009 Ninth IEEE
                      International Conference on Data Mining, 229–238.
                 Karypis, G., Han, E. H., and Kumar, V. (1999). “Chameleon: hierarchical clustering
                      using dynamic modeling.” Computer, 32(8), 68–75.
                 Kaspersky. (2020). “Cyberthreat real-time map.” https://cybermap.kaspersky.com/.
                      Last accessed November 2020.
                 Kath, O., Schreiner, R., and Favaro, J. (2009, September). “Safety, security, and
                      software reuse: a model-based approach.” Proceedings of the Fourth
                      International Workshop in Software Reuse and Safety. www.researchgate.net/
                      publication/228709911_Safety_Security_and_Software_Reuse_A_Model-Based_
                      Approach. Last accessed November 2021.
                 Kato, K. and Klyuev, V. (2017, August). “Development of a network intrusion detec-
                      tion system using Apache Hadoop and Spark.” 2017 IEEE Conference on
                      Dependable and Secure Computing. IEEE, 416–423.
                 Katsini, C., Abdrabou, Y., Raptis, G. E., Khamis, M., and Alt, F. (2020, April). “The
                      role of eye gaze in security and privacy applications: survey and future HCI
                      research directions.” Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human
                      Factors in Computing Systems, 1–21.
                 Kaufman, L. and Rousseeuw, P. (1987). Clustering by Means of Medoids. North-
                      Holland.
                 Kaufman, L. and Rousseeuw, P. J. (1990). Finding Groups in Data: An Introduction to
                      Cluster Analysis. John Wiley & Sons.
                 Keim, D. A., Mansmann, F., Panse, C., Schneidewind, J., and Sips, M. (2005).
                      “Mail explorer – spatial and temporal exploration of electronic mail.”
                      Proceedings of the Seventh Joint Eurographics/IEEE VGTC Conference on
                      Visualization, 247–254.
                 Keim, D. A., Mansmann, F., and Schreck, T. (2005). “Analyzing electronic mail using
                      temporal, spatial, and content-based visualization techniques.” Informatik 2005–
                      Informatik Live!, vol. 67, 434–438.
                 Keogh. E., Lin. J., and Fu. A. (2005). “Hot sax: efﬁciently ﬁnding the most unusual
                      time series subsequence.” Fifth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining
                      (ICDM'05), doi: 10.1109/ICDM.2005.79.
                 Kianmehr, K. and Koochakzadeh, N. (2012). “Learning from socio-economic charac-
                      teristics of IP geo-locations for cybercrime prediction.” International Journal of
                      Business Intelligence and Data Mining, 7(1/2), 21–39
                 Kim, S., Edmonds, W., and Nwanze, N. 2014. “On GPU accelerated tuning for a
                      payload anomaly-based network intrusion detection scheme.” Proceedings of the
                      9th Annual Cyber and Information Security Research Conference (CISR ‘14).
                      ACM, 1–4. doi: 10.1145/2602087.2602093.
                 Kim Zetter Security. (2013). “Someone’s been siphoning data through a huge security
                      hole in the internet.” www.wired.com/2013/12/bgp-hijacking-belarus-iceland/.
                      Last accessed December 2016.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  176                                          References


                  Knorr, E. M., Ng, R. T., and Tucakov, V. (2000). “Distance-based outliers: algorithms
                       and applications.” VLDB Journal – The International Journal on Very Large Data
                       Bases, 8(3–4), 237–253.
                  Koh, Y. S. and Ravana, S. D. (2016). “Unsupervised rare pattern mining: a survey.”
                       ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD), 10(4), 45.
                  Koh, Y. S. and Rountree, N. (2005). “Finding sporadic rules using apriori-inverse.”
                       PAKDD (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), vol. 3518. T. B. Ho, D. Cheung,
                       and H. Liu (Eds.). Springer, 97–106.
                  Koike, H. and Ohno, K. (2004). “SnortView: visualization system of snort logs.”
                       Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Workshop on Visualization and Data Mining for
                       Computer Security (VizSEC/DMSEC '04). ACM, 143–147. doi: 10.1145/
                       1029208.1029232.
                  Kosner, A. W. (2012). “Cyber security fails as 3.6 million social security numbers
                       breached in South Carolina.” www.forbes.com/sites/anthonykosner/2012/10/27/
                       cyber-security-fails-as-3-6-million-social-security-numbers-breached-in-south-car
                       olina/?sh=5f3637784e9e. Last accessed March 2021.
                  Kotsiantis, S. and Pintelas, P. (2004). “Recent advances in clustering: a brief
                       survey.” WSEAS Transactions on Information Science and Applications, 1(1),
                       73–81.
                  Kotsiantis, S. B., Zaharakis, I. D., and Pintelas, P. E. (2006). “Machine learning: a
                       review of classiﬁcation and combining techniques.” Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review,
                       26(3), 159–190.
                  Kulldorff, M. (1997). “A spatial scan statistic.” Communications of Statistics – Theory
                       Meth., 26(6), 1481–1496.
                  Kulldorff, M., Athas, W., Feuer, E., Miller, B., and Key, C. (1998). “Evaluating cluster
                       alarms: a space-time scan statistic and brain cancer in Los Alamos.” American
                       Journal of Public Health, 88(9), 1377–1380.
                  Kurgan, L. A. and Musilek, P. (2006, March). “A survey of knowledge discovery and
                       data mining process models.” Knowledge Engineering Review, 21(1) 1–24. doi: 10
                       .1017/S0269888906000737.
                  L24. (2016). “First national cyber security exercise Cyber Shield.” http://l24.lt/en/
                       society/item/150489-ﬁrst-national-cyber-security-exercise-cyber-shield-2016-will-
                       be-held. Last accessed April 12, 2017.
                  LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., and Hinton, G. (2015). “Deep learning.” Nature, 521(7553),
                       436.
                  Lee, G., Yun, U., Ryang, H., and Kim, D. (2015). “Multiple minimum support-based
                       rare graph pattern mining considering symmetry feature-based growth technique
                       and the differing importance of graph elements.” Symmetry, 7(3), 1151.
                  Leskovec, J. (2008). “Dynamics of large networks.” Dissertation. ProQuest
                       Dissertations Publishing.
                  Leskovec, J., Chakrabarti, D., Kleinberg, J., and Faloutsos, C. (2005). “Realistic,
                       mathematically tractable graph generation and evolution, using Kronecker multi-
                       plication.” European Conference on Principles and Practice of Knowledge
                       Discovery in Databases: PKDD 2005, A. M. Jorge, L. Torgo, P. Brazdil, R.
                       Camacho, and J. Gama (Eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3721.
                       Springer. doi: 10.1007/11564126_17.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              References                              177


                 Leskovec, J. and Faloutsos, C. (2007). “Scalable modeling of real graphs using
                       kronecker multiplication.” International Conference on Machine Learning
                       (ICML ‘07). ACM, 497–504. doi: 10.1145/1273496.1273559.
                 Leskovec, J., Kleinberg, J., and Faloutsos, C. (2005, August). “Graphs over time:
                       densiﬁcation laws, shrinking diameters and possible explanations.” Proceedings
                       of the Eleventh ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
                       in Data Mining. ACM, 177–187.
                 Leskovec, J., Kleinberg, J., and Faloutsos, C. (2007). “Graph evolution: densiﬁcation
                       and shrinking diameters.” ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data
                       (TKDD), 1, 2-es. doi: 10.1145/1217299.1217301.
                 Lewis, D. M. and Janeja, V. P. (2011). “An empirical evaluation of similarity coefﬁ-
                       cients for binary valued data.” International Journal of Data Warehousing and
                       Mining (IJDWM), 7(2), 44–66. doi: 10.4018/jdwm.2011040103.
                 Lewis, J. A. (2005). “Computer espionage, Titan Rain and China.” http://csis.org/ﬁles/
                       media/csis/pubs/051214_china_titan_rain.pdf. Last accessed March 2020.
                 Leyden, J. (2012, March 29). “NSA’s top spook blames China for RSA hack.” www.theregister
                       .co.uk/2012/03/29/nsa_blames_china_rsa_hack/. Last accessed November 2021.
                 Li, J., Dou, D., Wu, Z., Kim, S., and Agarwal, V. (2005). “An Internet routing forensics
                       framework for discovering rules of abnormal BGP events.” ACM SIGCOMM
                       Computer Communication Review, 35(5), 55–66.
                 Li, X., Wang, L., & Sung, E. (2008). AdaBoost with SVM-based component classiﬁers.
                       Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 21(5), 785–795.
                 Lin, J., Keogh, E., Lonardi, S., and Chiu, B. (2003). “A symbolic representation of time
                       series, with implications for streaming algorithms.” DMKD’03: Proceedings of the
                       8th ACM SIGMOD Workshop on Research Issues in Data Mining and Knowledge
                       Discovery. ACM, 2–11.
                 Lin, Q., Adepu, S., Verwer, S., and Mathur, A. (2018, May). “TABOR: a graphical
                       model-based approach for anomaly detection in industrial control
                       systems.” Proceedings of the 2018 on Asia Conference on Computer and
                       Communications Security (ASIACCS). ACM, 525–536. doi: 10.1145/
                       3196494.3196546.
                 Liu, B., Hsu, W., and Ma, Y. (1999a). “Mining association rules with multiple
                       minimum supports.” Proceedings of the 5th ACM SIGKDD International
                       Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 337–341.
                 Liu, H., Hussain, F., Tan, C. L., and Dash, M. (2002). “Discretization: an enabling
                       technique.” Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 6(4), 393–423.
                 Liu, Z., Wang, C., and Chen, S. (2008). “Correlating multi-step attack and constructing
                       attack scenarios based on attack pattern modeling.” International Conference on
                       Information Security and Assurance, 2008. ISA 2008. IEEE, 214–219.
                 Limmer, T. and Dressler, F. (2010). “Dialog-based payload aggregation for intrusion detec-
                       tion.” Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications
                       Security (CCS ‘10). ACM, 708–710. doi: 10.1145/1866307.1866405.
                 Lockheed Martin. (2015). “Gaining the advantage, applying Cyber Kill Chain® meth-
                       odology to network defense 2015.” Technical report. www.lockheedmartin.com/
                       content/dam/lockheed-martin/rms/documents/cyber/Gaining_the_Advantage_Cyber_
                       Kill_Chain.pdf. Last accessed November 2021.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  178                                          References


                  Luengo, J., García, S., and Herrera, F. (2012). “On the choice of the best imputation
                      methods for missing values considering three groups of classiﬁcation methods.”
                      Knowledge and Information Systems, 32(1), 77–108.
                  Ma, S. and Hellerstein, J. L. (2001a). “Mining mutually dependent patterns.”
                      Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM’01),
                      San Jose, CA, November 2001. IEEE, 409–416.
                  Ma, S. and Hellerstein, J. L. (2001b). “Mining partially periodic event patterns
                      with unknown periods.” Proceedings of the 2001 International Conference
                      on Data Engineering (ICDE’01), Heidelberg, Germany, April 2001. IEEE,
                      205–214.
                  MacQueen, J. (1967, June). “Some methods for classiﬁcation and analysis of
                      multivariate observations.” Proceedings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium on
                      Mathematical Statistics and Probability. University of California Press, vol. 1,
                      no. 14, 281–297.
                  Mandiant. (2013). “APT1: exposing one of China’s cyber espionage units.” www
                      .mandiant.com/resources/apt1-exposing-one-of-chinas-cyber-espionage-units.
                      Last accessed November 2021.
                  Manyika, J., Chui, M., Brown, B., et al. (2011). Big data: The next frontier for
                      innovation, competition, and productivity. McKinsey Global Institute.
                  Maron, M. and Kuhns, J. (1960). “On relevance, probabilistic indexing, and infor-
                      mation retrieval.” Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery 7,
                      216–244.
                  Massicotte, F., Whalen, T., and Bilodeau, C. (2003). “Network mapping tool for real-
                      time security analysis.” RTO IST Symposium on Real Time Intrusion Detection,
                      12-1–12-10.
                  McAfee. (2010). “Protecting your critical assets.” www.wired.com/images_blogs/
                      threatlevel/2010/03/operationaurora_wp_0310_fnl.pdf. Last accessed November
                      2021.
                  McAfee. (2011). “Global energy cyberattacks: “Night Dragon.” www.heartland.org/
                      publications-resources/publications/global-energy-cyberattacks-night-dragon. Last
                      accessed November 2021.
                  McAfee. (2018). “The economic impact of cybercrime – no slowing down.” McAfee,
                      Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). www.mcafee.com/enter
                      prise/en-us/solutions/lp/economics-cybercrime.html.
                  McBride, M., Carter, L., and Warkentin, M. (2012). “Exploring the role of
                      individual employee characteristics and personality on employee compliance with
                      cybersecurity policies.” RTI International Institute for Homeland Security
                      Solutions, 5(1), 1.
                  McGuire, M. P., Janeja, V.P., and Gangopadhyay, A. (2008, August). “Spatiotemporal
                      neighborhood discovery for sensor data.” International Workshop on Knowledge
                      Discovery from Sensor Data. Springer, 203–225.
                  McGuire, M. P., Janeja, V. P., and Gangopadhyay, A. (2012). “Mining sensor datasets
                      with spatio-temporal neighborhoods.” Journal of Spatial Information Science
                      (JOSIS), 2013(6), 1–42.
                  Meng, X., Bradley, J., Yavuz, B., et al. (2016). “Mllib: machine learning in Apache
                      Spark.” Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1), 1235–1241.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              References                             179


                 Mezzour, G. (2015). “Assessing the global cyber and biological threat.” Thesis,
                      Carnegie Mellon University. doi: 10.1184/R1/6714857.v1.
                 Miller, H. J. (2004). “Tobler’s ﬁrst law and spatial analysis.” Annals of the Association
                      of American Geographers, 94(2), 284–289.
                 Miller, W. B. (2014). “Classifying and cataloging cyber-security incidents within
                      cyber-physical systems.” Doctoral dissertation, Brigham Young University.
                 Misal, V., Janeja, V. P., Pallaprolu, S. C., Yesha, Y., and Chintalapati, R. (2016,
                      December). “Iterative uniﬁed clustering in big data.” 2016 IEEE International
                      Conference on Big Data (Big Data). IEEE, 3412–3421.
                 Mitra, B., Sural, S., Vaidya, J., and Atluri, V. (2016). “A survey of role mining.” ACM
                      Computing Surveys (CSUR), 48(4), 1–37.
                 MITRE ATT&CK. (2020). ATT&CK Matrix for Enterprise. https://attack.mitre.org/.
                      Last accessed November 2021.
                 Molina, L. C., Belanche, L., and Nebot, À. (2002). “Feature selection algorithms: a
                      survey and experimental evaluation.” 2002 IEEE International Conference on
                      Data Mining, 2002. ICDM 2003. Proceedings. IEEE, 306–313.
                 Namayanja, J. M. and Janeja, V. P. (2014, October). “Change detection in temporally
                      evolving computer networks: a big data framework.” 2014 IEEE International
                      Conference on Big Data. IEEE, 54–61.
                 Namayanja, J. M. and Janeja, V. P. (2015, May). “Change detection in evolving computer
                      networks: changes in densiﬁcation and diameter over time.” 2015 IEEE International
                      Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI). IEEE, 185–187.
                 Namayanja, J. M. and Janeja, V. P. (2017). “Characterization of evolving networks for
                      cybersecurity.” Information Fusion for Cyber-Security Analytics, I. Alsmadi, G.
                      Karabatis, and A. Aleroud (Eds.). Studies in Computational Intelligence, vol. 691.
                      Springer International Publishing, 111–127. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-44257-0_5.
                 Namayanja, J. M. and Janeja, V. P. (2019). “Change detection in large evolving
                      networks.” International Journal of Data Warehousing and Mining, 15(2), 62–79.
                 Naseer, S., Saleem, Y., Khalid, S., et al. (2018). “Enhanced network anomaly detection
                      based on deep neural networks.” IEEE Access, 6, 48231–48246.
                 Naus, J. (1965). “The distribution of the size of the maximum cluster of points on the
                      line.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 60, 532–538.
                 Neill, D., Moore, A., Pereira, F., and Mitchell, T. (2005). “Detecting signiﬁcant
                      multidimensional spatial clusters.” Advances in Neural Information Processing
                      Systems 17, MIT Press, 969–976.
                 Netscout. (2020). “A global threat visualization.” www.netscout.com/global-threat-
                      intelligence. Last accessed November 2020.
                 Ng, R. T. and Han, J. (1994, September). “Efﬁcient and effective clustering methods for
                      spatial data mining.” Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Very
                      Large Data Bases (VLDB ’94). Morgan Kaufmann , 144–155.
                 Ng, R. T., Lakshmanan, L. V. S., Han, J., and Pang, A. 1998. “Exploratory mining and
                      pruning optimizations of constrained associations rules.” Proceedings of the
                      1998 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data
                      (SIGMOD ’98). ACM,13–24.
                 Nguyen, T. T. and Janapa Reddi, V. (2019). “Deep reinforcement learning for cyber
                      security.” arXiv:1906.05799.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  180                                          References


                  Nicosia, V., Tang, J., Mascolo, C., et al. (2013). “Graph metrics for temporal net-
                       works.” Temporal Networks: Understanding Complex Systems, P. Holme and J.
                       Saramäki (Eds.). Springer, 15–40. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-36461-7_2.
                  NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology). (2015). NIST Big Data
                       Interoperability Framework (NBDIF), V1.0. https://bigdatawg.nist.gov/V1_
                       output_docs.php. Last accessed April 12, 2017.
                  NIST. (2017). National vulnerability database. http://nvd.nist.gov/. Last accessed
                       September 2017.
                  Nunes, D. S., Zhang, P., and Silva, J. S. (2015). “A survey on human-in-the-loop
                       applications towards an internet of all.” IEEE Communications Surveys and
                       Tutorials, 17(2), 944–965.
                  O’Gorman, G. and McDonald, G. (2012). “The Elderwood Project.” www.infopoint-
                       security.de/medien/the-elderwood-project.pdf. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Ohm, M., Sykosch, A., and Meier, M. (2020, August). “Towards detection of software
                       supply chain attacks by forensic artifacts.” Proceedings of the 15th International
                       Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES ’20). ACM, 1–6. doi:
                       10.1145/3407023.3409183.
                  Openshaw, S. (1987). “A mark 1 geographical analysis machine for the
                       automated analysis of point data sets.” International Journal of GIS, 1(4),
                       335–358.
                  OSQuery. (2016). https://osquery.io/. Last accessed March 2020.
                  Otoum, S., Kantarci, B., and Mouftah, H. (2019, May). “Empowering reinforcement
                       learning on big sensed data for intrusion detection.” 2019–2019 IEEE
                       International Conference on Communications (ICC). IEEE, 1–7.
                  Paganini, P. (2014). “Turkish government is hijacking the IP for popular DNS pro-
                       viders.”      http://securityaffairs.co/wordpress/23565/intelligence/turkish-govern
                       ment-hijacking-dns.html. Last accessed June 2017.
                  Parekh, J. J., Wang, K., and Stolfo, S. J. (2006). “Privacy-preserving payload-based
                       correlation for accurate malicious trafﬁc detection.” Proceedings of the
                       2006 SIGCOMM Workshop on Large-Scale Attack Defense (LSAD ‘06). ACM,
                       99–106. doi: 10.1145/1162666.1162667.
                  Patcha, A. and Park, J. M. (2007). “An overview of anomaly detection techniques:
                       existing solutions and latest technological trends.” Computer Networks, 51(12),
                       3448–3470.
                  Paul, R. J. and Taylor, S. J. E. (2002). “Improving the model development process:
                       what use is model reuse: is there a crook at the end of the rainbow?” Proceedings
                       of the 34th Conference on Winter Simulation: Exploring New Frontiers (WSC
                       ‘02). Winter Simulation Conference, 648–652.
                  Pei, J. and Han, J. (2000). “Can we push more constraints into frequent pattern
                       mining?” Proceedings of the Sixth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
                       Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM Press, 350–354.
                  Peña, J. M., Lozano, J. A., and Larrañaga, P. (2002). “Learning recursive Bayesian
                       multinets for data clustering by means of constructive induction.” Machine
                       Learning, 47(1), 63–89.
                  Pfeiffer, T., Theuerling, H., and Kauer, M. (2013). “Click me if you can! How do users
                       decide whether to follow a call to action in an online message?” Human Aspects of
                       Information Security, Privacy, and Trust. HAS 2013, L. Marinos and I.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              References                            181


                       Askoxylakis (Eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8030. Springer,
                       155–166. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-39345-7_17.
                 Phillips, G., Shenker, S., and Tangmunarunkit, H. (1999). “Scaling of multicast trees:
                       comments on the Chuang–Sirbu scaling law.” Proceedings of the Conference on
                       Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer
                       Communication (SIGCOMM ’99). ACM, 41–51. doi: 10.1145/316188.316205.
                 Picard, R. W. (2003). “Affective computing: challenges.” International Journal of
                       Human-Computer Studies, 59(1), 55–64.
                 Press, S. J. and Wilson, S. (1978). “Choosing between logistic regression and discrimin-
                       ant analysis.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 73(364), 699–705.
                 Qiu, J., Gao, L., Ranjan, S., and Nucci, A. (2007, September). “Detecting bogus BGP
                       route information: Going beyond preﬁx hijacking.” In 2007 Third International
                       Conference on Security and Privacy in Communications Networks and the
                       Workshops-SecureComm 2007 (pp. 381–390). IEEE.
                 Quader, F., and Janeja, V. (2014). Computational Models to Capture Human Behavior
                       In Cybersecurity Attacks. Academy of Science and Engineering (ASE).
                 Quader, F., and Janeja, V. P. (2021). Insights into Organizational Security Readiness:
                       Lessons Learned from Cyber-Attack Case Studies. Journal of Cybersecurity and
                       Privacy, 1(4), 638–659.
                 Quader, F., Janeja, V., and Stauffer, J. (2015, May). “Persistent threat pattern discov-
                       ery.” 2015 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security
                       Informatics (ISI). IEEE, 179–181.
                 Quinlan, J. R. (1979). Discovering Rules by Induction from Large Collections of
                       Examples: Expert Systems in the Micro Electronic Age. Edinburgh University
                       Press.
                 Quinlan, J. R. (1993). C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann.
                 Ramaswamy, S., Rastogi, R., and Shim, K. (2000, May). “Efﬁcient algorithms for
                       mining outliers from large data sets.” ACM Sigmod Record, 29(2), 427–438).
                 Rashid, F. Y. (2013, April 4). “DHS: spear phishing campaign targeted 11 energy
                       sector ﬁrms.” www.securityweek.com/dhs-spear-phishing-campaign-targeted-11-
                       energy-sector-ﬁrms. Last accessed February 23, 2014.
                 Raveh, A. and Tapiero, C. S. (1980). “Periodicity, constancy, heterogeneity and the
                       categories of qualitative time series.” Ecology, 61(3), 715–719.
                 Revow, M., Williams, C. K., and Hinton, G. E. (1996). “Using generative models for
                       handwritten digit recognition.” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
                       Machine Intelligence, 18(6), 592–606.
                 Risk Based Security. (2014). “A breakdown and analysis of the December, 2014 Sony
                       hack.” www.riskbasedsecurity.com/2014/12/05/a-breakdown-and-analysis-of-the-
                       december-2014-sony-hack/. Last accessed November 2021.
                 Rivest, R. L. and Vuillemin, J. (1976). “On recognizing graph properties from adja-
                       cency matrices.” Theoretical Computer Science, 3(3), 371–384.
                 Roddick, J. F. and Hornsby, K., (Eds.). (2001). Temporal, Spatial, and Spatio-
                       Temporal Data Mining, First International Workshop TSDM 2000 Lyon,
                       France, September 12, 2000, Revised Papers. Lecture Notes in Computer
                       Science, vol. 2007. Springer-Verlag.
                 Roddick, J. F., Hornsby, K., and Spiliopoulou, M. (2001). “An updated bibliography of
                       temporal, spatial, and spatio-temporal data mining research.” Temporal, Spatial,




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  182                                          References


                       and Spatio-Temporal Data Mining, First International Workshop TSDM 2000
                       Lyon, France, September 12, 2000, Revised Papers. Springer-Verlag, 147–164.
                  Roddick, J. F. and Spiliopoulou, M. (1999). “A bibliography of temporal, spatial and
                       spatio-temporal data mining research.” SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 1(1),
                       34–38.
                  Roman, J. The Hadoop Ecosystem Table. https://hadoopecosystemtable.github.io/. Last
                       accessed April 13, 2017.
                  Rousseeuw, P. J. (1987). “Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and
                       validation of cluster analysis.” Computational and Applied Mathematics. 20,
                       53–65.
                  Sadhwani, H. (2020). “Introduction to threat hunting.” https://medium.com/@hirensadh
                       wani2619/introduction-to-threat-hunting-8dff62ba52ca. Last accessed November
                       2021.
                  Sainani, H. (2018). “IP reputation scoring – a perspective on clustering with meta-
                       features augmentation.” Thesis.
                  Sainani, H., Namayanja, J. M., Sharma, G., Misal, V., and Janeja, V. P. (2020). “IP
                       reputation scoring with geo-contextual feature augmentation.” ACM Transactions
                       on Management Information Systems (TMIS), 11(4), 26:1–26:29.
                  Samuel, A. W. (2004). “Hactivism and future of political participation.” www.alexan-
                       drasamuel.com/dissertation/pdfs/Samuel-Hacktivism-entire.pdf. Last accessed
                       November 2021.
                  Sander, J., Ester, M., Kriegel, H. P., and Xu, X. (1998). “Density-based clustering in
                       spatial databases: the algorithm GDBSCAN and its applications.” Data Mining
                       and Knowledge Discovery, 2(2), 169–194.
                  Sandoval, G. (2008). “YouTube blames Pakistan network for 2-hour outage.” www
                       .cnet.com/news/youtube-blames-pakistan-network-for-2-hour-outage/.           Last
                       accessed June 2017.
                  Schlamp, J., Carle, G., and Biersack, E. W. (2013). “A forensic case study on as
                       hijacking: the attacker’s perspective.” ACM SIGCOMM Computer
                       Communication Review, 43(2), 5–12.
                  Schlosser, A. E., White, T. B., and Lloyd, S. M. (2006). “Converting web site visitors
                       into buyers: how web site investment increases consumer trusting beliefs and
                       online purchase intentions.” Journal of Marketing, 70(2), 133–148.
                  SecDev Group. (2009). “Tracking GhostNet: investigating a cyber espionage network.”
                       www.nartv.org/mirror/ghostnet.pdf. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Shashanka, M., Shen, M., and Wang, J. (2016). “User and entity behavior analytics for
                       enterprise security.” 2016 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data).
                       IEEEE. 1867–1874. doi: 10.1109/BigData.2016.7840805.
                  Shearer, C. (2000). “The CRISP-DM model: the new blueprint for data mining.”
                       Journal of Data Warehousing, 5, 13–22.
                  Shekhar, S., Lu, C., and Zhang, P. (2001). “Detecting graph-based spatial outliers:
                       algorithms and applications.” Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGKDD International
                       Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 371–376.
                  Sheng, S., Holbrook, M., Kumaraguru, P., Cranor, L. F., and Downs, J. (2010). “Who
                       falls for phish? A demographic analysis of phishing susceptibility and effective-
                       ness of interventions.” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
                       in Computing Systems. ACM, 373–382.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              References                            183


                 Shi, L. and Janeja, V. P. (2009, June). “Anomalous window discovery through scan
                       statistics for linear intersecting paths (SSLIP).” Proceedings of the 15th ACM
                       SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
                       ACM, 767–776.
                 Shropshire, J., Warkentin, M., Johnston, A., and Schmidt, M. (2006). “Personality and
                       IT security: an application of the ﬁve-factor model.” AMCIS 2006 Proceedings.
                       Association for Information Systems AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 415.
                 Simmon, E., Sowe, S. K., and Zettsu, K. (2015). “Designing a cyber-physical cloud
                       computing architecture.” IT Professional, (3), 40–45.
                 Simmons, C., Ellis, C., Shiva, S., Dasgupta, D., and Wu, Q. (2009). AVOIDIT: A cyber
                       attack taxonomy. 9th Annual Symposium on Information Assurance, 2–12. https://
                       nsarchive.gwu.edu/sites/default/ﬁles/documents/4530310/Chris-Simmons-Charles-
                       Ellis-Sajjan-Shiva.pdf. Last accessed November 2021.
                 Skariachan, D. and Finkle, J. (2014). “Target shares recover after reassurance on
                       data breach impact.” www.reuters.com/article/us-target-results/target-shares-
                       recover-after-reassurance-on-data-breach-impact-idUSBREA1P0WC20140226. Last
                       accessed March 2020.
                 Sklower, K. (1991, Winter). A Tree-Based Packet Routing Table for Berkeley UNIX.
                       USENIX.
                 SMR Foundation. (2021). NodeXL. www.smrfoundation.org/nodexl/. Last accessed
                       November 2021.
                 Snare. (2020). Snare. www.snaresolutions.com/central-83/. Last accessed March 2020.
                 Snort. (2020). Snort Rules Infographic. https://snort-org-site.s3.amazonaws.com/pro
                       duction/document_ﬁles/ﬁles/000/000/116/original/Snort_rule_infographic.pdf?X-
                       Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Credential=AKIAIXACIED2
                       SPMSC7GA%2F20210316%2Fus-east-1%2Fs3%2Faws4_request&X-Amz-Date
                       =20210316T191343Z&X-Amz-Expires=172800&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host&
                       X-Amz-Signature=bcfc7d75d223ab40badd8bd9e89ded29cc98ed3896f0140f5532
                       0ee9bcdf1383. Last accessed March 2020.
                 Spitzner, L. (2003). Honeypots: Tracking Hackers, vol. 1. Addison-Wesley.
                 Srikant, R. and Agrawal, R. (1996). “Mining quantitative association rules in large
                       relational tables.” Proceedings of the 1996 ACM SIGMOD international
                       Conference on Management of Data. ACM Press, 1–12.
                 Statista. (2020). eCommerce report 2020 Statista Digital Market Outlook. www.statista
                       .com/study/42335/ecommerce-report/. Last accessed November 2021.
                 Statista. (2021, March). Digital population worldwide. www.statista.com/statistics/
                       617136/digital-population-worldwide/. Last accessed November 2021.
                 Statista. “IoT market – forecasts.” www.statista.com/statistics/1101442/iot-number-of-
                       connected-devices-worldwide/. Last accessed November 2021.
                 Stauffer, J. and Janeja, V. (2017). “A survey of advanced persistent threats and the
                       characteristics. Technical report.
                 Stephens, G. D. and Maloof, M. A. (2014, April 22) “Insider threat detection.” U.S.
                       Patent No. 8,707,431.
                 Stouffer, K., Falco, J., and Scarfone, K. (2009). “Guide to industrial control systems
                       (ICS) security.” Technical report, National Institute of Standards and Technology.
                 Stubbs, J., Satter, R., and Menn, J. (2020). “U.S. Homeland Security, thousands of
                       businesses scramble after suspected Russian hack.” www.reuters.com/article/




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  184                                          References


                       global-cyber/global-security-teams-assess-impact-of-suspected-russian-cyber-
                       attack-idUKKBN28O1KN. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Stutz, J. and Cheeseman, P. (1996). “AutoClass – a Bayesian approach to classiﬁca-
                       tion.” Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods. Springer, 117–126.
                  Sugiura, O. and Ogden, R. T. (1994). “Testing change-points with linear trend.”
                       Communications in Statistics – Simulation and Computation, 23(2), 287–322.
                       doi: 10.1080/03610919408813172.
                  Sugiyama, M. and Borgwardt, K. (2013). “Rapid distance-based outlier detection via
                       sampling.” Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Neural
                       Information Processing Systems – Volume 1 (NIPS'13). Curran Associates,
                       467–475.
                  Tan, Y., Vuran, M. C., and Goddard, S. (2009, June). “Spatio-temporal event model for
                       cyber-physical systems.” 29th IEEE International Conference on Distributed
                       Computing Systems Workshops, 2009. ICDCS Workshops’ 09. IEEE, 44–50.
                  Tang, X., Eftelioglu, E., Oliver, D., and Shekhar, S. (2017). “Signiﬁcant linear hotspot
                       discovery.” IEEE Transactions on Big Data, 3(2), 140–153.
                  Tango, T. and Takahashi, K. (2005). “A ﬂexibly shaped spatial scan statistic for
                       detecting clusters.” International Journal of Health Geographics, 4(11). doi:
                       10.1186/1476-072X-4-11.
                  Tao, F., Murtagh, F., and Farid, M. (2003). “Weighted association rule mining using
                       weighted support and signiﬁcance framework.” Proceedings of the Ninth ACM
                       SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
                       KDD’03. ACM Press, 661–666.
                  Tartakovsky, A. G., Polunchenko, A. S., and Sokolov, G. (2013). “Efﬁcient computer
                       network anomaly detection by changepoint detection methods.” IEEE Journal of
                       Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 7(1), 4–11.
                  Ten, C. W., Hong, J., and Liu, C. C. (2011). “Anomaly detection for cybersecurity of
                       the substations.” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 2(4), 865–873.
                  Thakur, V. (2011, December 8). “The Sykipot Attacks.” www.symantec.com/connect/
                       blogs/sykipot-attacks. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Tim, O., Firoiu, L., and Cohen, P. (1999). “Clustering time series with hidden markov
                       models and dynamic time warping.” Presented at IJCAI-99 Workshop on
                       Sequence Learning.
                  Tobler, W. R. (1970). “A computer model simulation of urban growth in the Detroit
                       region.” Economic Geography, 46(2), 234–240.
                  Townsend, M., Rupp, L., and Green, J. (2014). “Target CEO ouster shows new board
                       focus on cyber attacks.” www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-05-05/target-ceo-ouster-
                       shows-new-board-focus-on-cyber-attacks.html. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Trend Micro Incorporated. (2012a). ”Detecting APT activity with network
                       trafﬁc analysis.” www.trendmicro.com/cloud-content/us/pdfs/security-intelli
                       gence/white-papers/wp-detecting-apt-activity-with-network-trafﬁc-analysis.pdf.
                       Last accessed November 2021.
                  Trend Micro Incorporated. (2012b), “Spear-phishing email: most favored APT attack
                       bait.”
                  Trinius, P., Holz, T., Göbel, J., and Freiling, F. C. (2009, October). “Visual analysis of
                       malware behavior using treemaps and thread graphs.” 6th International Workshop
                       on Visualization for Cyber Security, 2009. VizSec 2009. IEEE, 33–38.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              References                              185


                 Tsuchiya, P. F. (1988). “The landmark hierarchy: a new hierarchy for routing in very
                      large networks.” Symposium Proceedings on Communications Architectures and
                      Protocols (SIGCOMM '88). ACM, 35–42.
                 Vaarandi, R. and Podiņš, K. (2010). “Network IDs alert classiﬁcation with frequent
                      itemset mining and data clustering.” 2010 International Conference on Network
                      and Service Management. IEEE, 451–456.
                 Vaidya, J., Atluri, V., and Guo, Qi. (2007). “The role mining problem: ﬁnding a
                      minimal descriptive set of roles.” Proceedings of the 12th ACM Symposium on
                      Access Control Models and Technologies. ACM, 175–184.
                 Van Mieghem, V. (2016). “Detecting malicious behaviour using system calls.”
                      Master’s thesis, Delft University.
                 Venkatasubramanian, K., Nabar, S., Gupta, S. K. S., and Poovendran, R. (2011).
                      “Cyber physical security solutions for pervasive health monitoring systems.”
                      E-Healthcare Systems and Wireless Communications: Current and Future
                      Challenges, M. Watfa (Ed.). IGI Global, 143–162.
                 Verizon Wireless. (2017). “Data breach digest.” https://enterprise.verizon.com/
                      resources/articles/2017-data-breach-digest-half-year-anniversary/. Last accessed
                      November 2021.
                 Verma, J. P. and Patel, A. (2016, March–September). “Comparison of MapReduce and
                      Spark programming frameworks for big data analytics on HDFS.” International
                      Journal of Computer Science and Communication, 7(2), 80–84.
                 Versprille, A. (2015). “Researchers hack into driverless car system, take control of
                      vehicle.” www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles/2015/5/1/2015may-research
                      ers-hack-into-driverless-car-system-take-control-of-vehicle.     Last       accessed
                      November 20201.
                 Villeneuve, N. and Sancho, D. (2011). “The ‘lurid’ downloader.” www.trendmicro.com/
                      cloud-content/us/pdfs/security-intelligence/white-papers/wp_dissecting-lurid-apt.pdf.
                      Last accessed November 2021.
                 Vishwanath, A., Herath, T., Chen, R., Wang, J., and Rao, H. R. (2011). “Why do
                      people get phished? Testing individual differences in phishing vulnerability within
                      an integrated, information processing model.” Decision Support Systems, 51(3),
                      576–586.
                 Wall, M. E., Rechtsteiner, A., and Rocha, L. M. (2003). “Singular value decomposition
                      and principal component analysis.” A Practical Approach to Microarray Data
                      Analysis, D. P. Berrar, W. Dubitzky, and M. Granzow (Eds.). Springer, 91–109.
                      doi: 10.1007/0-306-47815-3_5.
                 Wang, H., Wu, B., Yang, S., Wang, B., and Liu, Y. (2014). “Research of decision tree
                      on YARN using MapReduce and Spark.” World Congress in Computer Science,
                      Computer Engineering, and Applied Computing. American Council on Science
                      and Education, 21–24.
                 Wang, K., He, Y., and Han, J. (2003). “Pushing support constraints into association
                      rules mining.” IEEE Transactions Knowledge Data Engineering, 15(3),
                      642–658.
                 Wang, K. and Stolfo, S. J. 2004. “Anomalous payload-based network intrusion detec-
                      tion.” Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection. RAID 2004, E. Jonsson, A. Valdes,
                      and M. Almgren (Eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3224. Springer,
                      89–96.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  186                                          References


                  Wang, K., Yu, H., and Cheung, D. W. 2001. “Mining conﬁdent rules without support
                      requirement.” Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Information
                      and Knowledge Management. ACM Press, 89–96.
                  Wang, L., Singhal, A., and Jajodia, S. (2007a, July). “Measuring the overall
                      security of network conﬁgurations using attack graphs.” IFIP Annual
                      Conference on Data and Applications Security and Privacy. Springer, 98–112.
                  Wang, L., Singhal, A., and Jajodia, S. (2007b, October). “Toward measuring network
                      security using attack graphs.” Proceedings of the 2007 ACM Workshop on Quality
                      of Protection. ACM, 49–54.
                  Wang, P. A. (2011). “Online phishing in the eyes of online shoppers.” IAENG
                      International Journal of Computer Science, 38(4), 378–383.
                  Wang, Q. H. and Kim, S. H. (2009). Cyber Attacks: Cross-Country Interdependence
                      and Enforcement. WEIS.
                  Wang, W., Yang, J., and Muntz, R. (1997, August). “STING: A statistical information
                      grid approach to spatial data mining.” VLDB, 97, 186–195.
                  Ward, J. S. and Barker, A. (2013). “Undeﬁned by data: a survey of big data deﬁnitions.”
                      arXiv:1309.5821.
                  Washington Post. (2013). “Target data ﬂood stolen-card market.” www.washingtonpost
                      .com/business/economy/target-cyberattack-by-overseas-hackers-may-have-comprom
                      ised-up-to-40-million-cards/2013/12/20/2c2943cc-69b5-11e3-a0b9-249bbb34602c_
                      story.html?utm_term=.42a8cd8b6c0e. Last accessed November 2016.
                  Websense. (2011). “Advanced persistent threat and advanced attacks: threat analysis
                      and defense strategies for SMB, mid-size, and enterprise organizations Rev 2.”
                      Technical report.
                  Wei, L., Keogh, E., and Xi, X. (2006). “SAXually explicit images: ﬁnding unusual
                      shapes.” ICDM’06: Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Data
                      Mining. IEEE Computer Society, 711–720.
                  Weimerskirch, A. (2018). Derrick Dominic Assessing Risk: Identifying and Analyzing
                      Cybersecurity Threats to Automated Vehicles. University of Michigan,
                  Wilson, R. J. (1986). Introduction to Graph Theory. John Wiley & Sons.
                  Wireshark. (2021). www.wireshark.org. Last accessed November 2021.
                  Wright, R., Chakraborty, S., Basoglu, A., and Marett, K. (2010). “Where did they go
                      right? Understanding the deception in phishing communications.” Group Decision
                      and Negotiation, 19(4), 391–416.
                  Wright, R. T. and Marett, K. (2010). The inﬂuence of experiential and dispositional
                      factors in phishing: an empirical investigation of the deceived. Journal of
                      Management Information Systems, 27(1), 27.
                  Wu, M., Miller, R. C., and Garﬁnkel, S. L. (2006). “Do security toolbars actually
                      prevent phishing attacks?” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
                      Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ‘06). ACM, 601–610.
                  Wu, X., Kumar, V., Quinlan, J. R., et al. (2008). “Top 10 algorithms in data mining.”
                      Knowledge and Information Systems, 14(1), 1–37.
                  Wübbeling, M., Elsner, T., and Meier, M. (2014, June). “Inter-AS routing anomalies:
                      improved detection and classiﬁcation.” 6th International Conference on Cyber
                      Conﬂict (CyCon 2014), 2014. IEEE, 223–238.
                  Wybourne, M. N., Austin, M. F., and Palmer, C. C. (2009). National Cyber Security.
                      Research and Development Challenges. Related to Economics, Physical




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                              References                             187


                      Infrastructure and Human Behavior. I3P: Institute for Information Infrastructure
                      Protection.
                 Xu, X., Ester, M., Kriegel, H. P., and Sander, J. (1998, February). “A distribution-based
                      clustering algorithm for mining in large spatial databases.” Proceedings, 14th
                      International Conference on Data Engineering, 1998. IEEE, 324–331.
                 Xu, X., Jäger, J., and Kriegel, H. P. (1999). “A fast parallel clustering algorithm for
                      large spatial databases.” High Performance Data Mining., Y. Guo and R.
                      Grossman (Eds.). Springer US, 263–290.
                 Yamanishi, K. and Takeuchi, J. (2002). “A unifying framework for detecting outliers
                      and change points from non-stationary time series data.” KDD’02: Proceedings of
                      the Eighth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
                      Data Mining. ACM, 676–681.
                 Yang, S.-C., and Wang, Y.-L. (2011, May). “System dynamics based insider threat
                      modeling.” International Journal of Network Security and Its Applications 3(3),
                      doi: 10.1109/ICDM.2007.61.
                 Yang, X., Kong, L., Liu, Z., et al. (2018). “Machine learning and deep learning methods
                      for cybersecurity.” IEEE Access, 6, 35365–35381.
                 Yankov, D., Keogh, E., and Rebbapragada, U. (2007). “Disk aware discord discovery:
                      ﬁnding unusual time series in terabyte sized datasets.” Seventh IEEE International
                      Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2007), 381–390. doi: 10.1109/
                      ICDM.2007.61.
                 Yıldırım, M. and Mackie, I. (2019). “Encouraging users to improve password security
                      and memorability.” International Journal of Information Security, 18(6),
                      741–759.
                 Yinka-Banjo, C. and Ugot, O.-A. (2019). “A review of generative adversarial networks
                      and its application in cybersecurity.” Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review, 53,
                      1721–1736. doi: 10.1007/s10462-019-09717-4.
                 Yun, H., Ha, D., Hwang, B., and Ryu, K. H. (2003, September 15). “Mining association
                      rules on signiﬁcant rare data using relative support.” Journal of Systems and
                      Software, 67(3) 181–191.
                 Yanan, S., Janeja, V. P., McGuire, M. P, .and Gangopadhyay, A. (2012). “Tnet: tensor-
                      based neighborhood discovery in trafﬁc networks.” 2012 IEEE 28th International
                      Conference on Data Engineering Workshops, 331–336. doi: 10.1109/
                      ICDEW.2012.72.
                 Zetter, K. (2011, April 20). “Top federal lab hacked in spear-phishing attack.” www
                      .wired.com/threatlevel/2011/04/oak-ridge-lab-hack/. Last accessed February 23,
                      2014.
                 Zhang, K., Hutter, M., and Jin, H. (2009). “A new local distance-based outlier detection
                      approach for scattered real-world data.” Advances in Knowledge Discovery and
                      Data Mining. PAKDD 2009, T. Theeramunkong, B. Kijsirikul, N. Cercone, and
                      T. B. Ho (Eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5476. Springer,
                      813–822. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-01307-2_84.
                 Zhang, P., Huang,, Y., Shekhar, S., and Kumar, V. (2003). “Correlation analysis of
                      spatial time series datasets: a ﬁlter-and-reﬁne approach.” Advances in Knowledge
                      Discovery and Data Mining. PAKDD 2003, K. Y. Whang., J. Jeon, K. Shim, and
                      J. Srivastava (Eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2637 Springer. doi:
                      10.1007/3-540-36175-8_53.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  188                                          References


                  Zhang, T., Ramakrishnan, R., and Livny, M. (1996, June). “BIRCH: an efﬁcient data
                      clustering method for very large databases.” ACM Sigmod Record, 25(2),
                      103–114.
                  Zhao, Q., and Bhowmick, S. S. (2003). “Sequential pattern mining: a survey.”
                      Technical report, CAIS Nayang Technological University Singapore, 1–26.
                  Zhou, B., Cheung, D. W., and Kao, B. (1999, April). “A fast algorithm for density-
                      based clustering in large database.” Methodologies for Knowledge Discovery and
                      Data Mining. PAKDD 1999, N. Zhong and L. Zhou (Eds.). Lecture Notes in
                      Computer Science, Vol. 1574. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/3-540-
                      48912-6_45.
                  Zimmermann, A., Lorenz, A., and Oppermann, R. (2007, August). “An operational
                      deﬁnition of context.” Modeling and Using Context. CONTEXT 2007, B.
                      Kokinov, D. C. Richardson, T. R. Roth-Berghofer, and L. Vieu (Eds.). Lecture
                      Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 4635. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/
                      978-3-540-74255-5_42.
                  Zimmermann, V. and Renaud, K. (2021). “The nudge puzzle: matching nudge inter-
                      ventions to cybersecurity decisions.” ACM Transactions on Computer–Human
                      Interaction (TOCHI), 28(1), 1–45.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                Index




                 access control, 12, 16, 24, 28, 49                     centroid, 34, 43, 110–111
                 accommodation, 99                                      CLARANS, 44–45
                 accuracy, 29, 40–41, 50                                classiﬁcation, 29–30, 40–41, 49–51, 55, 75, 90,
                 adjacency matrix, 130, 135                                   101, 152, 157
                 advanced persistent threat, 5, 69, 84–85, 139          client server, 14
                 anomalous window, 118                                  closeness, 131
                 anomaly, 18, 27–28, 34, 40, 42, 49, 81, 91–93,         cloud, 2–3, 6, 15–16, 76
                      95–101, 104, 107, 110–112, 116–118,               clustering, 11, 25, 34, 37, 40, 42–45, 48–49,
                      120–123, 129, 147, 158                                  53, 75, 92, 101, 105, 108–110, 117–118,
                 anomaly detection, 27, 34, 36, 91, 93, 100,                  155
                      104, 116–117, 140                                 common vulnerabilities and exposures, 25
                 application security, 6                                common vulnerability scoring system, 25, See
                 Apriori algorithm, 57–58                                     CVSS
                 APT, 5, 79, 84–89, 139                                 communication, 21
                 assets, 1–3, 14, 16, 24, 79                            computational data model, 81–82, 84
                 association rule mining, 18–19, 36, 41, 59             computer networks, 3, 7–8, 11, 13, 16, 18, 27,
                 asymmetric coefﬁcient, 39                                    67, 124, 148, 154
                 attack maps, 3, 113–114                                conditional probability, 42, 55, 57
                 attack vector, 85                                      conﬁdence, 30, 41, 57
                 autocorrelation, 67, 113–115, 117–118, 120,            consistent, 22, 28, 71–72, 89, 134
                      122                                               consistent nodes, 71–72
                 autonomous systems, 95                                 context, 93
                                                                        contextual anomalies, 91, 94
                 Bayesian, 24                                           contingency matrix, 38
                 behavioral, 11                                         CPS, 8, 67–68, 147, 149
                 behavioral data, 23                                    critical infrastructure, 3, 80
                 betweenness, 131                                       curse of dimensionality, 96–97, 109
                 BGP anomalies, 95                                      cyberattacks, 5, 24–26, 62, 68–70, 138–139,
                 big data, 9, 20, 60–61, 63, 65–66, 69–70, 72,                144, 156
                      74–76                                             cyber espionage, 5
                 blackhole attack, 79                                   cyberphysical, 7, 16, 147
                 Border Gateway Protocol, 95                            cyberphysical systems, 8, 16, 67, 147
                                                                        cybersecurity, 1–2, 6, 14–15, 27, 60–61, 112,
                 categorical data, 32                                         123, 128–129, 133–134, 147
                 central nodes, 70, 72, 132–133                         cybersecurity data, 28
                 centrality, 21, 131, 133                               cyber threats, 1


                                                                   189


https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  190                                             Index


                  data analytics, 7–9, 12, 60, 70, 137, 147             ﬁrewall, 14, 19
                  data cleaning, 33                                     ﬁrst law of geography, 113
                  data Mining, 8, 29, 36                                F-measure, 40–41
                  data preprocessing, 31–32                             FP tree, 58
                  data reduction, 35                                    frequent itemset, 58
                  data storage, 3, 6, 76                                frequent pattern, 55–56, 89
                  data transformation, 34
                  decision tree, 50–52, 54                              Geary’s, 113
                  deep learning, 157–158, 161                           generative adversarial network, 160–161
                  degrees, 22, 71, 132                                  geocontextual features, 152
                  denial of service, 4, 79, 125                         geographic, 11
                  densiﬁcation, 133                                     geolocations, 19, 27, 94, 115, 126, 141
                  density based, 42, 46–48                              geological, 3
                  detection, 1, 13, 16–18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 34, 42,      georeferenced, 68, 113
                        46, 59, 65, 67, 70–71, 73–74, 81, 84, 88,       geospatial data, 152–153
                        91, 93–97, 99–101, 103–105, 108–109,            graph data, 21
                        111–112, 116–118, 120–123, 129, 139,            graphs, 21, 69, 129, 133–134
                        141, 147, 154, 158                              ground truth, 40
                  diameter, 21, 69, 71, 127–128, 134
                  discord, 91, 121                                      hacktivism, 5
                  discordancy, 34, 102–104, 108–109                     Hausdorff distance, 38
                  dissimilarity, 37, 119                                header, 20
                  distance, 34, 37–38, 42–43, 46–49, 93, 101,           heartbleed, 5
                        105, 107–109, 111, 113, 116, 122, 124,          heterogeneous, 9, 30–31, 37, 60, 67, 73, 120, 151
                        131, 134                                        hierarchical, 42
                  distance based, 105, 108                              high dimensional, 36, 47, 67, 96, 109
                  distance based outlier detection, 34                  honeypots, 100
                  distributed control systems, 147                      human behavior, 18
                  distributed denial of service (DDoS), 4, 125
                  distributed intrusion detection system, 73            IDS, 17
                  domain name system, 14                                IDS logs, 11
                                                                        imbalanced learning, 53
                  e-commerce, 16                                        inconsistent nodes, 71
                  edges, 21, 45, 72, 122, 124, 128, 130–131, 133,       industrial control systems, 3, 147–148
                       148, 151                                         insider threat, 2, 24, 138, 140–142
                  eigenvector, 131                                      Intellectual property, 4
                  electronic assets, 1–2                                intercluster, 42
                  ensemble, 50, 53–54, 75, 162                          interface design, 143
                  entropy, 52–53                                        Internet of Things. See IoT
                  equal frequency binning, 34                           interquartile range, 34, 104
                  Euclidean distance, 37, 109, 118                      intracluster, 42
                  evaluation, 27, 29–30, 37, 40, 72, 111, 139,          intrusion detection systems. See IDS
                       142, 149                                         IoT, 8, 149–150
                  exception, 91                                         IP reputation scoring, 152
                  explainability, 159                                   IQR, 34, 104
                  exploits, 86
                  eye tracker, 24                                       Jaccard coefﬁcient, 39, 135
                                                                        joint count, 113
                  false negative, 40
                  false negative rate, 41                               K nearest neighbor, See K-NN
                  false positive, 40                                    key logging, 17




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                                  Index                                             191


                 K-means, 43–44, 66                                     outlier detection, 34, 67, 101, 105, 108–109, 117
                 K-NN, 47, 109                                          outliers, 34, 37, 46, 67, 91, 96–97, 99–105,
                                                                              107–109, 111, 117, 121
                 lift, 30, 41, 84
                 linear semantic-based scan, 118                        page rank, 21
                 links, 16, 47, 69, 124, 128, 137, 139, 142,            parametric, 101–102
                        148–149                                         partitioning, 42–44
                 logical errors, 5                                      password attack, 79
                                                                        password theft, 81–83
                 macroneighborhoods, 120                                payload, 19
                 malfunctions, 8, 150                                   peculiarity, 91
                 malicious intent, 2, 81, 95, 142                       personal assets, 2
                 malware, 19–20, 24, 28, 78, 81, 86,                    phishing, 5, 10, 25, 78, 80, 84–85, 124, 126,
                      124, 152                                                138–139, 144, 154
                 malware detection, 24                                  physical security, 2, 11, 27, 68, 142
                 Manhattan distance, 37                                 power grid, 2, 124
                 Markov model, 122                                      precision, 40–41, 151
                 Markov stationary distribution, 123                    predict, 14
                 masking, 104                                           prevention, 1, 13, 17, 129
                 measures of similarity, 37                             probabilistic label, 55
                 medoids, 43–45                                         probe, 81, 145
                 microneighborhood, 119                                 psychological proﬁling, 140
                 MILES, 53–54                                           psychology, 15
                 Minkowski distance, 37                                 public assets, 2
                 missing data, 33
                 missing data values, 33                                rare patterns, 56, 58–59
                 misuse, 6, 11, 27, 142                                 recall, 40
                 mobile ad hoc, 79                                      recover, 1
                 mobile devices, 3, 61                                  rejection, 100
                 Moran’s, 113                                           replay attack, 79
                 multilevel mining, 73                                  respond, 1, 6, 137, 141
                 multipronged attack, 9                                 router, 14
                 multivariate, 34
                                                                        scan statistic, 118
                 naive Bayes, 55                                        security indicators, 25
                 National Vulnerability Database, 25                    security perimeter, 9
                 neighborhood, 46, 119–120, 124                         security policies, 12, 19, 25, 138, 142, 152
                 network security, 7                                    semantic relationships, 120
                 network topology, 23, 134                              semisupervised, 91
                 network trafﬁc, 21                                     sensor networks, 3, 8, 16, 67, 124, 154
                 nodes, 22–23, 28, 69–71, 76, 122–123, 125,             sequential, 103
                      127–128, 131–133, 135, 148, 159                   silhouette coefﬁcient, 42, 45
                 NodeXL, 21                                             similarity, 32, 34, 38–40, 43, 104, 119–120,
                 noisy data, 34                                               122, 129, 135, 156, 161
                 normal distribution, 101–102                           simple matching coefﬁcient, 39
                 normalization, 35                                      social engineering, 5, 78, 80
                 numeric data attributes, 32                            social media, 16
                 NVD, 25                                                software vulnerability, 25
                                                                        spam, 126, 152
                 OPTICS, 48–49, 105, 118                                spatial, 11, 27, 32, 46, 67–68, 94, 108–109,
                 ordinal, 32                                                  112–114, 116–118, 120–122, 124–125, 151




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  192                                             Index


                  spatial autocorrelation, 113–114                      Trojan, 87, 100
                  spatial data, 67, 112                                 true negative, 40
                  spatial data mining, 67                               true negative rate, 41
                  spatial heterogeneity, 113                            true positive, 40
                  spatial neighborhoods, 32, 119, 124                   true positive rate, 41
                  spatial relationships, 117, 119, 125
                  spatiotemporal scan statistic, 118                    unauthorized access, 1–2, 4–6, 19, 70, 81, 154
                  spoofed, 121                                          univariate data, 34
                  spooﬁng, 19                                           unsupervised, 34, 91
                  SQL injection, 79, 86                                 unusual window, 118
                  standard deviation, 34, 83, 105                       user interaction, 143
                  Stuxnet, 124                                          user’s perception, 139
                  sum of squared error, 30, 42
                  supervised, 91                                        variety, 9
                  supervisory control and data acquisition, 147         velocity, 9
                  support, 12, 41, 55, 57–59, 94, 132, 140              veracity, 9
                  support vector machines, 55                           vertices, 21, 124, 128, 130–131
                  swamping, 104                                         volume, 9
                                                                        vulnerability, 9, 25, 38–39, 69, 80, 82, 86, 125,
                  temporal, 11, 25, 27–28, 67, 69, 88, 94, 112,              148, 150
                       115, 118, 121, 123, 125–126, 133, 145,           vulnerable, 2, 84–85, 136–137, 143, 162
                       149, 151, 155
                  threat hunting, 7                                     walk, 130
                  threat taxonomy, 78                                   watering hole, 85
                  threats, 1, 6–7, 9, 12, 14–15, 17–18, 20, 23, 25,     weighted degree, 72
                       28, 63, 70, 79, 85, 88–90, 112, 123, 129,        white listing, 129
                       136–137, 139, 141, 146–147, 150–151,             wireless networks, 8
                       154, 162                                         Wireshark, 20
                  time series discords, 121
                  Titan Rain attack, 5                                  zero day, 86, 129, 154
                  topology analysis, 140                                z-score, 35




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108231954.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
